@node    remoi pagbu, cimoi pagbu, pamoi pagbu, Top
@chapter remo'o le se klaku lalxu

@c                               CHAPTER II

@c                            The Pool of Tears
                              le se klaku lalxu

@c      `Curiouser and curiouser!' cried Alice (she was so much
@c    surprised, that for the moment she quite forgot how to speak good
@c    English); `now I'm opening out like the largest telescope that
@c    ever was!  Good-bye, feet!' (for when she looked down at her
@c    feet, they seemed to be almost out of sight, they were getting so
@c    far off).  `Oh, my poor little feet, I wonder who will put on
@c    your shoes and stockings for you now, dears?  I'm sure _I_ shan't
@c    be able!  I shall be a great deal too far off to trouble myself
@c    about you:  you must manage the best way you can; --but I must be
@c    kind to them,' thought Alice, `or perhaps they won't walk the
@c    way I want to go!  Let me see:  I'll give them a new pair of
@c    boots every Christmas.'

i lu cizy ze'a cizyze'a sei la alis krixa to abu tai se spaji ja'e le 
nu ze'a tolmorji le nu ta'i makau tavla bau le drani lojbo toi i caku 
mi se tolplo tai tu'a le'e brarai darvistci i co'o jamfu to ca le nu abu
catlu lei abu jamfu kei jy simlu le ka jibni le ka na ka'e se viska kei kei
ki'u le nu ca'o binxo lo tai darno toi i uu doi cmalu jamfu ma do ba
dasygau lei do cutci ku joi lei do smoka doi dirba i ju'o mi ba na ka'e
go'i i mi ba mutce dukse le ka darno do kei le nu kurji do i ko renvi
ta'i le do xagrai selka'e i ku'i ei mi jy xendo sei la alis pensi i va'o
da'i na'ebo la'e di'u ju'ocu'i jy na cadzu veka'a le mi se djica i ua ai 
mi dunda ca ro cevjbetersla lo cnino cutci remei li'u

@c curiouser: {bizra} does not sound like the kind of mistake a jbojbe
@c would make. What she means to say, I think, is {cizyze'a}; perhaps
@c she says {cizyzma} instead (for which the usual form of course is
@c {cizmau} but she gets the two words mixfused). -phma
@c I meant {cizra je bizra} as in {3zra je 8zra}, maybe {cizra je vozra}?
@c How about {cizy ze'a cizyze'a}? --xorxes

@c      And she went on planning to herself how she would manage it.
@c    `They must go by the carrier,' she thought; `and how funny it'll
@c    seem, sending presents to one's own feet!  And how odd the
@c    directions will look!

i abu ca'o platu le nu co'e ta'i makau i lu ei lei cutci cu se mrilu sei
abu pensi i ba xajmi fa le nu benji loi seldu'a le vo'a jamfu i ua le
judri ba simlu le ka cizra i

@c without {i} this means "How strange the address will seem to Alice's
@c honorable right foot..." -phma  --ok

@c    @format
@c                ALICE'S RIGHT FOOT, ESQ.
@c                    HEARTHRUG,
@c                        NEAR THE FENDER,
@c                            (WITH ALICE'S LOVE).
@c    @end format

@format
                  le selsi'a ke pritu jamfu be la alis
                      bu'u la fagzda lolgai
                          ne'a le fagzu'i
                               to la alis prami benji toi
@end format

@c    Oh dear, what nonsense I'm talking!'

i ue mi bebna tavla li'u

@c      Just then her head struck against the roof of the hall:  in
@c    fact she was now more than nine feet high, and she at once took
@c    up the little golden key and hurried off to the garden door.

i caku le abu stedu cu janli le drudi be le kumfa i je'u abu ca mitre
za'u li repimu i abu ze'i lebna le cmalu ke solji ckiku gi'e sutra
klama le purdi vorme

@c      Poor Alice!  It was as much as she could do, lying down on one
@c    side, to look through into the garden with one eye; but to get
@c    through was more hopeless than ever:  she sat down and began to
@c    cry again.

i la alis uu zo'u le nu mlana vreta gi'e catlu le purdi sepi'o pa kanla
cu jimte lei se zukte le ka abu kakne ce'u i le nu pagre cu nalcumki
traji i abu zutse gi'e za'ure'u co'a klaku

@c      `You ought to be ashamed of yourself,' said Alice, `a great
@c    girl like you,' (she might well say this), `to go on crying in
@c    this way!  Stop this moment, I tell you!'  But she went on all
@c    the same, shedding gallons of tears, until there was a large pool
@c    all round her, about four inches deep and reaching half down the
@c    hall.

i lu ei do ckeji sei la alis cusku i do barda nixli to'i ju'o drani toi
i i'enai ca'o tai klaku i le'o ko ca sisti li'u i ku'i abu za'o klaku
loi litce be li so'i ja'e le nu abu se sruri lo barda lalxu noi centre
li ji'ipano le ka condi kei gi'e preja le xadba be le kumfa

@c {tai klaku} does not parse. Neither does {taiku klaku}.
@c Parser bug? What's wrong with it? --xorxes

@c      After a time she heard a little pattering of feet in the
@c    distance, and she hastily dried her eyes to see what was coming.
@c    It was the White Rabbit returning, splendidly dressed, with a
@c    pair of white kid gloves in one hand and a large fan in the
@c    other:  he came trotting along in a great hurry, muttering to
@c    himself as he came, `Oh! the Duchess, the Duchess! Oh! won't she
@c    be savage if I've kept her waiting!'  Alice felt so desperate
@c    that she was ready to ask help of any one; so, when the Rabbit
@c    came near her, she began, in a low, timid voice, `If you please,
@c    sir--'  The Rabbit started violently, dropped the white kid
@c    gloves and the fan, and skurried away into the darkness as hard
@c    as he could go.

i bazaku abu tirna lo nu cmalu stapa le darno kei gi'e sutra le nu 
sudgau lei kanla tezu'e le nu viska le nu makau klama i klama fa le blabi
ractu noi xruti gi'e melbi dasni gi'e jgari lo blabi ke kanba gluta
remei ku fa'u lo barda bifpra le re xance i ry sutra bajra klama gi'e
sezysku lu oi le noltroni'u zo'u ba'a ny ba cilce fengu va'o le nu mi
gasnu le nu ny denpa li'u i la alis tai cinmo le nu tolpacna kei
ja'e le nu roda zo'u abu bredi le nu cpedu lo'e nunsidju da iseki'ubo 
ca le nu le ractu abu jibni kei abu co'a co'e sepi'o lo lauble je toldarsi 
voksa lu pe'u doi ractu li'u i le ractu cu suksa se jenca gi'e falcru lei
blabi ke kanba gluta e le bifpra gi'e bajra mo'ine'i le manku serai
le ka sutra

@c dizlo ki'a voksa? Changed to {lauble}.

@c      Alice took up the fan and gloves, and, as the hall was very
@c    hot, she kept fanning herself all the time she went on talking:
@c    `Dear, dear!  How queer everything is to-day!  And yesterday
@c    things went on just as usual.  I wonder if I've been changed in
@c    the night?  Let me think:  was I the same when I got up this
@c    morning?  I almost think I can remember feeling a little
@c    different.  But if I'm not the same, the next question is, Who in
@c    the world am I?  Ah, THAT'S the great puzzle!'  And she began
@c    thinking over all the children she knew that were of the same age
@c    as herself, to see if she could have been changed for any of
@c    them.

i la alis cu lebna le bifpra e lei gluta gi'e co'a pilno by ki'u le nu
le kumfa cu glare kei ze'a le nu ca'o cusku lu oi ue roda cizra ca le
cabdei i ca le purlamdei roda fadni fasnu i mi kucli le du'u xukau da
galfi mi ca le nicte i ei mi pensi i xu mi mi mintu ca le nu mi cikna
binxo ca le zi cerni i pe'iru'e ba'anai mi cinmo le nu mi frica milxe
i ku'i va'o le nu mi mi na mintu kei jersi preti fa le du'u mi du makau
i la'e di'u cu barda nabmi li'u i abu co'a pensi ro le verba poi ke'a
abu slabu gi'e mintu le ka nanca ku'o tezu'e le nu jdice le du'u xukau
cumki fa le nu ba'o galfi abu su'o vy

@c      `I'm sure I'm not Ada,' she said, `for her hair goes in such
@c    long ringlets, and mine doesn't go in ringlets at all; and I'm
@c    sure I can't be Mabel, for I know all sorts of things, and she,
@c    oh! she knows such a very little!  Besides, SHE'S she, and I'm I,
@c    and--oh dear, how puzzling it all is!  I'll try if I know all the
@c    things I used to know.  Let me see:  four times five is twelve,
@c    and four times six is thirteen, and four times seven is--oh dear!
@c    I shall never get to twenty at that rate!  However, the
@c    Multiplication Table doesn't signify:  let's try Geography.
@c    London is the capital of Paris, and Paris is the capital of Rome,
@c    and Rome--no, THAT'S all wrong, I'm certain!  I must have been
@c    changed for Mabel!  I'll try and say "How doth the little--"'
@c    and she crossed her hands on her lap as if she were saying lessons,
@c    and began to repeat it, but her voice sounded hoarse and
@c    strange, and the words did not come the same as they used to do:--

i lu ju'o mi na du la adas sei abu cusku ki'u le nu ge le abu kerfa cu
clani sarlu gi le memimoi cu nasai sarlu i ji'a ju'o mi na du la mabel
ki'u le nu ge mi djuno so'i vrici gi my y djuno lo tolmutce i ji'a
ge my du my gi mi du mi i oi ue roda cfipu i mi mi cipygau le ka ca
djuno roda poi mi pu djuno i pilji li vo li mu fa li pare i pilji li vo
li xa fa li paci i pilji li vo li ze i oi mi ba noroi snada tu'a li reno
va'o le nu tai masno i ku'i le pilji porsi na vajni i e'u troci tu'a le
tedyske i la londn raltca la paris i la paris raltca la romas i la romas
sa la'e di'u naldrani ju'o i ju'o pu galfi mi la mabel i mi troci le nu
cusku lu ua le cmalu li'u li'u i abu punji lei kruca xance lei tuple
tai lo'e nu cusku lo se cilre kei gi'e co'a sitsku i ku'i le voksa cu se
sance lo rufsu je cizra i lei valsi na mintu le se tcaci

@c                `How doth the little crocodile
@c                  Improve his shining tail,
@c                And pour the waters of the Nile
@c                  On every golden scale!

@c                `How cheerfully he seems to grin,
@c                  How neatly spread his claws,
@c                And welcome little fishes in
@c                  With gently smiling jaws!'

@format

                  i ua le cmalu krokodilo
                    cu zengau le ky rebla
                  si'u le djacu pe la nilos
                    le ka camri'ojvebla

                  i ua lei jgalu ja'a tinsa
                    je cnici preja panra
                  i lei cmafi'e cu se rinsa
                    le cisma xedja ganra

@end format

@c      `I'm sure those are not the right words,' said poor Alice, and
@c    her eyes filled with tears again as she went on, `I must be Mabel
@c    after all, and I shall have to go and live in that poky little
@c    house, and have next to no toys to play with, and oh! ever so
@c    many lessons to learn!  No, I've made up my mind about it; if I'm
@c    Mabel, I'll stay down here!  It'll be no use their putting their
@c    heads down and saying "Come up again, dear!"  I shall only look
@c    up and say "Who am I then?  Tell me that first, and then, if I
@c    like being that person, I'll come up:  if not, I'll stay down
@c    here till I'm somebody else"--but, oh dear!' cried Alice, with a
@c    sudden burst of tears, `I do wish they WOULD put their heads
@c    down!  I am so VERY tired of being all alone here!'

i lu ju'o lei valsi na drani sei la alis uu cusku li'u i lei abu kanla
cu za'ure'u tisna loi se klaku ca le nu di'a co'e lu ja'o mi du la
mabel i mi ba bilga le nu xabju le pindi ke cmalu zdani gi'e ponse
ji'ino selkei gi'e oi cilre so'isai da i ai na go'i i mi mu'o jdice
fi la'e di'u fe le du'u mi ganai du la mabel gi stali ti i noda de ba
prali le nu de setca le de stedu ti gi'e cusku lu ko barkla doi dirba
li'u i mi ba fa'aga'u catlu gi'e cusku lu ja'o mi ma du i pamai ko
mi jungau la'e di'u ibabo va'o le nu mi nelci le nu mi makau du keikei
mi barkla i va'o le nu mi na nelci kei mi ti denpa le nu mi drata li'u
i ku'i oi sei la alis suksa klaku krica i au su'o da ca'a setca le da
stedu ti i mi tai titpa le nu mi ti nonkansa li'u

@c      As she said this she looked down at her hands, and was
@c    surprised to see that she had put on one of the Rabbit's little
@c    white kid gloves while she was talking.  `How CAN I have done
@c    that?' she thought.  `I must be growing small again.'  She got up
@c    and went to the table to measure herself by it, and found that,
@c    as nearly as she could guess, she was now about two feet high,
@c    and was going on shrinking rapidly:  she soon found out that the
@c    cause of this was the fan she was holding, and she dropped it
@c    hastily, just in time to avoid shrinking away altogether.

i ca le nu cusku di'u kei abu fa'ani'a catlu le abu xance gi'e se spaji
le nu viska le nu abu co'a dasni pa le cmalu ke blabi ke kanba gluta pe 
le ractu ze'a le nu tavla i lu mi kakne la'e di'u ma sei abu pensi i 
ja'o mi za'ure'u jdika le ka barda li'u i abu sa'irbi'o gi'e klama le 
jubme tezu'e le nu sezmerli fi jy kei gi'e facki le du'u za'a abu ca 
centre li ji'imuno gi'e sutra le nu ca'o jdika i abu bazi facki le du'u 
rinka la'e di'u fa le nu jgari le bifpra kei kei gi'e sutra falcru by 
puzi le nu mu'osai jdika

@c    `That WAS a narrow escape!' said Alice, a good deal frightened at
@c    the sudden change, but very glad to find herself still in
@c    existence; `and now for the garden!' and she ran with all speed
@c    back to the little door:  but, alas! the little door was shut
@c    again, and the little golden key was lying on the glass table as
@c    before, `and things are worse than ever,' thought the poor child,
@c    `for I never was so small as this before, never!  And I declare
@c    it's too bad, that it is!'

i lu jibni rivbi sei la alis noi tolmilxe le ka terpa le nu suksa cenba
kei kei gi'e ku'i mutce le ka gleki le nu abu ca'o zasti cu cusku i e'e
caku klama le purdi li'u i abu bajra serai le ka sutra kei fa'a le cmalu
vorme i ku'i oidai le cmalu vorme cu za'ure'u ganlo i le cmalu ke solji
ckiku cu vreta le blaci jubme tai le purci i lu le tcini roda xlamau sei
le se kecti verba cu pensi iki'ubo mi noroi pu cmalu tai ti i noroi i
ju'a ty mutce le ka xlali je'u li'u

@c      As she said these words her foot slipped, and in another
@c    moment, splash! she was up to her chin in salt water.  Her first
@c    idea was that she had somehow fallen into the sea, `and in that
@c    case I can go back by railway,' she said to herself.  (Alice had
@c    been to the seaside once in her life, and had come to the general
@c    conclusion, that wherever you go to on the English coast you find
@c    a number of bathing machines in the sea, some children digging in
@c    the sand with wooden spades, then a row of lodging houses, and
@c    behind them a railway station.)  However, she soon made out that
@c    she was in the pool of tears which she had wept when she was nine
@c    feet high.

i ca le nu abu cusku lei di'u valsi kei le abu jamfu cu sakli ibazibo
lo nu jaurjanli zo'u le jmaji'o bi'i le firji'o be abu cu jinru lo silna 
djacu i pamoi sidbo fa le nu abu ba'o farlu le xamsi i lu va'o la'e di'u 
mi ka'e xrukla fu le trene sei abu sezysku li'u to la alis pu klama le
xamsi korbi paroi le nunjmive gi'eja'ebo jinvi le du'u ro pagbu be
le glico korbi cu se zvati so'o jinru minji noi nenri le xamsi ku'o 
e so'o verba noi kakpa lo canre le loldi lo mudri canpa ku'o e lo porsi
be fi loi ginka be'o e lo trene tcana noi trixe py toi i ku'i bazi abu
sanji le nu abu jinru le lalxu pe lei abu se klaku be ca le nu mitre
li repimu

@c      `I wish I hadn't cried so much!' said Alice, as she swam about,
@c    trying to find her way out.  `I shall be punished for it now, I
@c    suppose, by being drowned in my own tears!  That WILL be a queer
@c    thing, to be sure!  However, everything is queer to-day.'

i lu au mi na pu klaku lo tai mutce sei la alis ca le nu limna gi'e
troci le nu tolcri lo bartu pluta cu cusku i ru'a sfasa mi la'e di'u
le nu mrobi'o jinru lei mi se klaku i ju'o la'e di'u ba cizra i ku'i
roda cizra ca le cabdei li'u

@c      Just then she heard something splashing about in the pool a
@c    little way off, and she swam nearer to make out what it was:  at
@c    first she thought it must be a walrus or hippopotamus, but then
@c    she remembered how small she was now, and she soon made out that
@c    it was only a mouse that had slipped in like herself.

i caku abu tirna le nu da jaurjanli bu'u le lalxu zaku i abu jbize'a
limna tezu'e le nu zgana le nu da mokau i pamai abu jinvi le du'u da
odbenu ja rirxyxirma i ku'i remai abu morji le nu abu makau ca mitre
kei gi'e bazi viska le nu da smacu po'o gi'e mintu abu le ka pu
sakli

@c      `Would it be of any use, now,' thought Alice, `to speak to this
@c    mouse?  Everything is so out-of-the-way down here, that I should
@c    think very likely it can talk:  at any rate, there's no harm in
@c    trying.'  So she began:  `O Mouse, do you know the way out of
@c    this pool?  I am very tired of swimming about here, O Mouse!'
@c    (Alice thought this must be the right way of speaking to a mouse:
@c    she had never done such a thing before, but she remembered having
@c    seen in her brother's Latin Grammar, `A mouse--of a mouse--to a
@c    mouse--a mouse--O mouse!'  The Mouse looked at her rather
@c    inquisitively, and seemed to her to wink with one of its little
@c    eyes, but it said nothing.

i lu xu da mi prali sei la alis pensi le nu tavla le vi smacu i roda
bu'u le cnita cu tai tolfadni ja'e le nu pe'i lakne fa le nu ta ka'e
tavla iseju noda mi tolprali le nu troci li'u iseki'ubo abu co'a co'e
lu doi smacu xu do se slabu le pluta be le bartu be le bu'u lalxu i
mi mutce le ka tatpi le nu ru'u limna doi smacu li'u to la alis pu
jinvi le du'u ju'o ta drani le ka tadji lo'e nu tavla lo smacu i abu
noroi pu zukte lo simsa gi'eku'i morji le nu tcidu fi le latmo gerna
cukta pe le bruna fe lo'u lo smacu -- sera'a lo smacu -- seka'a lo smacu
-- ri'i lo smacu -- doi smacu le'u i le smacu cu terpreti mutce catlu abu
gi'e simlu le ka rinsa fi le nu ze'i ga'orgau pa le cmalu kanla i ku'i
sy cusku noda

@c the declension has to be in lo'u-le'u as it's words out of grammatical
@c context. -phma


@c      `Perhaps it doesn't understand English,' thought Alice; `I
@c    daresay it's a French mouse, come over with William the
@c    Conqueror.'  (For, with all her knowledge of history, Alice had
@c    no very clear notion how long ago anything had happened.)  So she
@c    began again:  `Ou est ma chatte?' which was the first sentence in
@c    her French lesson-book.  The Mouse gave a sudden leap out of the
@c    water, and seemed to quiver all over with fright.  `Oh, I beg
@c    your pardon!' cried Alice hastily, afraid that she had hurt the
@c    poor animal's feelings.  `I quite forgot you didn't like cats.'

i cumki fa le nu ta na se bangu le lojbo sei la alis pensi i ru'a ta
fraso smacu gi'e kansa la uiliam no'u le jamji'a le ka klama ti li'u
to abu djuno piso'ida lei purcedra gi'eku'i na mutce le ka jimpe le
du'u py pu fasnu za makau toi i abuboi za'ure'u co'a co'e zoi fy Où est
ma chatte? fy noi pamoi lei jufra pe le abu fraso ve cilre cukta i le
smacu cu suksa plipe le bartu be le djacu gi'e simlu le ka desku le
nu terpa i lu oise'i ko mi fraxu sei la alis noi xersmadi le du'u abu
crogau le danlu le cnirango cu sutra krixa i mi mulno le ka tolmorji
le nu do na nelci lo'e mlatu li'u

@c {abu za'ure'u} is an error. -fixed

@c      `Not like cats!' cried the Mouse, in a shrill, passionate
@c    voice.  `Would YOU like cats if you were me?'

i lu na nelci lo'e mlatu sei le smacu cu kinli je cinmo voksa krixa
i xu ba'e do nelci lo'e mlatu va'o le nu da'i do me mi li'u

@c      `Well, perhaps not,' said Alice in a soothing tone:  `don't be
@c    angry about it.  And yet I wish I could show you our cat Dinah:
@c    I think you'd take a fancy to cats if you could only see her.
@c    She is such a dear quiet thing,' Alice went on, half to herself,
@c    as she swam lazily about in the pool, `and she sits purring so
@c    nicely by the fire, licking her paws and washing her face--and
@c    she is such a nice soft thing to nurse--and she's such a capital
@c    one for catching mice--oh, I beg your pardon!' cried Alice again,
@c    for this time the Mouse was bristling all over, and she felt
@c    certain it must be really offended.  `We won't talk about her any
@c    more if you'd rather not.'

i lu y la'anai sei la alis surgau tonga cusku i ko na fengu i ku'i
au mi ka'e jarco le mi'a mlatu no'u la dinas do i pe'i do co'a nelci
lo'e mlatu va'o le nu da'i do dy viska i dy tai dirba smaji sei la alis
tecu'uru'e le sevzi ca le nu lazni limna le lalxu ca'o co'e i dy melbi
cmoni zutse ne'a le fagri gi'e tacpe'u le dy xance gi'e lumci le dy
flira i dy tai pluka ranti le nu kujyjai i dy tai certu le nu kavbu
lo'e smacu i oise'i ko mi fraxu sei la alis noi birti le du'u le smacu
noi caku tinsa cu je'u cnicro cu za'ure'u krixa i mi'o dy na ba di'a 
casnu va'o le nu do zmanei li'u

@c      `We indeed!' cried the Mouse, who was trembling down to the end
@c    of his tail.  `As if I would talk on such a subject!  Our family
@c    always HATED cats:  nasty, low, vulgar things!  Don't let me hear
@c    the name again!'

i lu zo mi'o ue sei le smacu noi da bi'i le jipno be le ke'a rebla cu
desku cu krixa i ju'onaicai mi casnu lo simsa i le mi lanzu ze'e xebni
lo'e mlatu i rigni je tolba'i je malfadni danlu i e'u mi na za'ure'u
tirna le cmene li'u

@c      `I won't indeed!' said Alice, in a great hurry to change the
@c    subject of conversation.  `Are you--are you fond--of--of dogs?'
@c    The Mouse did not answer, so Alice went on eagerly:  `There is
@c    such a nice little dog near our house I should like to show you!
@c    A little bright-eyed terrier, you know, with oh, such long curly
@c    brown hair!  And it'll fetch things when you throw them, and
@c    it'll sit up and beg for its dinner, and all sorts of things--I
@c    can't remember half of them--and it belongs to a farmer, you
@c    know, and he says it's so useful, it's worth a hundred pounds!
@c    He says it kills all the rats and--oh dear!' cried Alice in a
@c    sorrowful tone, `I'm afraid I've offended it again!'  For the
@c    Mouse was swimming away from her as hard as it could go, and
@c    making quite a commotion in the pool as it went.

i lu vi'osai sei la alis noi sutra le nu galfi le selsnu cu cusku i
xu y xu do y nelci y lo'e gerku li'u i le smacu na spuda iseki'ubo 
la alis ca'o co'e lu lo melbi ke cmalu gerku noi xabju le jibni be le 
mi'a zdani zo'u mi djica le nu mi gy do jarco i gy cmalu gerku la terier 
gi'e se kerfa lo clani je sarlu je bunre gi'e xrubei lei dacti poi do 
renro i gy fa'aga'u zutse gi'e cpedu le sanmi gi'e zukte so'i vrici noi 
mi ka'enai morji pimu lu'o ke'a i gy se ponse lo te cange noi xusra le 
du'u gy tai se pilno ja'e le nu gy se vamji lo rupnu be li panono i cy 
xusra le du'u gy catra ro le ratcu i oise'i sei la alis xenru tonga 
krixa i mi xersmadi le du'u mi ta za'ure'u cnixai li'u i le smacu ca'o 
limna to'o abu serai le ka vlipa kei gi'e mutce le ka kalsygau le lalxu 
ca le nu klama  

@c      So she called softly after it, `Mouse dear!  Do come back
@c    again, and we won't talk about cats or dogs either, if you don't
@c    like them!'  When the Mouse heard this, it turned round and swam
@c    slowly back to her:  its face was quite pale (with passion, Alice
@c    thought), and it said in a low trembling voice, `Let us get to
@c    the shore, and then I'll tell you my history, and you'll
@c    understand why it is I hate cats and dogs.'

i abu xutla trisku lu doi smacu dirba ko za'ure'u xruti i nu'edo'u
mi'o ba casnu genai lo'e mlatu ginaiji'a lo'e gerku va'o le nu
do na nelci li'u i ca le nu le smacu di'u tirna kei sy dutselfarbi'o
gi'e masno limna xruti abu i le flira cu mutce le ka blabi to ja'e le
nu cinmo sei la alis pensi toi i sy lauble je desku voksa cusku lu e'u
mi'o klama le korbi ibabo mi do jungau le mi lisri i do ba jimpe le du'u
makau krinu le nu mi xebni lo'e mlatu e lo'e gerku li'u

@c      It was high time to go, for the pool was getting quite crowded
@c    with the birds and animals that had fallen into it:  there were a
@c    Duck and a Dodo, a Lory and an Eaglet, and several other curious
@c    creatures.  Alice led the way, and the whole party swam to the
@c    shore.

i ca mapti tcika le nu cliva kei ki'u le nu le lalxu ca'o tisna loi
cipni ku joi loi danlu vu'o poi ba'o farlu ly i lo datka lo cipnrdodo
lo cipnrlori lo cipnrxakuila so'o drata noi vrici je cizra danlu i
la alis lidne i piro le girzu cu limna seka'a le korbi

@c lo datka lo cipnrdodo: This needs a conjunction, otherwise it means
@c "The duck did the dodo..." with the verb unspecified. --phma
@c The relationship, not the verb! The unspecified relationship is
@c "x1 and x2 and x3 and x4 were there" (or "crowded the pool", or whatever.)

