@node cimoi pagbu, , remoi pagbu, Top
@chapter cimoi pagbu

@c    THE NEW TESTAMENT OF OUR LORD AND SAVIOUR JESUS CHRIST


@c    Appendices
@c
@c      The Prayer of Manasses
@c      The Third Booke of Esdras
@c      The Fourth Booke of Esdras
@c
@c      The Prophecie of Abdias
@c      The Catholike Epistle of Iude the Apostle
@c
@c      The Preface to the Reader
@c      Hard Vvordes Explicated


@c    APPENDICES



@c    These texts come from the 1582 Rhemes and 1610 Doway printings of the
@c    portions of the Bible (see the 'History' section at the top of the
@c    e-text).  The primary sources provide a glimpse both into the history of
@c    the Douay-Rheims version and the English language itself.  The reader
@c    will quickly notice that the letter 'j' does not appear in the texts,
@c    rather 'i' functions either as a vowel or a consonant.  Likewise 'u' is
@c    not a distinct letter; it is employed typographically in the lower-case
@c    in place of 'v' where not starting a word.  The letters 'u' and 'v' both
@c    function either as vowels or consonants.  The word 'vniuersity'
@c    demonstrates this rule.  The letter 'w' is often employed, but in many
@c    cases the earlier form of a double-v (vv) appears instead.

@c    The transcriber has done his best to render the text accurately.  Note
@c    the relaxed spelling standards of the time; many variants appear.  While
@c    the errata section from the 1610 edition observed:  "We haue also found
@c    some other faultes of lesse importance; and feare there be more.  But we
@c    trust the reader may easely correct them, as they occurre." only obvious
@c    errors have been amended.  Where the transcriber has doubt between
@c    whether an irregular spelling is either an error and a variant, the
@c    printed text stands.  7-bit ASCII cannot fully represent the
@c    typographical standards of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, and
@c    many special characters have been replaced with modern equivalents.
@c    Where verse numbers stand in the margins of the printed texts, they have
@c    been transferred to the body; the verse numbers in the 'Prayer of
@c    Manasses' have been supplied from other versions.  Reference notes have
@c    been transferred from the margins, and their abbreviations modernized.





@c    ADDITIONAL BOOKS



@c    The prayer of Manasses, vvith the third & fourth Bookes of Esdras, extant
@c    in most Latin and vulgare Bibles, are here placed after al the Canonical
@c    bookes, of the old Testament:  because they are not receiued into the
@c    Canon of Diuine Scriptures by the Catholique Church.




@c    THE PRAYER OF MANASSES KING OF IVDA, WHEN HE WAS HELD CAPTIVE IN BABYLON.



@c    LORD omnipotent God of our fathers, Abraham, & Isaac, and Iacob, and of
@c    their iust sede, (2 Par 33:12) [2] which didst make heauen and earth:
@c    with al the ornamentes of them, [3] which hast bound the sea with the
@c    word of thy precept, which hast shut vp the depth, and sealed it with
@c    thy terrible and laudable name:  [4] whom al thinges dread, & tremble at
@c    the countinance of thy powre, [5] because the magnificence of thy glorie
@c    is importable, & the wrath of thy threatning vpon sinners is
@c    intollerable:  [6] but the mercie of thy promise is infinite and
@c    vnsearchable:  [7] because thou art our Lord, most high, benigne, long
@c    suffering, and very merciful, and penitent vpon the wickednes of men.
@c    Thou Lord according to the multitude of thy goodnes hast promised
@c    penance, and remission to them that haue sinned to thee, and by the
@c    multitude of thy mercies thou hast decreed penance to sinners, vnto
@c    saluation.  [8] Thou therfore Lord God of the iust, hast not appointed
@c    penance to the iust, Abraham, & Isaac and Iacob, them that haue not
@c    sinned to thee, but hast appointed penance for me a sinner:  [9] because
@c    I haue sinned aboue the number of the sand of the sea.  Myne iniquities
@c    Lord be multiplied, mine iniquities be multiplied, and I am not worthie
@c    to behold, & looke vpon the height of heauen, for the multitude of mine
@c    iniquities.  [10] I am made crooked with manie a band of yron, that I can
@c    not lift vp my head, and I haue not respiration:  because I haue stirred
@c    vp thy wrath, and haue done euil before thee:  I haue not done thy wil,
@c    and thy commandmentes I haue not kept:  I haue set vp abominations, and
@c    multiplied offenses.  [11] And now I bowe the knee of my hart, beseeching
@c    goodnes of thee.  [12] I haue sinned Lord, I haue sinned, & I acknowlege
@c    myne iniquities.  [13] Wherefore I beseech disiring thee, forgeue me
@c    Lord, forgeue me:  and destroy me not together with myne iniquities,
@c    neither reserue thou for euer, being angrie, euils for me, neither damme
@c    me into the lowest places of the earth:  because thou art Lord, God, I
@c    say, of the penitent:  [14] in me thou shalt shew al thy goodnes because
@c    thou shalt saue me vnworthie according to thy great mercie, [15] and I
@c    wil prayse thee alwayes al the dayes of my life:  because al the power of
@c    the heauens prayseth thee, and to thee is glorie for euer and euer.
@c    Amen.




@c    THE THIRD BOOKE OF ESDRAS.



@c    For helpe of the readers, especially such as haue not leysure to read al,
@c    vve haue gathered the contentes of the chapters; but made no Annotations:
@c    because the text it self is but as a Commentarie to the Canonical bookes;
@c    and therfore we haue only added the concordance of other Scriptures in
@c    the margin.



@c    CHAP. I.


@c    Iosias king of Iuda maketh a great Pasch, 7. geuing manie hostes to such
@c    as wanted for sacrifice:  14. the Priestes and Leuites performing their
@c    functions therin:  22. in the eightenth yeare of his reigne, 25. He is
@c    slayne in battel by the king of AEgypt, 32. and much lamented by the
@c    Iewes.  34. His sonne Ieconias succedeth.  37. After him Ioacim, 40. who
@c    is deposed by the king of Babylon.  43. Ioachim reigneth three monethes,
@c    and is caried into Babylon.  46. Sedecias reigneth eleuen yeares
@c    wickedly.  52. and he with his people is caried captiue into Babylon, the
@c    citie and temple are destroyed.  57. so remayned til the Monarchie of the
@c    Persians.

@c    AND Iosias made a Pasch in Ierusalem to our Lord & immolated the Phase
@c    the fourtenth moone of the moneth:  (4 Kings 23:21 / 2 Par 35:1)
@c    2 appointing the Priestes by courses of dayes clothed with stoles in the
@c    temple of our Lord.  3 And he spake to the Leuites the sacred seruantes
@c    of Isreal, that they should sanctifie them selues to our Lord in the
@c    placing of the holie arke of our Lord in the house, which king Salomon
@c    sonne of Dauid built.  4 It shal not be for you to take it vpon your
@c    shoulders.  And now serue your Lord, and take the care of that nation
@c    Israel, in part according to your villages and tribes, 5 according to the
@c    writing of Dauid king of Israel, and according to the magnificence of
@c    Salomon his sonne, al in the temple, and according to your fathers
@c    portion of principalitie, among them that stand in the sight of your
@c    brethren the children of Isreal.  6 Immolate the Pasch, and prepare the
@c    sacrifices for your bretheren, and doe according to the precept of our
@c    Lord which was geuen to Moyses.  (Ex 12 / Lev 23 / Num 28)  7 And Iosias
@c    gaue vnto the people that was found of sheepe, lambes, and kiddes, and
@c    goates thirtie thousand, calues there thousand.  8 These thinges were
@c    geuen to the people of the kinges goodes according to promisse:  and to
@c    the priestes for the Phase, sheepe in number two thousand, and calues an
@c    hundred.  9 And Iechonias, and Semeias, and Nathanael bretheren, and
@c    Hasabias, and Oziel, and Coraba for the Phase sheepe fiue thousand,
@c    calues fiue hundred.  10 And when these thinges were done in good order,
@c    the Priestes an the Leuites stood hauing azymes by tribes.  11 And
@c    according to the portions of their fathers principalitie, in the sight of
@c    the people they did offer, to our Lord according to those thinges, which
@c    were written in the booke of Moyses:  12 and rosted the Phase with fire
@c    as it ought:  and the hostes they boyled in cauldrons, and in pottes with
@c    beneuolence:  13 and they brought to al that were of the people:  and
@c    afterward they prepared for them selues and the priestes.  14 For the
@c    Priestes offered the fatte, vntil the houre was ended:  and the Leuites
@c    prepared for them selues, and their brethren, the children of Aaron.
@c    15 And the sacred singing men, the children of Asaph were by order
@c    according to the precept of Dauid and Asaph, and Zacharias, and Ieddimus,
@c    which was from the king.  16 And the porters at euerie gate, so that none
@c    transgressed his owne:  for their brethren prepared for them.  17 And the
@c    thinges were consummate that perteyned to the sacrifice of our Lord.
@c    18 In that day they celebrated the Phase, and offered hostes vpon the
@c    sacrifice of our Lord, according to the precept of king Iosias.  19 And
@c    the children of Israel, that were found at that time, celebrated the
@c    Phase:  and the festiual day of Azymes for seuen dayes:  20 and there was
@c    not celebrated such a Phase in Isreal, from the times of Samuel the
@c    prophet:  21 and al the kinges of Israel did not celebrate such a Phase
@c    as Iosias did, and the Priestes, and the Leuites, and the Iewes, and al
@c    Israel, that were found in their abode at Ierusalem.  22 In the eightenth
@c    yeare, Iosias reigning was the Phase celebrated.  23 And the workes of
@c    Iosias were directed in the sight of his Lord in a hart ful of feare:
@c    24 and the thinges concerning him are writen in the ancient times,
@c    touching them that sinned, and were irreligous against our Lord aboue al
@c    nations, and that sought not the wordes of our Lord vpon Israel.  25 And
@c    after al this fact of Iosias, came vp Pharao the king of AEgypt comming
@c    in Charcamis from the way vpon Euphrates, and Iosias went forth to meete
@c    him.  (4 Kings 23:29 / 2 Par 35:20)  26 And the king of AEgypt sent to
@c    Iosias saying:  What is there betwen me & thee king of Iuda?  27 I was
@c    not sent of the Lord to fight against thee:  for my battel is vpon
@c    Euphrates, goe downe in hast.  28 And Iosias did not returne vpon his
@c    chariote:  but endeuoured to ouerthrow him, not attending the word of the
@c    prophet from the mouth of our Lord:  29 but he made battel against him in
@c    the field of Mageddo.  And princes went downe to king Iosias.  30 And the
@c    king said to his seruantes:  Remoue me from the battel, for I am weakned
@c    excedingly.  And forthwith his seruantes remoued him out of the battel.
@c    31 And he went vp into his second chariote:  & comming to Ierusalem,
@c    dyed, and was buried in his fathers sepulchre.  32 And in al Iurie they
@c    mourned for Iosias, & the rulers with their wiues lamented him vntil this
@c    day.  And this was geuen out to be done alwayes vnto al the stocke of
@c    Israel.  33 But these thinges were writen before in the booke of the
@c    histories of the kinges of Iuda:  and al the actes of the doing of
@c    Iosias, and his glorie and his vnderstanding in the law of our Lord:  and
@c    the thinges that were done by him, and that are not writen in the booke
@c    of the kinges of Israel and Iuda.  34 And they that were of the nation,
@c    taking Iechonias the sonne of Iosias, made him king for Iosias his
@c    father, when he was three and twentie yeares old.  (4 Kings 23:30 /
@c    2 Par 36:1)  35 And he reigned ouer Israel three monethes.  And the king
@c    of AEgypt remoued him, that he should not reigne in Ierusalem:  36 and he
@c    put a taxe vpon the nation of siluer an hundred talentes, and of gold one
@c    talent.  37 And the king of AEgypt made Ioacim his brother king of Iuda
@c    and Ierusalem:  38 and he bound the magistrates of Ioacim, and Zaracel
@c    his brother, and taking them brought them backe into AEgypt.  39 Ioacim
@c    was fiue and twentie yeares old when he began to reigne in the land of
@c    Iuda and Ierusalem:  and he did euil in the sight of our Lord.  40 And
@c    after this man came vp Nabuchodonosor the king of Babylon, and binding
@c    him with a bande of brasse, brought him into Babylon.  41 And
@c    Nabuchodonosor tooke the sacred vessels of our Lord, and carried away,
@c    and consecrated them in his temple in Babylon.  42 For his vncleanes, and
@c    lacke of religion is written in the booke of the times of the kinges.
@c    43 And Ioachin his sonne reigned for him.  And when he was made king, he
@c    was eightene yeares old.  44 And reigned three monethes and ten dayes in
@c    Ierusalem, and did euil in the sight of our Lord:  45 and after a yeare
@c    Nabuchodonosor sending, transported him into Babylon together with the
@c    sacred vessels of our Lord.  (4 Kings 24:13)  46 And he made Sedecias
@c    king of Iuda and Ierusalem, when he was one and twentie yeares old:
@c    (4 Kings 24:17)  and he reigned eleuen yeares.  47 And he did euil in the
@c    sight of our Lord, and was not afraid of the wordes which were spoken by
@c    Ieremie the prophet from the mouth of our Lord:  (Jer 37:2)  48 and being
@c    sworne of king Nabuchodonosor, forsworne he did reuolt:  and his necke
@c    being hardened, & his hart, he transgressed the ordinances of our Lord
@c    the God of Israel.  49 And the princes of the people of our Lord did
@c    manie thinges wickedly, and they did impiously aboue al the vncleannes of
@c    the nations:  and they polluted the temple of our Lord that was holie of
@c    Ierusalem.  50 And the God of their fathers sent by his messenger to
@c    reclame them, for that he would spare them, and his tabernacle.  51 But
@c    they scorned at his messengers:  and in the day that our Lord spake to
@c    them, they were mocking his prophetes.  52 Who was moued euen vnto wrath
@c    vpon his nation for their impietie, and commanded the kinges of the
@c    Chaldees to come vp.  53 These slewe their yong men with the sword, round
@c    about their holie temple, and spared not yong man, and old man, and
@c    virgin, and youth:  54 but al were deliuered into their handes:  & taking
@c    al the sacred vessels of our Lord, and the kinges treasures, they caried
@c    them into Babylon, 55 and burnt the house of our Lord, and threwe downe
@c    the walles of Ierusalem:  and the towres therof they burnt with fire,
@c    56 and consumed al their honorable thinges, and brought them to naught,
@c    and those that were left of the sword, they led into Babylon.  57 And
@c    they were his seruants vntil the Persians reigned in the fulfilling of
@c    the word of our Lord by the mouth of Ieremie:  (Jer 25:12 / Jer 29:10 /
@c    Dan 9:2)  58 as long as the land quietly kept her sabbathes, al the time
@c    of her desolation she sabbathized in the application of seuentie yeares.



@c    CHAP. II.


@c    Cyrus king of Persia permitteth the Iewes to returne into their countrie:
@c    10. and deliuereth to them the holie vessels, which Nabuchodonosor had
@c    taken from the temple.  16. Certaine aduersaries writing to king
@c    Artaxerxes, hinder those that would repayre the ruines of Ierusalem.

@c    CYRVS king of the Persians reigning for the accomplishment of the word of
@c    our Lord by the mouth of Ieremie, (2 Par 36:22 / 1 Esd 1:1 / 1 Esd 6:3 /
@c    Jer 25:12 / Jer 29:10 / Dan 9:2) 2 our Lord raysed vp the spirit of Cyrus
@c    king of the Persians, and he proclaymed in al his kingdomes, and that by
@c    writing, 3 saying:  Thus sayth Cyrus king of the Persians:  The Lord of
@c    Israel, the high Lord, hath made me king ouer the whole earth.  4 and
@c    hath signified to me to build him a house in Ierusalem, which is in
@c    Iurie.  5 If there be any of your kinred, his Lord goe vp with him into
@c    Ierusalem.  6 Whosoeuer therefore dwel about the places, let them helpe
@c    them that are in the same place, in gold and siluer, 7 in giftes, with
@c    horses, and beastes, and with other thinges which by vowes are added into
@c    the temple of our Lord, which is in Ierusalem.  8 And the princes of the
@c    tribes, of the villages and of Iurie, of the tribe of Beniamin, & the
@c    Priestes, and the Leuites standing vp, whom our Lord moued to goe vp, and
@c    to build the house of our Lord which is in Ierusalem, and they that were
@c    round about them, 9 did helpe them with al their gold and siluer, and
@c    beastes, and manie whose minde was stirred vp, with many vowes.  10 And
@c    Cyrus the king brought forth the sacred vessel of our Lord, which
@c    Nabuchodonosor the king of Babylon transported out of Ierusalem, and
@c    consecrated them to his Idol.  11 And Cyrus the king of Persians bringing
@c    them forth, deliuered them to Mithridatus, who was ouer his treasures.
@c    12 And by him they were deliuered to Salmanasar president of Iurie.
@c    13 And of these this was the number:  Cuppes for libamentes of siluer two
@c    thousand foure hundred, basens of siluer thirtie:  phials of gold
@c    thirtie, also of siluer two thousand foure hundred:  and other vessels a
@c    thousand.  14 and al the vessels of gold and siluer, were fiue thousand
@c    eight hundred sixtie.  15 And they were numbered to Salmanasar together
@c    with them, that came out of the captiuite of Babylon into Ierusalem.
@c    16 But in the times of Artaxerxes king of the Persians, there wrote to
@c    him of them that dwelt in Iurie and Ierusalem, Balsamus, and Mithridatus,
@c    and Sabellius, and Rathimus, Balthemus, Sabellius scribe, and the rest
@c    dweling in Samaria, and other places the epistle folowing to king
@c    Artaxerxes.  (1 Esd 4:7)  17 SIR, thy seruantes Rathimus ouer
@c    occurrentes, and Sabellius the scribe, and the other iudges of thy court
@c    in Caelesyria, and Phenice.  18 And now be it knowen to our Lord the
@c    king, that Iewes came vp from you to vs, coming into Ierusalem a
@c    rebellious, & very naughty citie, do build the fornaces thereof, and set
@c    vp the walles, and rayse the temple.  19 And if this citie, and the
@c    walles shal be finished, they wil not onlie not abyde to pay tributes,
@c    but also wil resist the kinges.  20 And because that is in doing about
@c    the temple, we thought it should doe wel not to neglect this same thing:
@c    21 but to make it knowen to our Lord the king, that if it shal seme good,
@c    o king it may be sought in the bookes of thy fathers, 22 and thou shalt
@c    find in the recordes, thinges writen of these, and thou shalt know that
@c    this citie hath bene rebellious, and trubling kinges, and cities, 23 and
@c    the Iewes rebelles, & making battels in it from time out of mind, for the
@c    which cause this citie was made desolate.  24 Now therfore we doe thee to
@c    vnderstand, Lord king, that if this citie shal be built, and the walles
@c    therof shal be erected, there wil be no comming downe for thee into
@c    Caelesyria, & Phenice.  25 Then wrote the king to Rathimus, the writer of
@c    the occurrentes, and to Balthemus, and to Sabellius the scribe, and to
@c    the rest ioyned with them, and to the dwellers in Syria, and Phenice, as
@c    foloweth:  26 I haue read the epistle that you sent me.  I commanded
@c    therfore search to be made, & it was found that the same citie is from
@c    the beginning rebellious to kinges, 27 and the men rebelles, and making
@c    battels in it, & there were most valient kinges ruling in Ierusalem, and
@c    exacting tributes in Caelesyria, & Phenice.  28 Now therfore I haue geuen
@c    commandment to forbid those men to build the citie, and to stay them that
@c    nothing be done more then is:  29 and that they proceeded not farder,
@c    wherof are euils, so that there may be truble brougt vpon the kinges.
@c    30 Then these things being read which were writen of king Artaxerxes,
@c    Rathimus, and Sabellius the scribe, and they that were apointed with them
@c    ioyning together in hast came to Ierusalem with a troupe of horsemen, and
@c    multitude, & companie:  31 and they begane to forbid the builders, and
@c    they ceased from building of the temple in Ierusalem, til in the second
@c    yeare of the reigne of Darius king of the Persians.



@c    CHAP. III.


@c    After a solemne supper made to al the court, and chief princes, king
@c    Darius sleeping:  4. three esquires of the bodie keeping watch, proposed
@c    the question:  10. VVhether wine, or a King, or wemen, or the truth doth
@c    excel?  17. The first prayseth wine.

@c    KING Darius made a great supper to al his domestical seruantes, and to al
@c    the magistrates of Media and Persia, 2 and to al that were purple, and to
@c    the praetors, and counsuls, and liuetenantes vnder him from India vnto
@c    AEthiopia, an hundred twentie seuen prouinces.  3 And when they had eaten
@c    and drunken, and returned ful, then Darius went vp into his chamber, and
@c    slept, and awaked.  4 Then those three youngmen kepers of his bodie,
@c    which garded the kings bodie, sayd one to an other; 5 Let euerie one of
@c    vs say a word that may excel:  & whose word soeuer shal appeare wiser
@c    then the others, to him wil king Darius geue great giftes, 6 to be
@c    couered with purple, & to drinke in gold, and to sleepe vpon gold, & a
@c    chariote with a bridle of gold, & a bonet of silke, and a cheyne about
@c    his necke:  7 and he shal sit in the second place next Darius for his
@c    wisdome.  And he shal be called the cosin of Darius.  8 Then euerie one
@c    writing his word signed it, and they put it vnder the pillow of Darius
@c    the king, 9 and they sayd.  When the king shal rise, we wil geue him our
@c    writinges:  and which soeuer of the three the king shal iudge, and the
@c    magistrates of Persia, that his word is the wiser, to him shal the
@c    victorie be geuen as is writen.  10 One wrote:  Wine is strong.  11 An
@c    other wrote, a King is stronger.  12 The third wrote, Wemen are more
@c    strong:  but aboue al thinges truth ouercometh.  13 And when the king was
@c    risen, they tooke their writinges, and gaue him, and he read.  14 And
@c    sending he called al the Magistrates of Persians, and the Medes, and them
@c    that weare purple, and the pretors, and the ouerseers; 15 and they sate
@c    in the councel:  and the writinges were read before them.  16 And he
@c    sayd:  Cal the youngmen, and they shal declare their owne wordes.  And
@c    they were called, and went in.  17 And he sayd to them:  Declare vnto vs
@c    concerning these thinges which are writen.  And the first began, he that
@c    had spoken of the strength of wine, 18 and sayd:  O ye men, how doth wine
@c    preuaile ouer al men that drinke!  it seduceth the minde.  19 And also
@c    the mind of king and orphane it maketh vaine.  Also of the bondman and
@c    the free, of the rich man and the poore, 20 and euerie mind it turneth
@c    into securitie and pleasantnes, and it remembreth not any sorow and
@c    dewtie, 21 and al hartes it maketh honest, and it remembreth not king,
@c    nor magistrate, and it maketh a man speake al thinges by talentes.
@c    22 And when they haue drunke, they remember not frendship, nor
@c    brotherhood:  yea and not long after they take swordes.  23 And when they
@c    are recouered and risen from the wine, they remember not what they haue
@c    done.  24 O ye men, doth not wine excel?  who thinketh to doe so?  And
@c    hauing sayd this, he held his peace.



@c    CHAP. IIII.


@c    The second prayseth the excellencie of a king:  13. The third (which is
@c    Zorobabel) commendeth wemen:  33. but preferreth truth aboue al.
@c    41. VVhich is so approued, and he is rewarded.  42. The king moreouer at
@c    his request restoreth the holie vessels of the temple, and granteth
@c    meanes to build the citie of Ierusalem, and the temple.

@c    AND the next began to speake, he that spake of the strength of a king.
@c    2 O ye men doe not the men excel, which obteyne land and sea, and al
@c    thinges that are in them?  3 But a king excelleth aboue al thinges, and
@c    hath dominion ouer them:  and euerie thing whatsoeuer he shal say to
@c    them, they doe.  4 And if he send them to warryers, they goe, and throw
@c    downe mountaines, and the walles, and towers.  5 They kil, and are
@c    killed:  and the kinges word they transgresse not.  For if they shal
@c    ouercome, they bring to the king al thinges whatsoeuer they haue taken
@c    for a praye.  6 In like maner also al others, for so many as are not
@c    souldiars, nor fight, but til the ground:  when they shal reape, againe
@c    they bring tributes to the king.  7 And he being one onlie if he say:
@c    Kil ye, they kil:  say he:  forgeue, the forgeue.  8 say he:  strike:
@c    they strike:  say he, destroy, they destroy:  say he build, they build.
@c    9 say he, cut downe, they cut downe, say he plant, they plant:  10 and al
@c    the people, & potestates here him, and beside this he sitteth downe, and
@c    drinketh, and sleepeth.  11 And others gard him round about, and can not
@c    goe euerie one, and doe their owne workes, but at a word are obedient to
@c    him.  12 O ye men, how doth not a king excel that is so renowmed?  And he
@c    held his peace.  13 The third that spake of wemen and truth, this is
@c    Zorobabel, began to speake.  14 O ye men, not the great king, & many men,
@c    neither is it wine that dothe excel.  Who is it then that hath the
@c    dominion of them?  15 Haue not wemen brought forth the king, and al the
@c    people, that ruleth ouer land & sea:  16 and were they not borne of them,
@c    and did not they bring vp them which planted the vineyardes, whereof wine
@c    is made?  17 And they make the garmentes of al men, & they doe honor to
@c    al men, and men can not be separed from wemen.  18 If they haue gathered
@c    gold and siluer, and euerie beutiful thing, & see a woman comelie and
@c    fayre, 19 leauing al these thinges they fixe their looke vpon her, & with
@c    open mouth beholde her, and allure her more then gold and siluer, and
@c    euerie precious thing.  20 Man forsaketh his father that brought him vp,
@c    and his countrie, and ioyneth himself to a woman.  21 And with a woman he
@c    refresheth his soul:  and neither doth he remember father, nor mother,
@c    nor countrie.  22 And hereby you must know that wemen rule ouer you.  Are
@c    you not sorie?  23 And a man taketh his sword, & goeth into the way to
@c    commit theftes and murders, & to sayle seas & riuers, 24 and seeth a
@c    lyon, and goeth in darkenes:  and when he hath committed theft, and
@c    fraude, and spoyles, he bringeth it to his beloued.  25 And againe, man
@c    loueth his wife more then father or mother.  26 And many haue become
@c    madde for their wiues:  and haue been made bondmen for them:  27 and many
@c    haue perished and bene slayne, and haue sinned for wemen.  28 And now
@c    beleue me, that the king is great in his powre:  because al countries are
@c    afrayd to touch him.  29 Neuertheles I saw Apemes the daughter of Bezaces
@c    the concubine of a meruelous king, sitting by the king at his right hand,
@c    30 and taking of the crowne from his head, and putting it vpon her self,
@c    and with the palme of her left hand she stroke the king.  31 And beside
@c    these thinges he with open mouth beheld her:  and if she smiled he
@c    laugheth, and if she be angrie with him, he flattereth, til he be
@c    reconciled to her fauour.  32 O ye men, why are not wemen stronger?
@c    Great is the earth, and high is the heauen:  who doeth these thinges?
@c    33 And then the king and they that weare purple looked one vpon an other.
@c    And he began to speake of truth.  34 O ye men, are not wemen strong?  The
@c    earth is great and heauen is high:  & the swift course of the sunne
@c    turneth the heauen round into his place in one day.  35 Is not he
@c    magnifical that doth these thinges, and the truth great, and stronger
@c    aboue al thinges?  36 Al the earth calleth vpon the truth, heauen also
@c    blesseth it, and al workes are moued, and tremble at it, and there is not
@c    any thing with it vniust.  37 Wine is vniust, the king is vniust, wemen
@c    are vniust, al the sonnes of men are vniust, and al their workes are
@c    vniust, and in them is not truth, and they shal perish in their
@c    iniquitie:  38 and truth abydeth, and groweth strong for euer, and
@c    liueth, and preuayleth for euer and euer.  39 Neither is there with it
@c    acception of persons, nor differences:  but the thinges that are iust it
@c    doth to al men, to the vniust and malignant, and al men are wel pleased
@c    in the workes thereof.  40 And there is no vniust thing in the iudgement
@c    therof, but strength, and reigne, and power, and maiestie of worldes.
@c    Blessed be the God of truth.  41 And he left speaking.  And al the people
@c    cryed, and sayd:  Great is truth and it preuaileth.  42 Then the king
@c    sayd to him:  Aske, if thou wilt any more, then the thinges that are
@c    writen, and I wil geue it thee, according as thou art found wiser then
@c    thy neighbours, & thou shalt sitte next to me, and shalt be called my
@c    cosin.  43 Then sayd he to the king:  Be midful of thy vow, which thou
@c    hast vowed, to build Ierusalem in the day that thou didst receiue the
@c    kingdom:  44 and to send backe al the vessels that were taken out of
@c    Ierusalem, which Cyrus separated, when he sacked Babylon, and would haue
@c    sent them backe thither.  45 And thou hast vowed to build the temple,
@c    which the Idumeians burnt, when Iurie was destroyed of the Chaldees.
@c    46 And now this is that which I aske Lord, & which I desire, this is the
@c    maiestie which I desire of thee, that thou performe the vowe which thou
@c    hast vowed to the king of heauen by thy mouth.  47 Then Darius the king
@c    rising vp, kissed him:  and wrote letters to al the officers, and
@c    ouerseers, and them that weare purple, that they should conduct him, and
@c    them that were with him, al going vp to build Ierusalem.  48 And to al
@c    the ouerseers that were in Syria, and Phoenice, and Libanus he wrote
@c    letters, that they should draw Ceder trees from Libanus into Ierusalem,
@c    to build the citie with them.  49 And he wrote to al the Iewes which went
@c    vp from the kingdome into Iurie for libertie, euerie mightie man, &
@c    magistrate, & ouerseer not to come vpon them to their gates, 50 and al
@c    the countrie which they had obtayned to be free vnto them, & that the
@c    Idumeians leaue the castels which they possesse of the Iewes, 51 and to
@c    the building of the temple to geue euerie yeare twentie talentes vntil it
@c    were throughly built:  52 & vpon the altars to burne holocausts dayly, as
@c    they haue commandment:  to offer other ten talentes euery yeare, 53 & to
@c    al that go forth from Babylon to build the citie, that there should be
@c    libertie as wel to them as to their children, and to al the priestes that
@c    goe before.  54 And he wrote a quantitie also, and commanded the sacred
@c    stole to be geuen, wherein they should serue; 55 and to the Leuites he
@c    wrote to geue preceptes, vntil the day wherein the house shal be
@c    finished, and Ierusalem builded.  56 And to al that kepe the citie, he
@c    wrote portions and wages to be geuen to them.  57 And he sent away al the
@c    vessels whatsoeuer Cyrus had separated from Babylon, and al thinges
@c    whatsoeuer Cyrus sayd, he also commanded to be donne, and to be sent to
@c    Ierusalem.  58 And when that yong man was gone forth, lyfting vp his face
@c    toward Ierusalem, he blessed the king of heauen, 59 & sayd:  Of thee is
@c    victorie, and of thee is wisdome, and glorie.  And I am thy seruant.
@c    60 Blessed art thou which hast geuen me wisedom, and I wil confesse to
@c    thee Lord God of our fathers.  61 And he toke the letters, and went into
@c    Babylon.  And he came, and told al his brethren that were in Babylon:
@c    62 and they blessed the God of their fathers, because he gaue them
@c    remission and refreshing, 63 that they should goe vp and build Ierusalem,
@c    and the temple wherein his name was renowmed, and they reioyced with
@c    musike and ioy seuen dayes.



@c    CHAP. V.


@c    Those that returned from captiuitie of Bablyon into Ierusalem, and Iurie,
@c    are recited.  47. They restore Gods seruice:  66. but are hindered from
@c    building.

@c    AFTER these thinges there were chosen, to goe vp the princes of townes by
@c    their houses, and tribes, and their wiues, and their sonnes and
@c    daughters, and their men seruantes and wemen seruantes, and their cattel.
@c    (1 Esd 2:1)  2 And Darius the king sent together with them a thousand
@c    horsmen, til they conducted them to Ierusalem with peace, & with musicke
@c    & with tymbrels, and shaulmes:  3 and al the brethren were playing, and
@c    he made them goe vp together with them.  4 And these are the names of the
@c    men that went vp by their townes according to tribes, and according to
@c    the portion of their principalitie.  5 Priestes:  The children of
@c    Phinees, the sonne of Aaron, Iesus the sonne of Iosedec, Ioacim the sonne
@c    of Zorobabel, the sonne of Salatheil of the house of Dauid, of the
@c    progenie of Phares, of the tribe of Iuda.  6 Who spake vnder Darius king
@c    of the Persians the meruelous wordes in the second yeare of his reigne
@c    the first moneth Nisan.  7 And they are these, that of Iurie came vp from
@c    the captiuitie of the transmigration, whom Nabuchodonosor the king of
@c    Babylon transported into Babylon, and returned into Ierusalem.
@c    (1 Esd 2:2 / 2 Esd 7:6)  8 And euerie one sought a part of Iurie
@c    according to his owne citie, they that came with Zorobabel, and Iesus,
@c    Nehemias, Areores, Elimeo, Emmanio, Mardocheo, Beelsuro, Mechpsatochor,
@c    Olioro, Emonia one of their princes.  9 And the number of them of the
@c    same nation, of their rulers the children of Phares, two thousand an
@c    hundred seuentie two:  10 The children of Ares, three thousand an hundred
@c    fiftie seuen:  11 The children of Phoemo, an hundred fourtie two:  in the
@c    children of Iesus and Ioabes, a thousand three hundred two:  12 the
@c    children of Demu, two thousand foure hundred seuentie:  the children of
@c    Choraba, two hundred fiue:  the children of Banica, an hundred sixtie
@c    eight, 13 the children of Bebech, foure hundred three:  the children of
@c    Archad, foure hundred twentie seuen:  14 the children of Cham, thirtie
@c    seuen:  the children of Zoroar, two thousand sixtie seuen:  the children
@c    of Adin, foure hundred sixtie one:  15 the children of Aderectes, an
@c    hundred eight:  the children of Ciaso and Zelas an hundred seuen:  the
@c    children of Azoroc, foure hundred thirtie nine:  16 the children of
@c    Iedarbone, an hundred thirtie two:  the children of Ananias, an hundred
@c    thirtie:  the children of Asoni, ninetie:  17 the children of Marsar,
@c    foure hundred twentie two:  the children of Zabarus, nintie fiue:  the
@c    children of Sepolemon, an hundred twentie three:  18 the children of
@c    Nepopas, fiftie fiue:  the children of Hechanatus, an hundred fiftie
@c    eight:  the children of Cebethamus, an hundred thirite two:  19 the
@c    children of Crearpatros, which are of Enocadie and Modia, foure hundred
@c    twentie three:  they of Gramas and Babea, an hundred twentie one.
@c    20 They of Besselon, and Ceagge, sixtie fiue:  they of Bastraro, an
@c    hundred twentie two:  21 they of Bechenobes, fiftie fiue:  the children
@c    of Liptis, an hundred fiftie fiue:  the children of Labonni, three
@c    hundred fiftie seuen:  22 the children of Sichem, three hundred seuentie:
@c    the children of Suadon, & Cliomus, three hundred seuentie eight:  23 the
@c    children of Ericus, two thousand an hundred fourtie fiue:  the children
@c    of Anaas, three hundred seuentie.  The priestes:  24 the children of
@c    Ieddus, the sonne of Euther, the sonne of Eliasib, three hundred seuenty
@c    two:  the children of Emerus, two hundred fiftie two:  25 the children of
@c    Phasurius, three hundred fiftie seuen the children of Caree, two hundred
@c    twentie seuen.  26 The Leuites:  The children of Iesus in Caduhel, and
@c    Bamis, and Serebias, and Edias, seuentie foure, the whole number from the
@c    twelfth yeare, thiritie thousand foure hundred sixtie two.  27 The
@c    sonnes, and daughters, and wiues, the whole number, fourtie thousand two
@c    hundred fourtie two.  28 The children of the Priestes, that sang in the
@c    temple:  the children of Asaph, an hundred twentie eight.  29 And the
@c    porters:  the children of Esmeni, the children of Azer, the children of
@c    Amon, the children of Accuba, of Topa, the children of Tobi, al an
@c    hundred thirtie nine.  30 Priestes that serued in the temple:  the
@c    children of Sel, the children of Gaspha, the children of Tobloch, the
@c    children of Caria, the children of Su, the children of Hellu, the
@c    children of Lobana, the children of Armacha, the children of Accub, the
@c    children of Vtha, the children of Cetha, the children of Aggab, the
@c    children of Obai, the children of Anani, the children of Canna, the
@c    children of Geddu, 31 the children or An, the children of Radin, the
@c    children of Desanon, the children of Nachoba, the children of Caseba, the
@c    children of Gaze, the children of Ozui, the children of Sinone, the
@c    children of Attre, the children of Hasten, the children of Asiana, the
@c    children of Manei, the children of Nasissim, the children of Acusu, the
@c    children of Agista, the children of Azui, the children of Fauon, the
@c    children of Phasalon, 32 the children of Meedda, the children of Phusa,
@c    the children of Caree, the children of Burcus, the children of Saree, the
@c    children of Coesi, the children of Nasith, the children of Agisti, the
@c    children of Pedon.  33 Salomon his children, the children of Asophot, the
@c    children of Phasida, the children of Celi, the children of Dedon, the
@c    children of Gaddehel, the children of Sephegi, 34 the children of Aggia,
@c    the children of Sachareth, the children of Sabathen, the children of
@c    Caroneth, the children of Malsith, the children of Ama, the children of
@c    Sasus, the children of Addus, the children of Suba, the children of Eura,
@c    the children of Rahotis, the children of Phasphat, the children of
@c    Malmon.  35 Al that serued the sanctuarie, and the seruantes of Salomon,
@c    foure hundred eightie two.  36 These are the children that came vp from
@c    Thelmela, Thelharsa:  the princes of them, Carmellam, and Careth:  37 and
@c    they could not declare their cities, and their progenies, how they are of
@c    Israel.  The children of Dalari, the children of Tubal, the children of
@c    Nechodaici, 38 of the Priestes, that did the function of priesthood:  and
@c    there were not found the children of Obia, the children of Achisos, the
@c    children of Addin, who tooke a wife of the daughters of Pargeleu:  39 and
@c    they were called by his name, and the writing of the kinred of these was
@c    sought in the register, and it was not found, and they were forbid to doe
@c    the function of priesthood.  40 And Nehemias and Astharus sayd to them:
@c    Let not the holie thinges be participated, til there arise a hiegh priest
@c    lerned for declaration and truth.  41 And al Israel was beside men
@c    seruantes, and wemen seruantes, fourtie two thousand three hundred
@c    fourtie.  42 Their men seruantes and wemen seruantes, seuen thousand
@c    three hundred thirtie seuen.  Singing men and singing wemen, two hundred
@c    three score fiue.  43 Camels, foure hundred thiritie fiue.  Horses, seuen
@c    thousand thirtie six.  Mules, two hundred thousand fourtie fiue.  Beastes
@c    vnder yoke, fiue thousand twentie fiue.  44 And of the rulers themselues
@c    by their villages, when they came into the temple of God, which was in
@c    Ierusalem, to renew and raise vp the temple in his place, according to
@c    their power:  45 and to be geuen into the temple to the sacred treasure
@c    of the workes, of gold twelue thousand mnas, and fiue thousand mnas of
@c    siluer, and stoles for Priestes an hundred.  46 And the Priestes and
@c    Leuites, and they that came out of the people, dwelt in Ierusalem, and in
@c    the countrie, and the sacred singingmen, and porters, and al Israel in
@c    their countries.  47 And the seuenth moneth being at hand, and when the
@c    children of Israel were euerie man in his owne affayres, they came
@c    together with one minde into the court, that was before the east gate.
@c    (1 Esd 3:1)  48 And Iesus the sonne of Iosedec, and his brethren the
@c    priestes:  Zorobabel the sonne of Salathiel, and his brethren standing
@c    vp, prepared an altar, 49 that they might offer vpon it holocaustes,
@c    according to the thinges that are writen in the booke of Moyses the man
@c    of God.  50 And there assembled there of other nations of the land, and
@c    al the nations of the land erected the altar in his place, and they
@c    offered hostes, and morning holocaustes to our Lord.  51 And they
@c    celebrated the feast of Tabernacles, and the solemne day, as it is
@c    commanded in the lawe:  and sacrifices dayly, as it behoued:  52 and
@c    after these the appointed oblations, and the hostes of the sabbathes, and
@c    of the newmoones, and of al the solemne sanctified dayes.  53 And as
@c    manie as vowed to our Lord from the new moone of the seuenth moneth,
@c    began to offer the hostes to God, and the temple of our Lord was not yet
@c    built.  54 And they gaue monie to the masones and workemen, and drinke
@c    and victuals with ioy.  55 And they gaue cartes to the Sidonians, and
@c    Tyrianes, that with them they should carie ceder beames from Lybanus, and
@c    should make boates in the hauen Ioppe, according to the decre that was
@c    writen for them by Cyrus king of the Persians.  56 And in the second
@c    yeare coming into the temple of God in Ierusalem, in the second moneth
@c    began Zorobel the sonne of Salathiel, and Iosue the sonne of Iosedec, and
@c    their bretheren, and the Priestes and Leuites, and al that were come from
@c    the captiuitie into Ierusalem.  57 and they founded the temple of God in
@c    the newmoone of the second moneth of the second yeare, after that they
@c    came into Iurie and Ierusalem.  58 And they appoynted the Leuites from
@c    twentie yeares, ouer the workes of our Lord:  and Iesus stood and his
@c    sonne, and the bretheren, al Leuites ioyning together, & executors of the
@c    lawe, doing the workes in the house of our Lord.  59 And al the Priestes
@c    stood, hauing stoles with trumpettes:  60 and Leuites the children of
@c    Asaph, hauing cymbals together praysing our Lord, and blessing him
@c    according to Dauid king of Israel.  61 And they song a song to our Lord,
@c    because his sweetenes, and honour is for euer vpon Israel.  62 And al the
@c    people sounded with trumpet, and cried out with a loud voice, praysing
@c    our Lord in the raysing vp of the house of our Lord.  63 And there came
@c    of the Priestes and Leuites, and presidentes by their villages the more
@c    ancientes, which had sene the old house:  64 and to the building of this
@c    with crie and great lamentation, and manie with trumpettes and great ioy:
@c    65 in so much that the people heard not the trumpettes for the
@c    lamentatinon of the people.  For the multitude was sounding with
@c    trumpettes magnifically, so that it was heard far of.  66 And the enimes
@c    of the tribe of Iuda, and Beniamin heard it, and they came to knowe what
@c    the voyce of the trumpettes was:  67 And they knew that they which were
@c    of the captiuitie doe build a temple to our Lord the God of Israel.
@c    68 And coming to Zorobabel & Iesus, the ouerseers of the villages, they
@c    sayd to them:  We will build together with you:  (1 Esd 4:2)  69 For we
@c    haue in like maner heard your Lord, & we walke like from the dayes of
@c    Asbazareth king of the Assyrians, who transported vs hither.  70 And
@c    Zorobabel, and Iesus, & the princes of the villages of Israel, sayd to
@c    them:  71 It is not for vs and you to build the house of our God.  For we
@c    alone wil build to our Lord of Israel according as Cyrus the king of the
@c    Persians hath commanded.  72 And the nations of the land lying vpon them
@c    that are in Iurie, and lifting vp the worke of the building, and bringing
@c    ambushmentes, and peoples, prohibited them to build.  73 and practising
@c    assaultes hindred them, that the building might not be finished al the
@c    time of the life of king Cyrus, and they differred the building for two
@c    yeares vntil the reigne of Darius.



@c    CHAP. VI.


@c    The Iewes by assistance of king Darius build vp the Temple in Ierusalem.

@c    AND in the second yeare of the reigne of Darius prophecied Aggeus, and
@c    Zacharias the sonne of Addo the prophet to Iurie and Ierusalem in the
@c    name of God of Israel vpon them.  (1 Esd 5:1)  2 Then Zorobabel the sonne
@c    of Salathiel standing vp, and Iesus the sonne of Iosedec begane to build
@c    the house of our Lord, which is in Ierusalem.  3 When the prophetes of
@c    our Lord were present with them, and did helpe them.  At the same time
@c    came Sisennes to them, the deputie of Syria, and of Phenice, and
@c    Satrabuzanes, and his felowes:  4 and they sayd to them:  By whose
@c    commandment, build ye this house, and this roofe, and perfite al other
@c    thinges?  And who are the workmen that build these thinges?  5 And the
@c    ancientes of the Iewes, which were left of the captiuitie by our Lord,
@c    had fauoure when the visitation was made vpon them.  6 And they were not
@c    hindered from building, til it was signified to Darius of al these
@c    thinges, and answer was receiued.  7 A copie of the letter, which they
@c    sent to Darius.  SISENNES deputie of Syria and Phenice, and Satrabuzanes,
@c    and his felowes in Syria and Phenice presidents, to king Darius
@c    greetings:  8 Be al thinges knowen to our Lord the king, that when we
@c    came into the countrie of Iurie, and had entered into Ierusalem, we found
@c    them building the great house of God.  9 And the temple of polished
@c    stones, and of great and precious matter in the walles.  10 And the
@c    workes to be a doing earnestly, and to succede, and prosper in their
@c    handes, and in al glorie to be perfited most diligently.  11 Then we
@c    asked the ancients saying, by whose permission build ye this house, &
@c    found these workes?  12 And therfore we asked them, that we might doe
@c    thee to know the men & the ouerseers, and we required of them a rolle of
@c    the names of the ouerseers.  13 But they answered vs saying:  We are the
@c    seruantes of the Lord, which made heauen and earth.  14 And this house
@c    was built these manie yeares past by a king of Israel, that was great and
@c    most valiant, and was finished.  15 And because our fathers were
@c    prouoking to wrath, and sinned agaynst God of Israel, he deliuered them
@c    into the handes of Nabuchodonosor the king of Babylon, king of the
@c    Chaldees.  16 And throwing downe this house they burnt it, and they led
@c    the people captiue into Babylon.  17 In the first yeare when Cyrus
@c    reigned the king of Babylon, Cyrus the king wrote to build this house.
@c    18 And these sacred vessels of gold and siluer which Nabuchodonosor had
@c    taken out of the house which is in Ierusalem, and had consecrated them in
@c    his owne temple, Cyrus brought them forth agayne out of the temple which
@c    was in Babylon, and they were deliuered to Zorobabel, & to Salmanasar the
@c    deputie.  19 And it was commanded them that they should offer these
@c    vessels, & lay them vp in the temple, which was in Ierusalem, and build
@c    the temple of God itself in his place.  20 Then did Salmanasar lay the
@c    fundations of the house of our Lord, which is in Ierusalem:  and from
@c    that time vntil now it is a building, and is not accomplished.  21 Now
@c    therfore if thou thincke it good o king, let it be sought in the kings
@c    liberaries of Cyrus the king, which are in Babylon:  22 and if it shal be
@c    found, that the building of the house of the Lord, which is in Ierusalem,
@c    begane by the counsel of Cyrus the king, and it be thought good of our
@c    Lord the king, let him write to vs of these thinges.  23 Then Darius the
@c    king commanded search to be made in the libraries:  and there was found
@c    in Ecbatana a towne that is in the countrie of Media, one place wherin
@c    were writen these wordes:  (1 Esd 6:1)  24 IN THE FIRST YEARE of the
@c    reigne of Cyrus, king Cyrus commanded to build the house of the Lord
@c    which is in Ierusalem, where they did burne incense with dayly fire,
@c    25 the height wherof shal be of ten cubits, & the bredth three score
@c    cubites, foure square with three stones polished, and with a loft galerie
@c    of wood of the same countrie, & one new galerie, and the expenses to be
@c    geuen out of the house of Cyrus the king.  26 And the sacred vesseles of
@c    the house of the Lord, as wel of gold as of siluer, which Nabuchodonosor
@c    tooke from the house of our Lord, which is in Ierusalem where they were
@c    layed, that they be put there:  27 And he commanded Sisennes the deputie
@c    of Syria & Phoenice, and Satrabuzanes, and his felowes & them that were
@c    ordayned presidentes in Syria & Phoenice, that they should refraine
@c    themselues from that place.  28 And I also haue geuen commandment to
@c    build it wholly:  and haue prouided, that they helpe them, which are of
@c    the captiuitie of the Iewes, til the temple of the house of the Lord be
@c    accomplished.  29 And from the vexation of the tributes of Coelesyria &
@c    Phoenice, a quantitie to be geuen diligently to these men for the
@c    sacrifice of the Lord, to Zorobabel the gouernour, for oxen, and rammes,
@c    and lambes.  30 And in like maner corne also, and salt, and wine, and
@c    oyle continually yeare by yeare, according as the priestes which are in
@c    Ierusalem, haue prescribed to be spent dayly:  31 that libamentes may be
@c    offered to the most high God for the king & his children, & that they may
@c    pray for their life.  32 And that it be denounced, that whosoeuer shal
@c    transgresse anie thing of these which are writen, or shal despise it, a
@c    beame be taken of theyr owne, & they be hanged, & their goodes be
@c    confiscate to the king.  33 Therfore the Lord also, whose name is
@c    inuocated there, destroy euery king & nation, that shal extend their hand
@c    to hinder or to handle il the house of the Lord which is in Ierusalem.
@c    34 I Darius the king haue decreed that it be most diligently done
@c    according to these thinges.



@c    CHAP. VII.


@c    The house of God is finished, 7. and dedicated, 10. the feast of Pasch is
@c    also celebrated seuen dayes with Azimes.

@c    THEN Sisennes the deputie of Coelesyria, and Phaenice, and Satrabuzames,
@c    and their felowes, obeying those thinges which were decreed of Darius the
@c    king, (1 Esd 6:13) 2 applied the sacred workes most diligently, working
@c    together with the ancientes of the Iewes, the princes of Syria.  3 And
@c    the sacred workes prospered, Aggeus & Zacharias the prophetes
@c    prophecying.  4 And they accomplished al thinges by the precept of our
@c    Lord the God of Israel, and by the counsel of Cyrus, & Darius, and
@c    Artaxerxes the king of the Persians.  5 And our house was a finishing
@c    vntil the three and twentith day of the moneth of Adar, the sixth yeare
@c    of Darius the king.  6 And the children of Israel, and the Priestes and
@c    Leuites, and the rest that were of the captiuitie, which were added did
@c    according to those thinges that are written in the booke of Moyses.
@c    7 And they offered for the dedication of the temple of our Lord, oxen an
@c    hundred, rammes two hundred, lambes foure hundred.  8 And kiddes for the
@c    sinnes of al Israel, twelue, according to the number of the tribes of
@c    Israel.  9 And the Priestes and Leuites stood clothed with stoles by
@c    tribes, ouer al the workes of our Lord the God of Israel, according to
@c    the booke of Moyses, and the porters at euerie gate.  10 And the children
@c    of Israel, wih them that were of the captiuitie celebrated the phase of
@c    the fourtenth moone of the first moneth, when the Priestes and Leuites
@c    were sanctified.  11 Al the children of the captiuitie were not
@c    sanctified together, because al the Leuites were sanctified together.
@c    12 And al the children of the captuitie immolated the phase, both for
@c    their brethren the Priestes, and for them selues.  13 And the children of
@c    Israel did eate, they that were of the captiuitie al that remayned apart
@c    from al the abominations of the nations of the land seeking our Lord.
@c    14 And they celebrated the festiual day of Azymes seuen dayes feasting in
@c    the sight of our Lord.  15 Because he turned the counsel of the king of
@c    the Assirians toward them, to strengthen their handes to the workes of
@c    our Lord the God of Israel.



@c    CHAP. VIII.


@c    Esdras going from Babylon to Ierusalem, 9. carieth king Artaxerxes
@c    fauourable letters, 14. with licence to take gold, siluer, and al thinges
@c    necessarie at their pleasure.  31. The chief men that goe with him are
@c    recited.  51. He voweth a fast praying for good success in their iorney.
@c    56. weigheth the gold and siluer, which he deliuereth to the Priestes,
@c    and Leuites.  69. And seuerely admonisheth the people to repentance, for
@c    their mariages made with infideles.

@c    AND after him when Artaxerxes king of the Persians reigned, came Esdras
@c    the sonne of Azarias, the sonne of Helcias the sonne of Salome,
@c    (1 Esd 7:1) 2 the sonne of Sadoc, the sonne of Achitob, the sonne of
@c    Ameri, the sonne of Azahel, the sonne of Bocci, the sonne of Abisue, the
@c    sonne of Phinees the sonne of Eleazar, the sonne of Aaron the first
@c    priest.  3 This Esdras came vp from Babylon being scribe & wise in the
@c    law of Moyses, which was geuen of our Lord the God of Israel to teach and
@c    to doe.  4 And the king gaue him glorie, because he had found grace in al
@c    dignitie and desire in his sight.  5 And there went vp with him of the
@c    children of Israel, and the Priestes, and the Leuites, and the sacred
@c    singers of the temple, and the porters, and the seuantes of the temple
@c    into Ierusalem.  6 In the seuenth yeare when Artaxerxes reigned in the
@c    fifth moneth, this is the seuenth yeare of his reigne, going forth of
@c    Babylon in the newmoone of the fifth moneth, 7 they came to Ierusalem
@c    according to his commandment, according to the prosperitie of their
@c    iourney, which their Lord gaue them.  8 For in these Esdras had great
@c    knowlege, that he would not pretermitte anie of those thinges, which were
@c    according to the law, and the preceptes of our Lord, and in teaching al
@c    Israel al iusticie and iudgement.  9 And they that wrote the writinges of
@c    Araxerxes the king, coming deliuered the writing which was granted of
@c    Artaxerxes the king to Esdras the Priest, & the reader of the law of our
@c    Lord, the copie wherof here foloweth.  10 KING Artaxerxes to Esdras the
@c    Priest, and reader of the law of the Lord, greeting.  11 I of curtesie
@c    esteming it among benifites, haue commanded them that of their owne
@c    accord are desirous of the nation of the Iewes, and of the Priestes and
@c    Leuites, which are in my kingdom, to goe with thee into Ierusalem.  12 If
@c    anie therfore desire to goe with thee, let them come together, and set
@c    forward as it hath pleased me, and my seuen freindes my counselers:
@c    13 that they may visite those thinges which are done touching Iurie and
@c    Ierusalem, obseruing as thou hast in the law of the Lord.  14 And let
@c    them carie the giftes to the Lord the God of Israel, which I haue vowed
@c    and my freindes to Ierusalem, and al the gold and siluer, that shal be
@c    found in the countrie of Babylon to the Lord in Ierusalem, with that,
@c    15 which is geuen for the nation it self vnto the temple of their Lord
@c    which is in Ierusalem:  that this gold and siluer be gathered for oxen,
@c    and rammes, and lambes, and kiddes, and for the thinges that are agreable
@c    to these, 16 that they may offer hostes to the Lord vpon the altar of
@c    their Lord, which is in Ierusalem.  17 And al thinges whatsoeuer thou
@c    with thy brethren wilt doe with gold and siluer, doe it at thy pleasure
@c    according to the precept of the Lord thy God.  18 And the sacred vessels,
@c    which are geuen thee to the workes of the house of the Lord thy God,
@c    which is in Ierusalem.  19 And other thinges whatsoeuer shal helpe thee
@c    to the workes of the temple of thy God, thou shalt geue it out of the
@c    kings treasure.  20 When thou with thy brethren wilt doe ought with gold
@c    and siluer, doe according to the wil of the Lord.  21 And I king
@c    Artaxerxes haue geuen commandment to the keepers of the treasure of Syria
@c    and Phaenice, that what thinges soeuer Esdras the Priest and reader of
@c    the law of the Lord, shal write for, they geue him vnto an hundred
@c    talentes of siluer, likewise also of gold.  22 And vnto an hundred
@c    measures of corne, & an hundred vessels of wine, and other thinges
@c    whatsoeuer abound without taxing.  23 Let al thinges be done to the most
@c    high God according to the law of God, lest perhaps there arise wrath in
@c    the reigne of the king, and of his sonne, and his sonnes.  24 And to you
@c    it is sayd, that vpon al the Priestes, and Leuites, and sacred singers,
@c    and seruantes of the temple, & scribes of this temple 25 no tribute, nor
@c    any other taxe be sette, and that no man haue auctoritie to obiect any
@c    thing to them.  26 But thou Esdras according to the wisedom of God
@c    appoynt iudges, and arbitrers in al Syria and Phaenice:  and teach al
@c    them that know no the law of thy God:  27 that whosoeuer shal transgresse
@c    the law, they be diligently punished either with death, or with torment,
@c    or els with a forfeite of money, or with banishment.  28 And Esdras the
@c    scribe sayd:  Blessed be the God of our fathers, which hath geuen this
@c    wil into the kings hart, to glorifie his house, which is in Ierusalem.
@c    29 And hath honoured me in the sight of the king, and of his counselers,
@c    and freindes, and them that weare purple.  30 And I was made constant in
@c    minde according to the ayde of our Lord my God, and gathered together of
@c    Israel men, that should goe vp together with me.  31 And these are the
@c    princes according to their kindredes, and seueral principalities of them
@c    that came vp from Babylon the kingdom of Artaxerxes.  (1 Esd 8:1)  32 Of
@c    the children of Phares, Gerfomus:  and of the children of Siemarith,
@c    Amenus:  of the children of Dauid, Acchus the sonne of Scecilia:  33 Of
@c    the children of Phares, Zacharias, and with him returned an hundred
@c    fiftie men.  34 Of the children of leader Moabilion, Zaraei, and with him
@c    two hundred fiftie men:  35 Of the children of Zachues, Iechonias of
@c    Zechoel, and with him two hundred fiftie men:  36 of the children of
@c    Sala, Maasias of Gotholia, & with him seuentie men:  37 of the children
@c    of Saphatia, Zarias of Michel, and with him eightie men:  38 of the
@c    children of Iob, Abdias of Iehel, and with him two hundred twelue men:
@c    39 of the children of Bania, Salimoth, the sonne of Iosaphia, and with
@c    him an hundred sixtie men:  40 of the children of Beer, Zacharias Bebei,
@c    and with him two hundred eight men:  41 of the children of Ezead, Ioannes
@c    of Eccetan, and with him an hundred ten men:  42 of the children of
@c    Adonicam, which were last, and these are their names, Eliphalam the sonne
@c    of Gebel, and Semeias, and with him seuentie men.  43 And I gathered them
@c    together to the riuer that is called Thia, and we camped there three
@c    dayes, and vewed them againe.  44 And of the children of the Priestes and
@c    Leuites I found not there.  45 And I sent to Eleazarus, and Eccelon, and
@c    Masman, and Maloban, and Enaathan, and Samea, and Ioribum, Nathan,
@c    Enuaugam, Zacharias, and Mosolam the leaders them selues, and that were
@c    skilful.  46 And I sayd to them that they should come to Loddeus, who was
@c    at the place of the treasurie.  47 And I commanded them to say to
@c    Loddeus, and his brethren, and to them that were in the treasurie, that
@c    they should send vs them that might doe the function of priesthood in the
@c    house of the Lord our God.  48 And they brought vnto vs according to the
@c    mightie hand of the Lord our God cunning men:  of the children of Moholi,
@c    the sonne of Leui, the sonne of Israel, Sebebia, & his sonnes and
@c    brethren, which were eightene:  49 Asbia, and Amin of the sonnes of the
@c    children of Chananeus, and their children twentie men.  50 And of them
@c    that serued the temple, whom Dauid gaue, and the princes themselues to
@c    the ministerie of the Leuites of them that serued the temple, two hundred
@c    twentie.  Al their names were signified in writings.  51 And I vowed
@c    there a fast to the yong men in the sight of God, that I might aske of
@c    him a good iourney for vs, and them that were with vs, and for the
@c    children, and the cattel because of ambushementes.  52 For I was ashamed
@c    to aske of the king footemen and horsemen in my companie, to guard vs,
@c    against our aduersaries.  53 For we sayd to the king that the power of
@c    our Lord wil be with them that seeke him with al affection.  54 And
@c    agayne we besought the Lord our God according to these thinges:  whom
@c    also we had propicious, and we obteyned of our God.  55 And I separated
@c    of the rulers of the people, and of the Priestes of the temple, twelue
@c    men, and Sedebia, and Asanna, and with them of their brethren ten men.
@c    56 And I weyed to them the gold and siluer, and the vessels of the house
@c    of our God perteyning to the Priestes, which the king had geuen, and his
@c    counselers, and the princes, and al Israel.  57 And when I had weyed it,
@c    I deliuered of siluer an hundred fiftie talentes, and siluer vessels of
@c    an hundred talentes, and of gold an hundred talentes.  58 And of vessels
@c    of gold seuen score and twelue brasen vessels good of shyning brasse,
@c    resembling the forme of gold.  59 And I sayd to them:  You are also
@c    sanctified to our Lord, and the vessels be holie, and the gold and siluer
@c    is vowed to our Lord the God of our fathers.  60 Watch and keepe, til you
@c    deliuer them to some of the rulers of the people, and to the Priestes,
@c    and Leuites, and to the princes of the cities of Israel in Ierusalem, in
@c    the treasurie of the house of our God.  61 And those Priestes and Leuites
@c    that receiued the gold and siluer and vessels, brought it to Ierusalem
@c    into the temple of our Lord.  62 And we went forward from the riuer Thia,
@c    the twelfth day of the first moneth, til we entred into Ierusalem.
@c    63 And when the third day was come, in the fourth day the gold being
@c    weyed, and the siluer, was deliuered in the house of the Lord our God, to
@c    Marimoth Priest the sonne of Iori.  64 And with him was Eleazar the sonne
@c    of Phinees:  and with them were Iosadus the sonne of Iesus, and Medias,
@c    and Banni the sonne of a Leuite, by number and weight al thinges.  65 And
@c    the weight of them was writen the same houre.  66 And they that came out
@c    of the captiuitie, offered sacrifice to our Lord the God of Israel, oxen
@c    twelue, for al Israel, rammes eightie six, 67 lambes seuentie two, bucke
@c    goates for sinne twelue, and for health twelue kyne, al for the sacrifice
@c    of our Lord.  68 And they read againe the preceptes of the king to the
@c    kinges officers, and to the deputies of Coelesyria, and Phoenice:  and
@c    they honored the nation, and the temple of our Lord.  69 And these
@c    thinges being finished, the rulers came to me, saying:  The stocke of
@c    Isreal, and the princes, and the Priestes, and the Leuites, (1 Esd 9:1)
@c    70 and the strange people, and nations of the land haue not separated
@c    their vncleannes from the Chananeites, and Hetheites, and Pherezeites,
@c    and Iebuseites, and Moobites, & AEgyptians, and Idumeians.  71 For they
@c    are ioyned to their daughters both themselues, and their sonnes:  and the
@c    holie sede is mingled with the strange nations of the earth, and the
@c    rulers and magistrates were partakers of that iniquitie from the
@c    beginning of the reigne it self.  72 And forthwith as I heard these
@c    thinges, I rent my garmentes and sacred tunike:  and tearing the heares
@c    of my head, and my beard, I sate sorowful and heauie.  73 And there
@c    assembled to me mourning vpon this iniquitie, as manie as were then moued
@c    by the word of our Lord the God of Israel, and I sate sad vntil the
@c    euening sacrifice.  74 And I rising vp from fasting, hauing my garmentes
@c    rent and the sacred tunike, kneeling, and stretching forth my handes to
@c    our Lord, 75 I sayd:  Lord I am confounded, and ashamed before thy face,
@c    76 for our sinnes are multiplied ouer our heades, and our iniquities are
@c    exalted euen to heauen.  77 Because from the times of our fathers we are
@c    in great sinne vnto this day.  78 And for the sinnes of vs, and of our
@c    fathers we haue bene deliuered with our brethren, and with our Priestes
@c    to the kinges of the earth, into sword and captiuitie, and spoile with
@c    confusion vnto this present day.  79 And now what a great thing is this
@c    that mercie hath happened to vs from thee o Lord God, & leaue thou vnto
@c    vs a roote, and a name in the place of thy sanctification, 80 to discouer
@c    our light in the house of the Lord our God, to geue vs meate in al the
@c    time of our bondage.  81 And when we serued, we were not forsaken of the
@c    Lord our God:  but he sette vs in fauour, appointing the kinges of the
@c    Persians to geue us meate, 82 and to glorifie the temple of the Lord our
@c    God, and to build the desolations of Sion, to geue vs stabilitie in
@c    Iurie, and Ierusalem.  83 And now what say we Lord, hauing these thinges?
@c    For we haue transgressed thy preceptes, which thou gauest into the handes
@c    of thy seruantes the prophetes, 84 saying:  That the land into which ye
@c    entred to possesse the inheritance therof, is a land polluted with the
@c    coinquinations of the strangers of the land, and their vncleanes hath
@c    filled it wholy with their filthines.  85 And now your daughters you shal
@c    not match with their sonnes, and their daughters you shal not take for
@c    your sonnes.  86 And you shal not seeke to haue peace with them for euer,
@c    that growing strong you may eate the best things of the land, and may
@c    distribute the inheritance to your children for euer.  87 And the thinges
@c    that happen to vs, al are done for our nauhtie workes, and our great
@c    sinnes.  88 And thou gauest vs such a roote, and we are returned againe
@c    to transgresse thy ordinances, that we would be mingled with the
@c    vncleannes of the nations of this land.  89 Wilt not thou be wrath with
@c    vs to destroy vs, til there be no roote left nor our name?  90 Lord God
@c    of Israel thou art true.  For there is a roote left vntil this present
@c    day.  91 Behold, now we are in thy sight in our iniquities.  For it is
@c    not to stand any longer before thee in these matters.  92 And when Esdras
@c    with adoration confessed weeping, lying flat on the ground before the
@c    temple, there were gathered before him out of Ierusalem a verie great
@c    multitude, men and wemen, and yong men and yong wemen.  For there was
@c    great weeping in the multitude it self.  (1 Esd 10:1)  93 And when he had
@c    cried, Iechonias of Ieheli of the children of Israel, sayd to Esdras:  We
@c    haue sinned against our Lord, for that we haue taken vnto vs in mariage
@c    strange wemen of the nations of the land.  94 And now thou art ouer al
@c    Israel, in these therfore let there be an othe from our Lord to expel al
@c    our wiues that are of strangers with their children.  95 As it was
@c    decreed to thee of the ancesters according to the law of our Lord, rising
@c    vp declare it.  96 For to thee the busines perteineth, and we are with
@c    thee:  doe manfully.  97 And Esdras rysing vp adiured the princes of the
@c    Priestes and Leuites, and al Israel to doe according to these thinges and
@c    they sware.



@c    CHAP. IX.


@c    Esdras fasting for the sinnes of the people, commandeth that they
@c    separate al strange wemen from them.  18. The Priestes and Leuites, which
@c    had offended herein, are recited.  38 He readeth the law before the
@c    people:  48 certaine doe expound to the multitudes in seueral places.
@c    52 And so they are dismissed with ioy.

@c    AND Esdras rysing vp from before the court of the temple, went into the
@c    chamber of Ionathas the sonne of Nasabi.  (1 Esd 10:6)  2 And lodging
@c    there he tasted no bread, nor dranke water for the iniquitie of the
@c    multitude.  3 And there was proclamation made in al Iurie, & in Ierusalem
@c    to al that were of the captiuitie gathered in Ierusalem, 4 that whosoeuer
@c    shal not appeare with in two or three dayes, according to the iudgement
@c    of the ancients sitting vpon it, their goods should be taken away, and
@c    himselfe should be iudged an alien from the multitude of the captiuitie.
@c    5 And al were gathered that were of the tribe of Iuda, and of Beniamin
@c    within three dayes in Ierusalem:  this is the ninth moneth, the twentith
@c    day of the moneth.  6 And al the multitude sate in the court of the
@c    temple trembling, for the present winter.  7 And Esdras rysing vp sayd to
@c    them:  You haue done vnlawfully taking to you in mariage strang wiues,
@c    that you might adde to the sinnes of Israel.  8 And now geue confession,
@c    & magnificence to our Lord the God of our fathers:  9 and accomplish his
@c    wil, and depart from the nations of the land, and from your wiues the
@c    strangers.  10 And al the multitude cried, and they sayd with a lowde
@c    voice:  As thou hast sayd, we wil doe.  11 But because the multitude is
@c    great, and winter time, and we can not stand in the ayre without succour:
@c    and this is a worke for vs not of one day, nor of two, for we haue sinned
@c    much in these thinges:  12 Let the rulers of the multitude stand, and
@c    that dwel with vs, and as manie as haue with them forreine wiues, 13 and
@c    at a time appointed let the priestes out of euerie place, and the iudges
@c    assist, vntil they appeaze the wrath of our Lord concerning this busines.
@c    14 And Ionathas the sonne of Ezeli, and Ozias of Thecam tooke vpon them
@c    according to these wordes:  and Bosoramus, and Leuis, and Sabbathaeus,
@c    wrought together with them.  15 And al that were of the captiuitie stood
@c    according to al these thinges.  16 And Esdras the priest chose vnto him
@c    men the great princes of their fathers according to their names:  & they
@c    sate together in the newmoone of the tenth moneth to examine this
@c    busines.  17 And they determined of the men that had outlandish wiues,
@c    vntil the newmoone of the first moneth.  18 And there were found of the
@c    priestes entermingled that had outlandish wiues.  19 Of the sonnes of
@c    Iesus the sonne of Iosedec, and his brethren:  Maseas, and Eleazarus, and
@c    Ioribus, and Ioadeus, 20 and they put to their handes to expel their
@c    wiues:  and to offer a ramme to obtayne pardon for their ignorance.
@c    21 And the sonnes of Semmeri:  Maseas and Esses, Ieelech, and Azarias.
@c    22 And of the children of Fofere:  Limosias, Hismaenis, and Nathanee,
@c    Iussio, Reddus, and Thalsas.  23 And of the Leuites:  Iorabdus, and
@c    Semeis, and Colnis, and Calitas, and Facteas, and Coluas, and Eliomas,
@c    24 and of the sacred singing men, Eliasib, Zaccarus.  25 And of the
@c    porters, Salumus, and Tolbanes.  26 And of Israel:  of the sonnes of
@c    Foro, Ozi, and Remias, and Geddias, & Melchias, and Michelus, Eleazarus,
@c    and Iammebias, and Bannas.  27 And of the sonnes of Iolaman:  Chamas, and
@c    Zacharias, and Iezuelus, and Ioddius, and Erimoth, and Helias.  28 And of
@c    the sonnes of Zathoim:  Eliadas, and Liasumus, Zochias, and Larimoth, &
@c    Zabdis, and Thebedias.  29 And of the sonnes of Zebes:  Ioannes, and
@c    Amanias, and Zabdias, and Emeus.  30 And of the sonnes of Banni:  Olamus,
@c    & Maluchus, and Ieddeus, and Iasub, and Azabus, & Ierimoth.  31 And of
@c    the sonnes of Addin:  Nathus, and Moosias, & Caleus, and Raanas, Maaseas,
@c    Mathathias, and Beseel, and Bonnus, and Manasses.  32 And of the sonnes
@c    of Nuae:  Noneas, and Aseas, and Melchias, and Sameas, and Simon,
@c    Beniamin, and Malchus, and Marras.  33 And of the sonnes of Asom:
@c    Carianeus, Mathathias, & Bannus, & Eliphalach, and Manasses, and Semei.
@c    34 And of the sonnes of Banni:  Ieremias, and Moadias, and Abramus, &
@c    Iohel, and Baneas, & Pelias, and Ionas, and Marimoth, & Eliasib, and
@c    Matheneus, and Eliasis, and Orizas, and Dielus, and Semedius, & Zambris,
@c    and Iosephus.  35 And of the sonnes of Nobei:  Idelus, and Mathathias,
@c    and Sabadus, and Zecheda, Zedmi, and Iessei, Baneas.  36 Al these maried
@c    outlandish wiues, and did put them away with their children.  37 And the
@c    Priestes and the Leuites, and they that were of Israel, dwelt in
@c    Ierusalem, and in the whole countrie in the newmoone of the seuenth
@c    moneth.  And the children of Israel were in their habitations.  38 And al
@c    the multitude was gathered together into the court, which is on the east
@c    of the sacred gate:  39 and they sayd to Esdras the high priest, and
@c    reader, that he should bring the law of Moyses, which was deliuered of
@c    our Lord the God of Israel.  40 And Esdras the high priest brought the
@c    law to al the multitude of them from man vnto woman, and to al the
@c    priestes to heare the law in the newmoone of the seuenth moneth.  41 And
@c    he read in the court, which is before the sacred gate of the temple, from
@c    breake of day vntil euening before men and wemen.  And they al gaue their
@c    minde to the law.  42 And Esdras the priest, and reader of the law stoode
@c    vpon a tribunal of wood, which was made.  43 And by him stood Mathathias,
@c    and Samus, and Ananias, Azarias, Vrias, Ezechias, and Balsamus on the
@c    right hand, 44 and on the left Faldeus, Misael, Malachias, Ambusthas,
@c    Sabus, Nabadias, and Zacharias.  45 And Esdras tooke the booke before al
@c    the multitude:  for he was chiefe in glorie in the sight of al.  46 And
@c    when he had ended the law, they stood al vpright:  and Esdras blessed our
@c    Lord the most high God, the God of Sabaoth omnipotent.  47 And al the
@c    people answered:  Amen.  And lifting vp their handes falling on the
@c    ground, they adored our Lord.  48 Iesus and Banaeus, and Sarebias, and
@c    Iaddimus, and Accubus, and Sabbathaeus, and Calithes, & Azarias, and
@c    Ioradus, and Ananias, and Philias Leuites, 49 who taught the law of our
@c    Lord, and read the same in the multitude, & euerie one preferred them
@c    that vnderstood the lesson.  50 And Atharathes sayd to Esdras the high
@c    priest and the reader, and to the Leuites, that taught the multitude,
@c    51 saying:  This day is sancitified to our Lord.  And they al wept, when
@c    they had heard the law.  52 And Esdras sayd, departing therfore eate ye
@c    al the fattest thinges, & drinke al most swete things, and send giftes to
@c    them that haue not.  53 For this is the holy day of our Lord, & be not
@c    sad.  For our Lord wil glorifie you.  54 And the Leuites denounced openly
@c    to al, saying:  This day is holie, be not sad.  55 And they went al to
@c    eate, and drinke, and make merie, and to geue giftes to them that had
@c    not, that they might make merie, for they were excedingly exalted with
@c    the wordes that they were taught.  56 And they were al gathered in
@c    Ierusalem to celebrate the ioy, according to the testament of our Lord
@c    the God of Israel.




@c    THE FOVRTH BOOKE OF ESDRAS.



@c    CHAP. I.


@c    Esdras is sent to expostulate with the vngratful Iewes for neglecting
@c    Gods manie great benefites.

@c    THE second book of Esdras the prophet, the sonne of Sarei, the sonne of
@c    Azarei, the sonne of Helcias, the sonne of Sadanias, the sonne of Sadoch,
@c    the sonne of Achitob, (1 Esd 7:1) 2 the sonne of Achias, the sonne of
@c    Phinees, the sonne of Heli, the sonne of Amerias, the sonne of Asiel, the
@c    sonne of Marimoth, the sonne of Arna, the sonne of Ozias, the sonne of
@c    Borith, the sonne of Abisei, the sonne of Phinees, the sonne of Eleazar,
@c    3 the sonne of Aaron of the tribe of Leui; who was captiue in the
@c    countrie of the Medes, in the reigne of Artaxerxes king of the Persians.
@c    4 And the word of our Lord came to me, saying:  5 Goe, and tel my people
@c    their wicked deedes, and their children the iniquities, that they haue
@c    done against me, that they may tel their childrens children:  6 because
@c    the sinnes of their parentes are increased in them, for they being
@c    forgetful of me haue sacrified to strange goddes.  7 Did not I bring them
@c    out of the land of AEgypt from the house of bondage?  But they haue
@c    prouoked me, & haue despised my counsels.  8 But doe thou shake of the
@c    heare of thy head, and throw al euils vpon them:  because they haue not
@c    obeyed my law.  And it is a people without discipline.  9 How long shal I
@c    beare with them, on whom I haue bestowed so great benefiates?  10 I haue
@c    ouer throwen manie kinges from them.  I haue stroke Pharao with his
@c    seruantes, and al his hoste.  (Ex 14)  11 Al nations did I destroy before
@c    their face, & in the East I dissipated the peoples of two prouinces Tyre
@c    and Sidon, and I slew al their aduersaries.  12 But speake thou to them,
@c    saying:  Thus sayth our Lord:  13 I made you passe through the sea, and
@c    gaue you fensed streates from the beginning.  I gaue you Moyses for your
@c    gouernour, and Aaron for the Priest:  14 I gaue you light by the piller
@c    of fire, & did manie meruelous things among you:  but you haue forgotten
@c    me, sayth our Lord.  (Ex 13)  15 Thus sayth our Lord omnipotent:  The
@c    quayle was a signe to you, I gaue you a campe for defense, and there you
@c    murmured:  16 And you triumphed not in my name for the destruction of
@c    your enemies, but yet vntil now you haue murmured.  (Ex 16)  17 Where
@c    are the benefites, that I haue geuen you?  Did you not crie out to me
@c    when you were hungrie in the desert, 18 saying:  Why hast thou brought vs
@c    into this desert to kil vs?  it had bene better for vs to serue the
@c    AEgyptians, then to dye in this desert.  (Num 14)  19 I was sorie for
@c    your mournings, & gaue you manna to eate.  You did eate bread of Angels.
@c    (Ex 16 / Wis 16:20)  20 When you thirsted did not I cleaue the rocke, &
@c    waters flowed in abundance?  for the heates I couered you with the leaues
@c    of trees.  21 I deliuered vnto you fatte landes:  The Chananeites, and
@c    Pherezeites, and Philistheans I threw out from your face:  what shal I
@c    yet doe to you, sayth our Lord?  (Isa 9:4)  22 Thus sayth our Lord
@c    omnipotent:  In the desert when you were thirstie in the riuer of the
@c    Amorrheites, and blasphemeing my name, (Ex 15:25) 23 I gaue you not fire
@c    for blasphemies, but casting wood into the water, I made the riuer swete.
@c    24 What shal I doe to thee Iacob?  Thou wouldest not obey o Iuda.  I wil
@c    transferre my self to other nations, and wil geue them my name, that they
@c    may keepe my ordinances.  (Ex 32)  25 Because you haue forsaken me, I
@c    aslo forsake you:  when you aske mercie of me, I wil not haue mercie.
@c    (Isa 1:15)  26 When you shal inuocate me, I wil not heare you.  For you
@c    haue defiled your handes with bloud, and your fete are quicke to commit
@c    murders.  27 Not as though you haue forsaken me, but yourselues, sayth
@c    our Lord.  28 Thus saith our Lord omnipotent, haue not I desired you, as
@c    a father his sonnes, and a mother her daughters, and as a nurce her litle
@c    ones, 29 that you would be my people, and I your God, and to me for
@c    children, and I to you for a father?  30 So haue I gathered you, as the
@c    henne her chickenes vnder her winges.  But now what shal I doe to you?  I
@c    wil throw you from my face.  (Matt 23:37)  31 When you shal bring me
@c    oblation, I wil turne away my face from you.  (Isa 66:5)  For I haue
@c    refused your festiual dayes, & newmoones, and circumcisions.  32 I sent
@c    my seruantes the prophetes to you, whom being taken you slew, and mangled
@c    their bodies, whose bloud I wil require, sayth our Lord.  33 Thus sayth
@c    our Lord omnipotent, your house is made desolate, I wil throw you away,
@c    as the winde doth stubble, 34 and your children shal not haue issue:
@c    because they haue neglected my commandment, and haue done that which is
@c    euil before me.  35 I wil deliuer your houses to a people comming, who
@c    not hearing me do beleue:  to whom I haue not shewed signes, they wil do
@c    the thinges that I haue commanded.  36 The prophetes they haue not sene,
@c    and they wil be mindful of their iniquities.  37 I cal to witnes the
@c    grace of the people comming, whose litle ones reioyce with ioy, not seing
@c    me with their carnal eyes, but in spirit beleuing the thinges that I haue
@c    sayd.  38 And now brother behold what glorie:  and see people comming
@c    from the east, 39 to whom I wil geue the conduction of Abraham, Isaac,
@c    and Iacob, and of Osee, and Amos, and of Ioel, and Abdias, and Ionas, and
@c    Michaeas, 40 and Naum and Habacuc, of Sophonias, Aggaeus, Zacharias, and
@c    Malachias, who also is called the Angel of our Lord.  (Mal 3:1)



@c    CHAP. II.


@c    The Synagogue expostulateth with her children for their ingratitude;
@c    10. shewing that they shal be forsaken, and the gentiles called.

@c    THVS saith our Lord:  I brought this people out of bondage, to whom I
@c    gaue commandment by my seruantes the Prophetes, whom they would not
@c    heare, but made my counsel frustrate.  2 Their mother that bare them,
@c    sayth to them:  Goe children, because I am a wydow and forsaken.  3 I
@c    brought you vp with ioy, & haue lost you with mourning & sorow, because
@c    you haue sinned before our Lord your God, & haue done that which is euil
@c    before him.  4 But now what shal I doe to you?  I am a wydow and
@c    desolote, goe my children, & aske mercie of our Lord.  5 And I cal thee o
@c    father a witnes vpon the mother of the children, that would not keepe my
@c    testament, 6 that thou geue them confusion, & their mother into spoile,
@c    that there be no generation of them.  7 Let their names be dispersed into
@c    the Gentiles, let them be destroyed out of the land:  because they haue
@c    despised my sacrament.  8 Woe be to thee Assur, which hidest the wicked
@c    with thee.  Thou naughtie nation, remember what I did to Sodom &
@c    Gomorrha:  (Gen 19:24)  9 whose land lieth in cloddes of pitch, & heapes
@c    of ashes:  so wil I make them, that haue not heard me, saith our Lord
@c    omnipotent.  10 Thus saith our Lord to Esdras:  Tel my pople, that I wil
@c    geue them the kingdom of Ierusalem, which I ment to geue to Isreal.
@c    11 And I wil take to me the glorie of them, and wil geue them eternal
@c    tabernacles, which I had prepared for them.  12 The wood of life shal be
@c    to them for an odour of oyntment, and they shal not labour, nor be
@c    wearied.  13 Goe & you shal receiue.  Aske for your selues a few dayes,
@c    that they may abide.  Now the kingdom is prepared for you, watch ye.
@c    14 Cal thou heauen and earth to witnes:  for I haue destroyed euil, and
@c    haue created good, because I liue sayth our Lord.  15 Mother embrace thy
@c    children, bring them vp with ioy.  As a doue confirme their feete:
@c    because I haue chosen thee, sayth our Lord.  16 And I wil raise againe
@c    the dead out of their places, and out of the monumentes I wil bring them
@c    forth, because I haue knowen my name in Israel.  17 Feare not o mother of
@c    the children, because I haue chosen thee, saith our Lord.  18 I wil send
@c    thee ayde, my seruantes I saie, and Ieremie, at whose counsel I haue
@c    sanctified, and prepared for thee tweleue trees loden with diuerse
@c    fruites, 19 and as manie fountaines flowing milke and honie:  and seuen
@c    huge mountaines, hauing the rose and the lilie, in the which I wil fil
@c    thy children with ioy.  (Ex 15:27)  20 Iustifie thou the widow, iudge for
@c    the pupil, geue to the needie, defend the orphane, cloth the naked,
@c    21 cure the broken & feeble, mocke not the lame, defend the maimed, and
@c    admitte the blind to the vision of my glorie.  22 The old man & the yong
@c    keepe with in thy walles:  23 where thou shalt finde the dead, committe
@c    them to the graue signing it, & I wil geue thee the first seate in my
@c    resurrection.  (Tob 1:20)  24 Pause and rest my people, because thy rest
@c    shal come.  25 As a good nurce nourish thy children, confirme their
@c    feete.  26 The seruantes that I haue geuen thee, none of them shal
@c    perish.  For I wil require them of thy number.  27 Be not wearied.  For
@c    when the day of affliction and distresse shal come, others shal weepe,
@c    and be sad, but thou shalt be merie and plenteous.  28 The gentiles shal
@c    enuie, and shal be able to doe nothing against thee, sayth our Lord.
@c    29 My handes shal couer thee, that thy children see not hel.  30 Be
@c    pleasant thou mother with thy children, because I wil deliuer thee sayth
@c    our Lord.  31 Remember thy children that sleepe, for I wil bring them out
@c    of the sides of the earth, & wil doe mercie with them:  because I am
@c    merciful, sayth our Lord omnipotent.  32 Embrace thy children til I come,
@c    & shew them mercie:  because my fountaines runne ouer, and my grace shal
@c    not faile.  33 I Esdras receiued commandment of our Lord, in mount Oreb;
@c    that I should goe to Israel:  to whom when I came, they refused me, and
@c    reiected the commandement of our Lord.  34 And therfore, I say vnto you
@c    gentiles, which heare, and vnderstand, Looke for your pastor, he wil geue
@c    you the rest of eternitie:  because he is at hand, that shal come in the
@c    end of the world.  35 Be ye readie for the rewardes of the kingdom,
@c    because perpetual light shal shine to you for time euerlasting.  36 Flee
@c    from the shadow of this world:  receiue ye the pleasantnes of your
@c    glorie.  I openly cal to witnes my sauiour.  37 Receiue the commended
@c    gift and be pleasant, geuing thankes to him that called you to the
@c    heauenlie kingdomes.  38 Arise, & stand & see the number of them that are
@c    signed in the feast of our Lord.  39 They that haue transferred them
@c    selues from the shadow of the world, haue receiued glorious garmentes of
@c    our Lord.  40 Receiue o Sion thy number, and shut vp thyne made white,
@c    which haue accomplished the law of our Lord.  41 The number of thy
@c    children, which thou didst wish is ful.  Desire the powre of our Lord
@c    that thy people may be sanctified, which was called from the beginning.
@c    42 I Esdras saw in mount Sion a great multiude, which I could not number,
@c    and they did al prayse our Lord with songes.  (Apoc 7:9)  43 And in the
@c    middes of them was a young man high of stature, appearing aboue ouer them
@c    al, & he put crownes vpon euerie one of their heades, and he was more
@c    exalted.  And I was astonied at the miracle.  44 Then asked I an Angel,
@c    and sayd:  Who are these Lord?  45 Who answering sayd to me:  These are
@c    they that haue laid of the mortal garment, and taken an immortal, and
@c    haue confessed the name of God.  Now they are crowned, and receiue
@c    palmes.  46 And I sayd to the Angel:  That yongman what is he, which
@c    putteth the crownes vpon them, and geueth palmes into their handes?
@c    47 And answering he sayd to me:  The same is the Sonne of God, whom they
@c    did confesse in the world:  & I begane to magnifie them, that stood
@c    strongly for the name of our Lord.  48 Then sayd the Angel to me:  Goe,
@c    tel my people, what maner of meruelous thinges and how great, thou hast
@c    sene of the Lord God.



@c    CHAP. III.


@c    The workes of God are wonderful from the beginning, 7. and men vngrateful
@c    13. In Abraham God chose to himself a peculiar people:  who neuertheles
@c    were froward, and obstinate.  23. He also chose Dauid, but stil the
@c    people were sinful:  28. the Babylonians also, by whom the are afflicted,
@c    are no lesse but rather greater sinners.

@c    IN the thirteth yeare of the ruine of the citie I was in Babylon, and was
@c    trubled lying in my chamber, and my cogitations came vp ouer my hart:
@c    2 because I saw the desolation of Sion, and the abundance of them that
@c    dwelt in Babylon.  3 And my spirit was tossed excedingly, and I began to
@c    speake to the highest timorous wordes, 4 and sayd:  O Lord dominatour
@c    thou spakest from the beginning, when thou didst plant the earth, and
@c    that alone, and didst rule ouer the people, (Gen 1) 5 and gauest Adam a
@c    dead bodie:  but that also was the worke of thy handes, & didst breath
@c    into him the spirit of life, and he was made to liue before thee:
@c    (Gen 2:7)  6 and thou broughst him into paradise, which thy right hand
@c    had planted, before the earth came.  7 And him thou didst command to loue
@c    thy way, and he transgressed it, & forth with thou didst institute death
@c    in him, and in his posteritie, and there were borne nations, and tribes,
@c    and peoples, and kindreds, wherof there is no number.  8 And euerie
@c    nation walked in their owne wil, & they did meruelous thinges before
@c    thee, and despised thy preceptes.  9 And agane in time thou broughst in
@c    the floud vpon inhabitantes of the world, and didst destroy them.
@c    (Gen 7)  10 And there was made in euery one of them, as vnto Adam to dye,
@c    so to them the floud, 11 But thou didst leaue one of them, Noe with his
@c    house and of him were al the iust.  12 And it came to passe, when they
@c    began to be multiplied, that dwelt vpon the earth, & multiplied children
@c    and peoples and manie nations:  and they begane againe to doe impietie
@c    more then the former.  13 And it came to passe when they did iniquitie
@c    before thee, thou didst choose thee a man of them whose name was Abraham.
@c    14 And thou didst loue him and to him onlie thou didst shew thy wil.
@c    (Gen 12)  15 And thou didst dispose vnto him an euerlasting testament,
@c    and toldst him that thou wouldst neuer forsake his seede.  And thou
@c    gauest him Issac, and to Isaac thou gauest Iacob and Esau.  16 And Iacob
@c    thou didst seuer to thy selfe, but Esau thou didst separate.  And Iacob
@c    grewe to a great multitude.  17 And it came to passe when thou didst
@c    bring forth his sede out of AEgypt, thou broughst it vpon mount Sinai.
@c    (Ex 19)  18 And thou didst bowe the heauens, and fasten the earth, and
@c    didst shake the world, and madest the depthes to tremble, and trubledst
@c    the world, 19 and thy glorie passed foure gates of fire, and of
@c    earthquake, and winde, and frost, that thou mightst geue a law to the
@c    seede of Iacob, and to the generation of Israel diligence.  20 And thou
@c    didst not take away from them a malignant hart, that thy law might bring
@c    forth fruite in them.  21 For Adam the first bearing a vicious hart
@c    transgressed and was ouercome, yea and al that were borne of him.  22 And
@c    it was made a permanent infirmitie, and the law with the hart of the
@c    people, with the wickednes of the roote, and that which is good departed,
@c    and the wicked remayned.  23 And the times passed, & the yeares were
@c    ended:  and thou didst raise vp vnto thee a seruant named Dauid, 24 and
@c    spakest vnto him to build a citie of thy name, and to offer vnto thee in
@c    it frankencense, and oblations.  25 And this was done manie yeares, and
@c    they that inhabited the citie forsooke thee, 26 in al things as Adam and
@c    al his generations.  For they also vsed a wicked hart.  27 And thou didst
@c    deliuer thy citie into the hands of thyne enimies.  28 Why, doe they
@c    better thinges, that inhabite Babylon?  And for this shal she rule ouer
@c    Sion?  (Jer 12)  29 It came to passe when I was come hither, and had sene
@c    the impieties that can not be numbred:  and my soul saw manie offending
@c    this thirteth yeare, & my hart was astonied:  30 because I saw how thou
@c    bearest with their sinne, and didst spare them that did impiously, and
@c    didst destroy thine owne people, and preserue thine enimies, and didst
@c    not signifie it.  31 I nothing remember how this way should be forsaken:
@c    doth Babylon better thinges then Sion?  32 Or hath anie nation knowen
@c    thee beside Israel:  or what tribes haue beleued thy testamentes as
@c    Iacob?  33 Whose reward hath not appeared, nor their labour fructified.
@c    For passing through I passed among the nations, and I saw them abound,
@c    and not mindeful of thy commandmentes.  34 Now therfore wey our
@c    iniquities in a ballance, and theirs that dwel in the world:  & thy name
@c    shal not be found, but in Israel.  35 Or when haue not they sinned in thy
@c    sight, that inhabite the earth?  or what nation hath so obserued thy
@c    commandmentes?  36 These certes by their names thou shalt finde to haue
@c    kept thy commandments, but the nations thou shalt not finde.



@c    CHAP. IIII.


@c    Mans witte and reason is not able to vnderstand the counsel and iudgement
@c    of God, 22. why his people are afflicted by wicked nations, 33. nor of
@c    times, and thinges to come.

@c    AND the Angel answered me, that was sent to me, whose name was Vriel,
@c    2 and sayd to me:  Thy hart exceding hath exceded in this world, & thou
@c    thinkest to comprehend the way of the Highest.  3 And I sayd:  It is so
@c    my Lord.  And he answered me, & sayd:  I am sent to shew thee three
@c    wayes, & to propose to thee three similitudes.  4 Of the which if thou
@c    shalt declare to me one of them, I also wil shew thee the way which thou
@c    desirest to see, and wil teach thee whence a wicked hart is.  5 And I
@c    sayd, Speak my Lord.  And he sayd to me:  Goe, wey me the weight of the
@c    fire, or measure me the blast of the winde, or cal me backe the day that
@c    is past.  6 And I answered, and sayd:  what man borne can doe it, that
@c    thou askest me of these thinges?  7 And he sayd to me:  If I should aske
@c    thee, saying:  How great habitations are there in the hart of the sea, or
@c    how great vaines be there in the beginning of the depth, or how great
@c    vaines be there aboue the firmament, and what are the issues of paradise:
@c    8 thou wouldest perhaps say to me:  I haue not descended into the depth,
@c    nor into hel as yet, neither haue I ascended at anie time into heauen.
@c    9 But now I haue not asked thee, sauing of the fire, and the winde, and
@c    the day by the which thou hast passed, and from the which thou canst not
@c    be separated:  and thou hast not answered me of them.  10 And he sayd to
@c    me:  Thou canst not know the thinges that are thine which grow together
@c    with thee:  11 and how can thy vessel comprehend the way of the Highest,
@c    and now the world being outwardly corrupted, vnderstand the corruption
@c    euident in my sight:  12 I sayd to him:  Better were it for vs not to be,
@c    then yet liuing to liue in impieties, and to suffer, and not to
@c    vnderstand for what thing.  13 And he answered me, & said:  Going forth I
@c    went forward to a wood of trees in the filde, and they deuised a deuise,
@c    (Judges 9 / 2 Par 25) 14 and said:  Come and let vs goe, and make warre
@c    against the sea, that it may retyre backe before vs, and we may make vs
@c    other woodes.  15 And in like maner the waues of the sea they also
@c    deuised a deuise, and sayd:  Come let vs goe vp, let vs ouerthrow the
@c    woodes of the filde, that there also we may consummate an other countrie
@c    for our selues.  16 And the woodes deuise was made vaine, for fire came,
@c    and consumed it.  17 Likewise also the deuise of the waues of the sea.
@c    For the sand stood, & stayed them.  18 For if thou wert iudge of these,
@c    whom wouldest thou begin to iustifie, or whom to condemne?  19 And I
@c    answered, and sayd:  Verely they deuised a vayne deuise.  For the earth
@c    is geuen to the wood, and a place to the sea to carie her waues.  20 And
@c    he answered me, and sayed:  Thou hast iudged wel, and why hast thou not
@c    iudged for thy self?  21 For as the earth is geuen to the wood, and the
@c    sea for the waues therof:  so they that inhabite vpon the earth, can
@c    vnderstand onlie the thinges that are vpon the earth:  and they vpon the
@c    heauens, the thinges that are aboue the height of the heauens.  22 And I
@c    answered, and sayd:  I besech thee Lord, that sense may be geuen me to
@c    vnderstand.  23 For I meant not to aske of thy superiour thinges, but of
@c    those that passe by vs dayly.  For what cause Israel is geuen into
@c    reproche to the gentiles, the people whom thou hast loued, is geuen to
@c    impious tribes, & the law of our fathers is brought to destruction, & the
@c    written ordinances are no where:  24 and we haue passed out of the world,
@c    as locustes, and our life is astonishment and dreade, and we are not
@c    worthie to obtaine mercie.  25 But what wil he doe to his name that is
@c    inuocated vpon vs?  and of these thinges I did aske.  26 And he answered
@c    me, and sayd:  If thou search very much, thou shalt often meruail:
@c    because the world hastening hasteneth to passe, 27 and can not comprehend
@c    the thinges which in times to come are promised to the iust:  because
@c    this world is ful of iniustice and infirmities.  28 But conerning the
@c    thinges that thou demandest I wil tel thee:  for the euil is sowed, and
@c    the destruction therof is not yet come.  29 If then that which is sowen
@c    be not turned vp, and the place depart where the euil is sowen, that shal
@c    not come where the good is sowen.  30 Because the grayne of il seede hath
@c    bene sowen in the hart of Adam from the beginning:  and how much impietie
@c    hath it ingendered vntil now, and doth ingender vntil the floore come?
@c    31 And esteme with thy self the graine of the il seede, how much fruite
@c    of impietie it hath ingendred:  32 When the eares shal be cut, which are
@c    innumerable, what a great floore wil they begin to make?  33 And I
@c    answered, and sayd:  How, and when shal these things be?  why are our
@c    yeares few and euil?  34 And he answered me, and sayd to me, Hasten not
@c    aboue the Highest.  For thou doest hasten in vaine to be aboue him, for
@c    thy excesse is much.  35 Did not the soules of the iust in the cellars,
@c    aske of these things, saying:  How hope I so, and when shal the fruite
@c    come of the floore of our reward?  36 And Ieremiel the Archangel answered
@c    to those things, and sayd:  When the number of the sedes in you shal be
@c    filled, because he hath weyed the world in a balance, 37 and with a
@c    measure hath he measured the times, and in number he hath numbered the
@c    times, and hath not moued, nor stirred them, vntil the foresayd measure
@c    be filled.  38 And I answered, and sayd:  O Lord Dominatour, we also are
@c    al ful of impietie.  39 And left perhaps for vs the floores of the iust
@c    be not filled, for the sinnes of the inhabitantes vpon the earth.  40 And
@c    he answered me, and sayd:  Goe, and aske a woman with childe, if when
@c    she hath accomplished her nine monethes, her wombe can yet hold the
@c    infant within it?  41 And I sayd it can not Lord.  And he sayd to me, in
@c    hel the cellars of the soules are like to the matrice.  42 For as she
@c    that is:  In trauail maketh hast, to escape the necessitie of trauailing:
@c    so this also hasteneth to render those thinges which are commended to it.
@c    43 From the beginning it shal be shewed thee touching those thinges,
@c    which thou doest couet to see.  44 And I answered, and sayd:  If I haue
@c    found grace before thine eyes, & if it be possible, and if I by fitte,
@c    45 shew mee if there be more to come then is passed, or more things haue
@c    passed, then are to come.  46 What passed, I know:  but what is to come,
@c    I know not.  47 And he sayd to me:  Stand vpon the right side, and I wil
@c    shew thee the interpretation of the similitude.  48 And I stood, and saw:
@c    and behold a burning fornace passed before me, & it came to passe when
@c    the flame passed, I saw:  and behold the smoke ouercame.  49 And these
@c    thinges there passed before me a clowd ful of water, and with violence
@c    casting in much raine:  and when the violence of raine was cast, the
@c    droppes therin ouercame.  50 And he sayd to me:  Thinke with thyself, as
@c    the raine increaseth more then the droppes, and the fire then the smoke:
@c    so did the measure that passed, more a bound.  But the droppes, and the
@c    smoke ouercame:  51 and I prayed, & sayd, shal I liue thinkest thou vntil
@c    these dayes?  or what shal be in those dayes?  52 He answered me, and
@c    sayd:  Of the signes wherof thou askest me, in part I can tel thee,
@c    howbeit of thy life I was not sent to tel thee, neither doe I know.



@c    CHAP. V.


@c    Diuers signes of thinges to come are shewed to Esdras by an Angel:
@c    16. for the comforth of the people in captiuitie.

@c    BVT concerning signes:  behold the dayes shal come, wherin they that
@c    inhabite the earth shal be taken in a great number:  and the way of truth
@c    shal be hid:  and the countrie shal be barren from fayth.  2 And
@c    iniustice shal be multiplied aboue that which thy self seest, & aboue
@c    that which thou hast heard in time past.  (Matt 24)  3 And they shal put
@c    their foote into the countrie which now thou seest to reigne, and they
@c    shal see it desolate.  4 And if the Highest geue thee life, thou shalt
@c    see after the third trumpet, and the sunne shal sodenly shine agayne in
@c    the night, and the moone thrise in a day, 5 and out of wood bloud shal
@c    distil, and the stone shal geue his voice, and the peoples shal be moued:
@c    6 and he reigne, whom they hope not that inhabite vpon the earth, and
@c    soules shal make their flight away.  7 & the sea of Sodom shal cast the
@c    fishes, and shal make a noise in the night, which manie knew not, and al
@c    shal heare the voice therof, 8 and there shal be made a confusion in
@c    manie places, and the fire shal often be sent backe, and the sauage
@c    beastes shal goe to other places, and wemen in their monethlie flowers
@c    shal bring forth monsters, 9 and in swete waters shal salt waters be
@c    found, and al frendes shal ouerthrow one an other:  and then shal witte
@c    be hid, and vnderstanding shal be separated into his cellar:  10 and it
@c    shal be sought of manie, and shal not be found:  and iniustice shal be
@c    multiplied, and incontinencie vpon the earth.  11 And one countrie shal
@c    aske her neighbour, and shal say:  Hath iustice doing iust passed
@c    throught thee?  and she shal denie it.  12 And it shal be in that time,
@c    men shal hope, and shal not obtaine:  they shal labour, and their wayes
@c    shal not haue successe.  13 These signes I am permitted to tel thee:  and
@c    if thou pray againe and weepe, as also now, and fast seuen dayes, thou
@c    shalt heare againe greater thinges then these.  14 And I awaked, and my
@c    bodie did shiuer excedingly:  and my soule laboured, that it fainted:
@c    15 and the Angel that came, that spake in me, held me, and strengthened
@c    me, and sette me vpon my feete.  16 And it came to passe in the second
@c    night, and Salathiel the prince of the people came to me, and sayd to me:
@c    Where wast thou?  and why is thy countenance heauie?  17 Knowest thou not
@c    that Isreal is committed to thee in the countrie of their transmigration?
@c    18 Rise vp therfore, and taste bread, and forsake vs not, as the pastour
@c    his flocke in the hand of wicked wolues.  19 And I sayd to him:  Goe from
@c    me, & approch not vnto me.  And he heard, as I sayd:  and he departed
@c    from me.  20 And I fasted seuen dayes howling & weeping, as Vriel the
@c    Angel commanded me.  21 And it came to passe after seuen dayes, and
@c    againe cogitations of my hart molested me very much, 22 and my soule
@c    resumed the spirit of vnderstanding:  & agayne I began to speake wordes
@c    before the Highest:  23 and I sayd:  Lord Dominatour of euerie wood of
@c    the earth, & al the trees therof, thou hast chosen one vineyard:  24 & of
@c    euerie land of the world thou hast chosen thee one ditch:  & of al the
@c    flowers of the world thou hast chosen thee one lilie:  25 and of al
@c    depthes of the sea, thou hast filled thee one riuer:  and of al the
@c    builded cities, thou hast sanctified vnto thyself Sion:  26 and of al
@c    created soules, thou hast named thee one doue:  and of al beastes that
@c    were made, thou hast prouided thee one shepe:  27 and of al multiplied
@c    peoples, thou host purchased thee one people:  and a law approued of al
@c    thou hast geuen to this people, whom thou didst desire.  28 And now Lord,
@c    why hast thou deliuered one vnto manie?  And thou hast perpared vpon one
@c    roote others, and hast dispersed thy onlie one in manie:  29 and they
@c    haue troden vpon it, which gainesayd thy couenants, and which beleued not
@c    thy testamentes.  30 And if hating thou hatest thy people, it ought to be
@c    chastised with thy handes.  31 And it came to passe, when I had spoken
@c    the wordes, and the Angel was sent to me, that came to me before the
@c    night past, 32 and he sayd to me:  Heare me, and I wil instruct thee:
@c    and harken to me, and I wil adde before thee.  33 And I sayd:  Speake my
@c    Lord.  And he sayd to me:  Thou art become excedingly in excesse of minde
@c    for Israel:  hast thou loued it more then him that made it?  34 And I
@c    sayd to him:  No Lord, but for sorow I haue spoken, for my veynes torment
@c    me euerie houre, to apprehend the pathe of the Highest, and to search
@c    part of his iudgement.  35 And he sayd to me:  Thou canst not.  And I
@c    sayd:  Why Lord?  To what was I borne, or why was not my mothers wombe my
@c    graue, that I might not see the labour of Iacob, & the wearines of the
@c    stocke of Israel?  36 And he sayd to me:  Number me the thinges that are
@c    not yet come, and gather me the dispersed droppes, and make me the
@c    withered flowers grene againe, 37 and open me the shut cellars, & bring
@c    me forth the blastes inclosed in them, shew me the image of a voice:  and
@c    then wil I shew thee the labour that thou desirest to see.  38 And I
@c    sayd:  Lord Dominatour, for who is there that can know these thinges, but
@c    he that hath not his habitation with men?  39 And I am vnwise, and how
@c    can I speake of these thinges, which thou hast asked me?  40 And he sayd
@c    to me:  As thou canst not doe one of these thiges, which haue bene sayd:
@c    so canst thou not finde my iudgement, or in the end the charitie, which I
@c    haue promised to the people.  41 And I sayd:  But behold Lord thou art
@c    nigh to them that are nere the end:  and what shal they doe that haue
@c    bene before me, or we, or they after vs?  42 And he sayd to me:  I wil
@c    resemble my iudgement to a crowne.  As there shal not be slacknes of the
@c    last, so neither swiftnes of the former.  43 And I answered, and sayd:
@c    Couldst thou not make them that haue bene, and that are, and that shal
@c    be, at once, that thou mayst shew thy iudgement the quicker?  44 And he
@c    answered me, and sayd:  The creature can not hasten aboue the Creatour,
@c    nor the world sustayne them that are to be created in it, at once.
@c    45 And I sayd:  As thou didst say to thy seruant, that quickening thou
@c    didst quicken the creature created by thee at once, and the creature
@c    susteined it:  it may now also beare them present at once.  46 And he
@c    sayd to me:  Aske the matrice of a woman, & thou shalt say to it:  And if
@c    thou bring forth children, why by times?  Aske it therfore, that it geue
@c    ten at once.  47 And I sayd, it can not verily:  but according to time.
@c    48 And he sayd to me:  And I haue geuen a matrice to the earth for them,
@c    that are sowen vpon it by time.  49 For as the infant bringeth not forth
@c    the thinges that perteyne to the aged, so haue I disposed the world
@c    created of me.  50 And I asked, and sayd:  Wheras thou hast now geuen me
@c    a way, I wil speake before thee:  for our mother, of whom thou toldest
@c    me, yet she is yong:  now draweth nigh to old age.  51 And he answered
@c    me, and sayd:  Aske her that beareth children, and she wil tel thee.
@c    52 For thou shalt say to her:  Why are not they whom thou hast brought
@c    forth, now like to them that were before thee, but lesse of stature?
@c    53 And she also wil say vnto thee:  They that are borne in the youth of
@c    streingth are of one sort, and they of an other, that are borne about the
@c    time of old age, when the matrice fayleth.  54 Consider therfore thou
@c    also, that you are of lesse stature, then they that were before you:
@c    55 and they that are after you, of lesser then you, as it were creatures
@c    now waxing old, and past the strength of youth.  56 And I sayd:  I besech
@c    thee Lord, if I haue found grace before thine eyes, shew vnto thy
@c    seruant, by whom thou doest visite thy creature.



@c    CHAP. VI.


@c    God knowing al thinges before they were made, created them 54. for man:
@c    and considerth the endes of al.

@c    AND he sayd to me:  In the beginning of the earthlie world, and before
@c    the endes of the world stood, and before the congregation of the windes
@c    did blow, (Prov 8) 2 and before the voyces of thunders sounded, & before
@c    the flashinges of lightenings shined, and before the fundations of
@c    paradise were confirmed, 3 and before beautiful flowers were sene, and
@c    before the moued powers were established, and before the innumerable
@c    hostes of Angels were gathered, 4 and before the heightes of the ayre
@c    were aduanced, and before the measures of the firmaments were named, and
@c    before the chymneies were hote in Sion, 5 and before the present yeares
@c    were searched out, and before their inuentions that now sinne, were put
@c    away, and they signed that made fayth their treasure:  6 then I thought,
@c    and they were made by me only, and not by any other:  and the end by me,
@c    and not by any other.  7 And I answered, and sayd:  What separation of
@c    times shal there be?  and when shal the end of the former be, and the
@c    begynning of that which foloweth?  8 And he sayd to me, from Abraham vnto
@c    Isaac, when Iacob and Esau were borne of him, the hand of Iacob held from
@c    the begynning the heele of Esau, 9 for the end of this world is Esau, and
@c    the begynning of the next Iacob.  10 The hand of a man betwen the heele
@c    and the hand.  Aske no other thing Esdras.  11 And I answered, and sayd:
@c    O Lord dominatour, if I haue found grace before thyne eyes, 12 I pray
@c    thee shew thy seruant the end of thy signes, wherof thou didst shew me
@c    part the night before.  13 And he answered, and sayd to me:  Arise vpon
@c    thy feete, and heare a voice most ful of sound.  14 And it shal be as it
@c    were a commotion, neither shal the place be moued wherin thou standest.
@c    15 Therfore when it speaketh be not thou afrayd, because of the end is
@c    the word, and the fundation of the earth vnderstood, 16 for concerning
@c    them the word trembleth and is moued, for it knoweth that their end must
@c    be changed.  17 And it came to passe, when I had heard, I rose vpon my
@c    feete, and I heard:  and behold a voice speaking, and the sound therof as
@c    the sound of manie waters:  18 and it sayd:  Behold the dayes come, and
@c    the time shal be when I wil begyne to approch, that I may visite the
@c    inhabitantes vpon the earth.  19 And when I wil begin to enquire of them
@c    that vniustly haue hurt with their iniustice, and when the humilitie of
@c    Sion shal be accomplished.  20 And when the world shal be ouersigned that
@c    shal beginne to passe, I wil doe these signes:  Bookes shal be opened
@c    before the face of the firmament, and al shal see together, 21 and
@c    infantes of one yeare shal speake with their voices, & wemen with child
@c    shal bring forth vntimely infantes not ripe of three or foure monethes,
@c    and shal liue, and shal be raysed vp.  22 And sodenly shal appeare sowen
@c    places not sowen, & ful cellers shal sodenly be found emptie:  23 and a
@c    trumpet shal sound; which when al shal heare, they wil sodenly be afrayd.
@c    24 And it shal be in that time, freindes as enimies shal ouerthrow
@c    freindes, and the earth shal be afrayd with them:  & the vaynes of
@c    fountaynes shal stand, and shal not runne in three howres:  25 and it
@c    shal be, euerie one that shal be leaft of al these, of whom I haue
@c    foretold thee, he shal be saued, and shal see my saluation, & the end of
@c    your world.  26 And the men that are receiued, shal see, they that tasted
@c    not death from their natiuitie, and the hart of the inhabitantes shal be
@c    turned into an other sense.  27 For euil shal be put out, and deceite
@c    shal be extinguished, 28 but fayth shal florish, and corruption shal be
@c    ouercome, and truth shal be shewed, which was without fruite so manie
@c    dayes.  29 And it came to passe, when he spake to me, & I loe by litle &
@c    litle looked on him before whom I stood, 30 and he sayd to me these
@c    wordes:  I am come to shew thee the time of the night to come.  31 If
@c    therfore thou pray agayne, and fast agayne seuen dayes, agayne I wil tel
@c    thee greater thinges by the day which I haue heard.  32 For thy voice is
@c    heard before the Highest.  For the strong hath sene thy direction, and
@c    hath fore sene the chastitie which thou hast had from thy youth:  33 and
@c    for this cause he hath sent me to shew thee al these thinges, and to say
@c    to thee, haue confidence, and feare not, 34 and hasten not with the
@c    former times to thinke vayne thinges, that thou hasten not from the last
@c    times.  35 And it came to passe after these thinges, and I wept againe,
@c    and in like maner I fasted seuen dayes, to accomplish the three weekes,
@c    that were told me.  36 And it came to passe in the eight night, and my
@c    hart was trubled againe in me, and I began to speake before the Highest.
@c    37 For my spirit was inflamed excedingly, and my soul was distressed.
@c    38 And I sayd:  O Lord, speaking thou didst speake from the beginning of
@c    creature from the first day, saying:  Let heauen be made and earth:  and
@c    thy word was a perfect worke.  39 And then there was spirit, and
@c    darknesse was caried about, and silence, the sound of the voyce of man
@c    was not yet from thee.  40 Then thou didst command the lighsome light to
@c    be brought forth of thy treasures, wherby thy worke might appeare.
@c    41 And in the second day thou didst create the spirit of the firmament,
@c    and commandest it to diuide, and to make a diuision betwen the waters,
@c    that a certayn part should depart vpward, and part should remaine beneth.
@c    42 And in the third day thou didst command the waters to be gathered
@c    together in the seuenth part of the earth:  but sixe partes thou didst
@c    drie and preserue, that of them might be seruing before thee thinges
@c    sowen of God, and tilled.  43 For thy word proceded, and the worke forth
@c    with was made.  44 For sodenly came forth fruite of multitude infinite,
@c    and diurse tastes of concupiscence, and flowers of vnchangeable colour,
@c    and odours of vnsearcheable smel, and in the third day these thinges were
@c    made.  45 And in the fourth day thou didst command to be made the
@c    brightnesse of the sunne, the light of the moone, the disposition of the
@c    starres:  46 and didst command them that they should serue man, that
@c    should be made.  47 And in the fifth day:  thou saydst to the seuenth
@c    part, where the water was gathered together, that it should bring forth
@c    beastes, and foules, and fishes:  and so was it done, 48 the dumme water
@c    and without life, the thinges that by Gods appointement were commanded,
@c    made beastes, that therby the nations may declare thy meruelous workes.
@c    49 And then thou didst preserue two soules:  the name of one thou didst
@c    cal Henoch, and the name of the second thou didst cal Leuiathan, 50 and
@c    thou didst separate them from eche other.  For the seuenth part, where
@c    the water was gathered together, could not hold them.  51 And thou gauest
@c    to Henoch one part, which was dried the third day, to dwelt therin, where
@c    are a thousand mountaynes.  52 But to Leuiathan thou gauest the seuenth
@c    part being moyst, and kepst it, that it might be to deuoure whom thou
@c    wilt, and when thou wilt.  53 And in the sixt day thou didst command the
@c    earth, to create before thee cattel, and beastes, and creeping creatures:
@c    54 and ouer these Adam, whom thou madest ruler ouer al the workes, which
@c    thou didst make, & out of him are al we brought forth, and the people
@c    whom thou hast chosen.  55 And al these thinges I haue sayd before thee o
@c    Lord, because thou didst create the world for vs.  56 But the residue of
@c    the nations borne of Adam thou saydst that they were nothing, and that
@c    they were like to spittle, and as it were the droping out of a vessel
@c    thou didst liken the abundance of them.  57 And now Lord, behold these
@c    nations which are reputed for nothing, haue begune to rule ouer vs, and
@c    to deuoure vs:  58 but we thy people whom thou didst cal thy first onlie
@c    begotten emulatour, are deliuered into their handes:  59 and if the world
@c    was created for vs, why doe not we possesse inheritance with the world?
@c    how long these thinges?



@c    CHAP. VII.


@c    Without tribulations no man can attayne immortal life:  17. which the
@c    iust shal inherite:  and the wicked shal perish.  28. Christ wil come,
@c    and dye for mankind.  36. Prayers of the iust shal profite til the end of
@c    this world, but not after the general iudgement.  48. Al sinned in Adam.
@c    52. and haue added more sinnes, 57. but it is in mans powre, 62. by Gods
@c    grace, to liue eternally.

@c    AND it came to passe when I had ended to speake these wordes, the Angel
@c    was sent to me, which had bene sent to me the first nights, 2 and he sayd
@c    to me:  Arise Esdras, and heare the wordes which I am come to speake to
@c    thee.  3 And I sayd:  Speake my God.  And he sayd to me:  The sea is set
@c    in a large place, that it might be deepe and wide:  4 but the entrance to
@c    it shal be set in a straict place, that it might be like to riuers.
@c    5 For who witting wil enter into the sea, and see it, or rule ouer it:
@c    if he passe not the streite, how shal he come into the bredth?  6 Also an
@c    other thing:  A citie is built, and set in a plaine place, and it is ful
@c    of al goodes.  7 The entrance therof narrow, and set in a stepe place, so
@c    that on the right hand there was fire, & on the left depe water:  8 and
@c    there is one onlie pathe set betwen them, that is, betwen the fire and
@c    the water, so that the pathe can not conteyne, but onlie a mans steppe.
@c    9 And if the citie shal be geuen a man for inheritance, if he neuer passe
@c    through the peril set before it, how shal he receiue his inhertance?
@c    10 And I sayd:  So Lord.  And he sayd to me, So it is:  Israel also a
@c    part.  11 For I made the world for them:  and when Adam transgressed my
@c    constitution, that was iudged which was done.  12 And the entrance of
@c    this world were made streite, and sorowful, & paynful, and few and euil,
@c    and ful of dangers, & stuffed very much with labour.  13 For the
@c    entrances of the greater world are large andsecure, and making fruite of
@c    immortalitie.  14 If then they that liue entring in enter into these
@c    streite and vayne thinges:  they can not receiue the thinges that are
@c    layd vp.  15 Now therfore why art thou trubled, wheras thou art
@c    corruptible?  and why art thou moued, wheras thou art mortal?  16 And why
@c    hast thou not taken in thy hart that which is to come, but that which is
@c    present?  17 I answered, and sayd:  Lord dominatour:  behold thou hast
@c    disposed by thy law that the iust shal inherite these thinges, and the
@c    impious shal perish.  (Deut 8)  18 But the iust shal suffer the streites,
@c    hoping for the wyde places, for they that haue done impiously, haue both
@c    suffered the streites, and shal not see the wide places.  19 And he sayd
@c    to me:  There is no iudge aboue God, nor that vnderstandeth aboue the
@c    Highest.  20 For manie present doe perish, because the law of God which
@c    was set before, is neglected.  21 For God commanding commanded them that
@c    came, when they came, what doing they should liue, and what obseruing
@c    they should not be punished.  22 But they were not perswaded, and
@c    gaynesayd him, and made to them selues a cogitation of vanitie, 23 and
@c    proposed to them selues deceites of sinnes, & they sayd to the Highest
@c    that he was not, and they knew not his wayes, 24 and dispised his law,
@c    and denyed his couenaunces, and had not fidelitie in his ordinances, and
@c    did not accomplish his workes.  25 For this cause Esdras, the emptie to
@c    the emptie, and the ful to the ful.  26 Behold the time shal come, and it
@c    shal be when the signes shal come, which I haue foretold thee, and the
@c    bride shal appeare, and appearing she shal be shewed that now is hid with
@c    the earth:  27 and euerie one that is deliuered from the foresaid euils,
@c    he shal see my meruelous thinges.  28 For my sonne IESVS shal be reueled
@c    with them that are with him, and they shal be merie that are leaft in the
@c    foure hundred yeares.  29 And it shal be after these yeares, and my sonne
@c    CHRIST shal dye:  and al men that haue breath, 30 and the world shal be
@c    turned into the old silence seuen dayes, as in the former iudgementes, so
@c    that none shal be leaft.  31 And it shal be after seuen dayes, and the
@c    world shal be raysed vp that yet waketh not, and shal dye corrupted:
@c    32 and the earth shal render the thinges that sleepe in it, & the dust
@c    them that dwel in it with silence, and the cellars shal render the soules
@c    that are commended to them.  33 And the Highest shal be reueled vpon the
@c    seate of iudgement, and miseries shal passe, and long sufferance shal be
@c    gathered together.  34 And iudgement onlie shal remayne, truth shal
@c    stand, and fayth shal waxe strong, 35 and the worke shal folow, and the
@c    reward shal be shewed, and iustice shal awake, and iniustice shal not
@c    haue dominion.  [See note below.]  36 And I sayd:  First Abraham prayed
@c    for the Sodomites, and Moyses for the fathers that sinned in the desert.
@c    (Gen 18 / Ex 32)  37 And they that were after him for Isreal in the dayes
@c    of Achaz, and of Samuel, 38 and Dauid for the destruction, and Salomon
@c    for them that came vnto the sanctification.  (2 Kings 24:17 / 2 Par 6:13)
@c    39 And Elias for them that receiued raine, and for the dead that he might
@c    liue, (3 Kings 17 & 18) 40 and Ezechias for the people in the dayes of
@c    Sennacherib, and manie for manie.  (4 Kings 19:15)  41 If therfore now
@c    when corruptible did increase, and iniustice was multiplied, and the iust
@c    prayed for the impious:  why now also shal it not be so?  42 And he
@c    answered me and sayd:  This present world is not the end, much glorie
@c    remaineth in it:  for this cause they prayed for the impotent.  43 For
@c    the day of iudgement shal be the end of this time, and the beginning of
@c    the immortalitie to come, wherein corruption is past:  44 intemperance is
@c    dissolued, incredulitie is cut of:  and iustice hath increased, truth is
@c    strong.  45 For then no man can saue him that hath perished, nor drowne
@c    him that hath ouercome.  And I answered, 46 and sayd:  This is my word
@c    the first and the last, that it had bene better not to geue the earth to
@c    Adam, or when he had now geuen it, to restraine him that he should not
@c    sinne.  47 For what doth it profit men presently to liue in sorow, and
@c    being dead to hope for punishment?  48 O what hast thou done Adam?  For
@c    if thou didst sinne, it was not made thy fal only, but ours also which
@c    came of thee.  (Rom 5:12)  49 For what doth it profit vs if immortal time
@c    be promised to vs:  but we haue done mortal workes?  50 And that
@c    euerlasting hope is foretold vs:  but we most wicked are become vayne?
@c    51 And that habitations of health and securitie are reserued for vs, but
@c    we haue conuerst naughtely?  52 And that the glorie of the Highest is
@c    reserued to protect them that haue slowly conuerst:  but we haue walked
@c    in most wicked wayes.  53 And that paradise shal be shewed, whose fruite
@c    continueth incorrupted, wherin is securitie and remedie:  54 but we shal
@c    not enter in:  for we haue conuerst in vnlawful places.  55 And their
@c    faces which haue had abstinence, shal shyne aboue the starres:  but our
@c    faces blacke aboue darkenes.  56 For we did not thinke liuing when we
@c    did iniquitie, that we shal beginne after death to suffer.  57 And he
@c    answered, and sayd:  This is the cogitation of the battel which man shal
@c    fight, who is borne vpon the earth, 58 that if he shal be ouercome, he
@c    suffer that which thou hast sayd:  but if he ouercome he shal receiue
@c    that which I say:  59 for this is the life which Moyses spake of when he
@c    liued, to the people, saying:  Choose vnto thee life, that thou mayst
@c    liue.  (Deut 30:19)  60 But they beleued him not, no nor the Prophetes
@c    after him, no nor me which haue spoken to them.  61 Because there should
@c    not be sorow vnto their perdition, as there shal be ioy vpon them, to
@c    whom saluation is perswaded.  62 And I answered, and sayd:  I know Lord,
@c    that the Highest is called merciful in that, that he hath mercie on them
@c    which are not yet come into the world, 63 and that he hath mercie on them
@c    which conuerse in his law:  64 and he is long suffering, because he
@c    sheweth long sufferance to them that haue sinned, as it were with their
@c    owne workes:  65 and he is bountiful, because he wil geue according to
@c    exigentes:  66 and of freat mercie, because he multiplieth more mercies
@c    to them that are present, and that are past, and that are to come.
@c    67 For if he shal not multiplie his mercies, the world shal not be made
@c    aliue with them that did inherite it.  68 And he geueth:  for if he shal
@c    not geue of his bountie, that they may be releeued which haue done
@c    iniquitie, the tenth thousand part of men can not be quickned from their
@c    iniquities.  69 And the iudge if he shal not forgeue them that are cured
@c    with his word, and wype away a multitude of contentions:  there should
@c    not perhaps be leaft in an innumerable multitiude, but very few.



@c    CHAP. VIII.


@c    God is merciful in this world, yet fewe are saued.  6. Gods workes, and
@c    disposition of his creatures are meruelous.  15. Esdras prayeth for the
@c    people of Israel:  37. and saluation is promised to the iust, and
@c    punishment threatned to the wicked.

@c    AND he answered me, & sayd:  This world the Highest made for manie, but
@c    that to come for few.  2 And I wil speake a similitude Esdras before
@c    thee.  For as thou shalt aske the earth, and it wil tel thee, that it wil
@c    geue much more earth wherof earthen worke may be made, but a litle dust
@c    wherof gold is made:  so also is the act of this present world.  3 Manie
@c    in deede are created, but few shal be saued.  (Matt 20:16)  4 And I
@c    answered, and sayd:  Then o soul swallow vp the sense, and deuoure that
@c    which is wise.  5 For thou art agred to obey, and willing to prophecie.
@c    For there is no space geuen thee but only to liue.  6 O Lord if thou wilt
@c    not permitte thy seruant, that we pray before thee, and thou geue vs
@c    seede to the hart, and tillage to the vnderstanding, wherof may the
@c    fruite be made, wherby euerie corrupt person may liue, that shal beare
@c    the place of a man?  7 For thou art alone, and we are one workmanshippe
@c    of thy handes, as thou hast spoken:  8 and as now the bodie made in the
@c    matrice, and thou doest geue the members, thy creature is preserued in
@c    fire & water:  and nine monethes thy workemanship doth suffer thy
@c    creature that is created in it:  9 and it self that keepeth, and that
@c    which is kept, both shal be preserued:  and the matrice being preserued
@c    rendreth agayne at some time the thinges that are growen in it.  10 For
@c    thou hast commanded of the members, that is the brestes to geue milke
@c    vnto the fruite of the brestes, 11 that the thing which is made, may be
@c    nourished til a certayne time, and afterward thou mayst dispose him to
@c    thy mercie.  12 For thou hast, brought him vp in thy iustice, and hast
@c    instructed him in thy law, and hast corrected him in thy vnderstanding:
@c    13 and thou shalt mortifie him, as thy creature:  and shalt geue him
@c    life, as thy worke.  14 If then thou wilt destroy him that is made with
@c    so great labours:  it is easie by thy commandment to be ordayned, that
@c    also which was made, might be preserued.  15 And now Lord I wil speake,
@c    of euerie man thou rather knowest:  but concerning thy people, for which
@c    I am sorowful:  16 and concerning thine inheritance, for which I mourne,
@c    and for Israel for whom I am pensiue, and concerning Iacob, for whom I am
@c    sorowful.  17 Therfore wil I begin to pray before thee for me, & for
@c    them:  because I see our defaultes that inhabite the earth.  18 But I
@c    haue heard of the celeritie of the iudge that shal be.  19 Therfore heare
@c    my voyce, and vnderstand my word, and I wil speake before thee.  20 The
@c    beginning of the wordes of Esdras before he was assumpted:  and I sayd:
@c    Lord which inhabitest the world, whose eyes are eleuated vnto thinges on
@c    high and in the ayre:  21 and whose throne is inestimable, and glorie
@c    incomprehensible:  by whom standeth an host of Angels with trembling,
@c    22 whose keping is turned in wynde and fire, thou whose word is true, and
@c    sayings premanent:  23 whose commandment is strong, and disposition
@c    terrible:  whose looke dryeth vp the depthes, and indignation maketh the
@c    mountaynes to melt, and truth doth testifie.  24 Heare the prayer of thy
@c    seruant, & with thine eares receiue the petition of thy creature.  25 For
@c    whiles I liue, I wil speake:  and whiles I vnderstand, I wil answere:
@c    26 Neither doe thou respect the sinnes of thy people, but them that serue
@c    thee in truth.  27 Neither doe thou attend the impious endeuours of the
@c    nations, but them that with sorowes haue kept thy testimonies.
@c    28 Neither thinke thou of them that in thy sight haue conuerst falsly,
@c    but remember them that according to thy wil haue knowen thy feare.
@c    29 Neither be thou willing to destroy them that haue had the maners of
@c    beastes:  but respect them that haue taught thy law gloriously.
@c    30 Neither haue indignation towards them, which are iudged worse then
@c    beastes:  but loue them that alwayes haue confidence in thy iustice, and
@c    glorie.  31 Because we and our fatheres languish with such diseases:  but
@c    thou for sinners shalt be called merciful.  32 For if thou shalt be
@c    desirous to haue mercie on vs, then thou shalt be called merciful, to vs
@c    hauing no workes of iustice.  33 For the iust which haue manie workes
@c    layd vp, of their owne workes shal receiue reward.  34 For what is man,
@c    that thou art angrie with him:  or the corruptible kinde, that thou art
@c    so bitter touching it?  35 For in truth there is no man of them that be
@c    borne, which hath not done impiously, and of them that confesse, which
@c    haue not sinned.  (3 Kings 8:46 / 2 Par 6:36)  36 For in this shal thy
@c    iustice be declared, and thy goodnes, o Lord, when thou shalt haue mercie
@c    on them, that haue no substance of good workes.  37 And he answered me,
@c    and sayd:  Thou hast spoken somethinges rightly:  and according to thy
@c    wordes, so also shal it be done, 38 because I wil not in dede thinke vpon
@c    the worke of them that haue sinned before death, before the iudgement,
@c    before perdition:  39 but I wil reioyce vpon the creature of the iust,
@c    and I wil remember their pilgrimage also, and saluation, and receiuing of
@c    reward.  40 Therfore as I haue spoken, so also it is.  41 For as the
@c    husbandman soweth vpon the ground manie seedes, and planteth manie
@c    plantes, but not al which were sowen in time, are preserued, nor yet al
@c    that were planted, shal take roote:  so they also that are sowen in the
@c    world, shal not al be saued.  (Matt 13 & 20)  42 And I answered, and
@c    sayd:  If I haue found grace, let me speake.  43 As the seede of the
@c    husbandman, if it come not vp, or receiue not the rayne in time, if it be
@c    corupted with much rayne, perisheth:  44 so likewise also man who made
@c    with thy handes, and thou named his image:  because thou art likened to
@c    him, for whom thou hast made al thinges, and hast likened him to the
@c    seede of the husbandman.  45 Be not angrie vpon vs, but spare thy people,
@c    and haue mercie on thy inheritance.  And thou hast mercie on thy
@c    creature.  46 And he answered me, and sayd:  The thinges that are present
@c    to them that are present, and that shal be, to them that shal be.  47 For
@c    thou lackest much to be able to loue my creature aboue me:  and to thee
@c    often times, euen to thyselfe I haue approched, but to the vniust neuer.
@c    48 But in this also thou art meruelous before the Highest, 49 because
@c    thou hast humbled thyself as becometh thee:  & hast not iudged thyself,
@c    that among the iust thou maist be very much glorified.  50 For which
@c    cause manie miseries, and miserable thinges shal be done to them that
@c    inhabite the world in the later dayes:  because they haue walked in much 
@c    pride.  51 But thou for thyselfe vnderstand, & for them that are like
@c    vnto thee seeke glorie.  52 For to you paradise is open, the tree of life
@c    is planted, time to come is prepared, abundance is prepared, a citie is
@c    builded, rest is approued, goodnes is perfited, & perfit wisdome.  53 The
@c    roote of euil is signed from you:  infirmitie, and mothe is hid from you:
@c    & corruption is fled into hel in obliuion.  54 Sorowes are past, & the
@c    treasure of immortalitie is shewed in the end.  55 Adde not therfore
@c    inquiring of the multitude of them that perish.  56 For they also
@c    receiuing libertie, haue despised the Highest, and contemned his lawe,
@c    and forsaken his wayes.  57 Yea and moreouer they haue troden downe his
@c    iust ones, 58 and haue sayd in their hart, that there is no God:  and
@c    that, knowing that they dye.  (Ps 13 & 52)  59 For as the thinges
@c    aforesayd shal receiue you:  so thirst and torment, which are prepared
@c    shal take them:  for he would not man to be destroyed.  60 But they them
@c    selues also which are created, haue defyled his name which made them:  &
@c    haue bene vnkind to him that prepared life.  61 Wherfore my iudgement now
@c    approcheth.  62 Which thinges I haue not shewed to al, but to thee, & to
@c    few like vnto thee.  And I answered, and sayd:  63 Behold now Lord thou
@c    hast shewed me a multitude of signes, which thou wilt beginne to doe in
@c    the latter times:  but thou hast not shewed me at what time.



@c    CHAP. IX.


@c    Certaine signes shal goe before the day of iudgement.  14. More shal
@c    perish then be saued.  25. Prayer with other good workes, are meanes to
@c    saluation.

@c    AND he answered me, and sayd:  Measuring measure thou the time in it
@c    selfe:  and it shal be when thou seest, after a certaine part of the
@c    signes which are spoken of before shal passe, 2 then shalt thou
@c    vnderstand, that the same is the time wherin the Highest wil beginne to
@c    visite the world that was made by him.  3 And when there shal be sene in
@c    the world mouing of places, and truble of peoples, 4 then shalt thou
@c    vnderstand, that of these spake the Highest, from the dayes that were
@c    before thee, from the beginning.  5 For as al that is made in the world
@c    hath a beginning, and also a consummation, and the consummation is
@c    manifest:  6 so also the times of the Highest haue the beginning manifest
@c    in wonders and powers, and the consummations in worke and in signes.
@c    7 And it shal be, euery one that shal be saued, and that can escape by
@c    his workes, and by fayth, in which you haue beleeued, 8 shal be leaft out
@c    of the foresayd dangers, and shal see my saluation in my land, and in my
@c    costes, because I haue sancitifed my selfe from the world.  9 And then
@c    shal they be in miserie, that now haue abused my wayes:  and they that
@c    haue reiected them in contempt, shal abide in torments.  10 For they that
@c    knew not me, hauing obtained benefits when they liued:  11 and they that
@c    loathed my law, when they yet had libertie, 12 and when as yet place of
@c    penance was open to them vnderstoode not, but despised:  they must after
@c    death in torment know it.  13 Thou therfore be not yet curious, how the
@c    impious shal be tormented:  but inquire how the iust shal be saued, and
@c    whose the world is, and for whom the world is, and when.  14 And I
@c    answered, and sayd:  15 I haue spoken hertofore, and now I say, and
@c    hereafter wil say:  that they are more which perish then that shal be
@c    saued:  (Matt 10)  16 as a floud is multiplied aboue, more then a droppe.
@c    17 And he ansvvered me, and sayd:  Like as the field so also the sedes:
@c    and as the flovvers, such also the colours:  and as the workeman, such
@c    also the worke:  and such as the husbandman, such is the husbandrie:
@c    because it was the time of the world.  18 And now when I was preparing
@c    for them, for these that now are before the world was made, wherin they
@c    should dwel:  and no man gaynsayd me.  19 For then euery man, and now the
@c    creator in this world prepared, and haruest not fayling, and law
@c    vnsearchable their manners are corrupted.  20 And I considered the world,
@c    and behold there was danger because of the cogitations that came in it.
@c    21 And I saw, and spared it very much:  and I kept vnto my selfe a grape
@c    kernel of a cluster, and a plant of a great trybe.  22 Let the multitude
@c    therfore perish, which was borne without cause, and let my kernel be
@c    kept, & my plant:  because I finished it with much labour.  23 And thou
@c    if thou adde yet seuen other dayes, but thou shalt not fast in them,
@c    24 thou shalt goe into a field of flowers, where no house is built:  &
@c    thou shalt eate only of the flowers of the field, and flesh thou shalt
@c    not tast, and wine thou shalt not drinke, but only flowers.  25 Pray to
@c    the Highest without intermission, and I wil come, and wil speake with
@c    thee.  26 And I went forth, as he sayd to me, into a field which is
@c    called Ardath, and I sate there among the flowers.  And I did eate of the
@c    herbes of the field, and the meate of them made me ful.  27 And it came
@c    to passe after seuen dayes, and I sate downe vpon the grasse, and my hart
@c    was trubled ayayne as before.  28 And my mouth was opened, and I beganne
@c    to speake before the Highest, and sayd:  29 O Lord thou shewing thy selfe
@c    to vs, wast shewed to our fathers in the desert, which is not troden, and
@c    vnfruitful, when they came out of AEgypt:  and saying thou saydst:
@c    (Ex 19 & 24 / Deut 4)  30 Thou Israel heare me, and sede of Iacob attend
@c    to my wordes.  31 For behold, I sow my lawe in you, and it shal bring
@c    forth fruite in you, and you shal be glorified in it for euer.  32 For
@c    our fathers receiuing the law obserued it not, and kept not my
@c    ordinances, and the fruite of the law did not appeare:  for it could not,
@c    because it was thine.  33 For they that receiued it, perished, not
@c    keeping that which had bene sowen in them.  (Ex 32)  34 And behold it is
@c    the custome, that when the earth hath receiued sede, or the sea a shippe,
@c    or some vessel meate or drinke:  when that shal be destroyed wherin it
@c    was sowne, or into the which it was cast:  35 that which was sowne, or
@c    cast in, or the thinges that were receiued, are destroyed withal, and the
@c    thinges receiued now tarye not with vs:  but it is not so done to vs.
@c    36 We in dede that receiued the law, sinning haue perished, and our hart
@c    that receiued it:  37 For the law hath not perished, but hath remayned in
@c    his labour.  (Ezech 48)  38 And when I spake these thinges in my hart, I
@c    looked backe with myne eyes, and saw a woman on the right side, and
@c    behold she mourned, and wept with a lowd voice, and was sorrowful in
@c    mynde exceedingly, and her garments rent, and ashes vpon her heade.
@c    39 And I left the cogitations, wherin I was thinking, and I turned to her
@c    and sayd to her:  40 Why weepest thou?  and why art thou sorie in mynde.
@c    And she sayd to me:  41 Suffer me my Lord, that I may lament myselfe, &
@c    adde sorrow:  because I am of a very pensiue mynde, and am humbled
@c    exceedingly.  42 And I sayd to her, What ayleth thee:  tel me.  And she
@c    sayd to me:  43 I thy seruant haue beene barren, and haue not borne
@c    childe, hauing a husband thirty yeares.  44 For I euery howre, and euerie
@c    day, and these thirty yeares do beseche the Highest night and day.
@c    45 And it came to passe, after thirtie yeares God heard me thy handmayd,
@c    and saw my humilitie, and attended to my tribulation, and gaue me a
@c    sonne:  and I was very ioyful vpon him, and my husband, and al my
@c    citizens, and we did glorifie the Strong exceedingly.  46 And I nourished
@c    him with much labour.  47 And it came to passe when he was growen, and
@c    came to take a wife, I made a feast day.



@c    CHAP. X.


@c    The state of Ierusalem is prefigured by a woman mourning, 25. and
@c    afterwardes reioycing.

@c    AND it came to passe, when my sonne was entred into his inner chamber, he
@c    fel downe, and dyed:  2 and we al ouerthrewe the lights, and al my
@c    citizens rose vp to comfort me, and I was quiet vntil the other day at
@c    night.  3 And it came to passe, when al were quiet to comfort me, that I
@c    might be quiet:  and I arose in the night, and fled:  and came as thou
@c    seest into this field.  4 And I meane nowe not to returne into the citie,
@c    but to stay here:  and neither eate, nor drinke, but without intermission
@c    to mourne, and to fast vntil I dye.  5 And I left the talke wherin I was,
@c    and with anger answered her, & sayd:  6 Thou foole aboue al wemen, seest
@c    thou not our mourning, & what thinges chance to vs?  7 Because Sion our
@c    mother is sorroweful with al sorrowe, and humbled, and mourneth most
@c    bitterly.  8 And now wheras we al mourne, and are sadde:  wheras we are
@c    sorrowful, and art thou sorrowful for one sonne?  9 For aske the earth,
@c    and it wil tel thee:  that it is she, that ought to lament the fal of so
@c    manie thinges that spring vpon it.  10 And of her were al borne from the
@c    beginning, and others shal come:  and behold, almost al walke into
@c    perdition, and the multitude of them commeth to destruction.  11 And who
@c    then ought to mourne more, but she that hath lost so great a multitude,
@c    rather then thou which art sorie for one?  12 And if thou say vnto me,
@c    that my mourning is not lyke the earthes:  because I haue lost the fruite
@c    of my wombe, which I bare with sorrowes, and brought forth with paynes:
@c    13 but the earth according to the maner of the earth, and the present
@c    multitude in it hath departed as it came:  and I saye to thee, 14 as thou
@c    hast brought forth with payne, so the earth also geueth her fruite for
@c    man from the beginning to him that made her.  15 Now therfore kepe in
@c    with thy sorrowe, and beare stoutly the chances that haue befallen thee.
@c    16 For if thou iustifie the end of God, thou shalt in time both receiue
@c    his counsel, and also in such thinges thou shalt be praysed.  17 Goe in
@c    therfore into the citie to thy husband.  And she sayd to me:  18 I wil
@c    not doe it, neither wil I enter into the citie, but here wil I dye.
@c    19 And I added yet to speake to her, & sayd:  20 Doe not this word, but
@c    consent to him that counseleth thee.  For how manie are the chances of
@c    Sion?  Take comfort for the sorrowe of Ierusalem.  21 For thou seest that
@c    our sanctification is made desert, and our altar is throwen downe, and
@c    our temple is destroyed, 22 and our psalter is humbled, and hymne is
@c    silent, and our exultation is dissolued, and the light of our
@c    candelsticke is extinguished, and the arke of our testament is taken for
@c    spoyle, & our holie thinges are contaminated, and the name that is
@c    inuocated vpon vs, is almost prophaned:  and our children haue suffred
@c    contumelie, and our Priestes are burnt, & our Leuites are gone into
@c    captiuitie, & our virgins are defloured, and our wiues haue suffered
@c    rape, and our iust men are violently taken, and our litle ones are lost,
@c    and our yong men are in bondage, and our valiants are made impotent:
@c    23 and that which is greatest of al, the seale of Sion, because she is
@c    vnsealed of her glorie:  For she is also deliuered into the handes of
@c    them that hate vs.  24 Thou therfore shake of thy great heauines, and lay
@c    away from thee the multitude of sorrowes, that the Strong may be
@c    propicious to thee agayne, and the Highest wil geue thee rest, rest from
@c    thy labours.  25 And it came to passe, when I spake to her, her face did
@c    shine suddenly, and her shape, and her visage was made glistering, so
@c    that I was afrayde excedingly at her, & thought what this thing should
@c    be.  26 And Behold, suddenly she put forth a great sound of a voyce ful
@c    of feare, that the earth was moued at the womans sound.  And I saw:
@c    27 and behold, the woman did no more appeare vnto me, but a citie was
@c    built, & a place was shewed of great fundations:  and I was afrayd, &
@c    crying with a loude voyce I sayd:  28 Where is Vriel the Angel, that from
@c    the beginning came to me?  for he made me come in multitude in excesse of
@c    this minde, and my end is made into corruption, & my prayer into reproch.
@c    29 And when I was speaking these thinges, behold he came to me, and sawe
@c    me.  30 And behold I was layd as dead, & my vnderstanding was alienated,
@c    and he held my right hand, and strengthned me, & set me vpon my feete, &
@c    sayd to me:  31 What ayleth thee?  and why is thy vnderstanding, and the
@c    sense of thy hart trubled, & why art thou trubled?  And I sayd:
@c    32 Because thou hast forsaken me, and I in dede haue done according to
@c    thy wordes, & went out into the field:  & behold, I haue seene, & doe see
@c    that which I cannot vtter.  And he sayd to me:  33 Stand like a man, & I
@c    wil moue thee.  And I sayd:  34 Speake thou my Lord in me, forsake me
@c    not, that I die not in vaine:  35 because I haue seene thinges that I
@c    knew not, & I doe heare thinges that I know not.  36 Or is my sense
@c    deceiued, & doth my soule dreame?  37 Now therfore I besech thee, that
@c    thou shew vnto thy seruant concerning this trance.  And he answered me, &
@c    sayd:  38 Heare me, and I wil teach thee, and wil tel thee of what
@c    thinges thou art afrayd:  because the Highest hath reuealed vnto thee
@c    manie mysteries.  39 He hath seene thy right way, that without
@c    intermission thou was forrowful for thy people, and didst mourne
@c    exceedingly for Sion.  40 This therfore is the vnderstanding of the
@c    vision which appeared to thee a litle before.  41 The woman whom thou
@c    sawest mourning, thou beganst to comfort her.  42 And now thou seest not
@c    the forme of the woman, but there appeared to thee a citie to be built.
@c    43 And because she tolde thee of the fal of her sonne, this is the
@c    interpretation.  44 This woman which thou sawest, she is Sion, and wheras
@c    she told thee of her, whom now also thou shalt see, as a citie builded.
@c    45 And whereas she told thee, that she was barren thirtie yeares:  for
@c    the which there were thirtie yeares, when there was not yet oblation
@c    offered in it.  46 And it came to passe after thirtie yeares, Salomon
@c    built the citie, and offered oblations:  then it was, when the barren
@c    bare a childe.  47 And that which she sayd vnto thee, that she nourished
@c    him with labour, this was the habitation in Ierusalem.  48 And wheras she
@c    sayd to thee, that my sonne comming into the bryde chamber dyed, and that
@c    a fal chanced vnto him, this was the ruine of Ierusalem that is made.
@c    49 And behold, thou hast seene the similitude of her:  and because she
@c    lamented her sonne, thou beganst to comfort her:  and of these thinges
@c    that haue chanced, these were to be opened to thee.  50 And now the
@c    Highest seeth that thou wast sorie from the hart:  and because with thy
@c    whole hart thou sufferest for her, he hath shewed thee the clearnes of
@c    her glorie, and the fayrenes of her beautie.  51 For therfore did he say
@c    to thee, that thou shouldest tarie in a field where house is not built.
@c    52 For I knew that the Highest beganne to shew thee these thinges:
@c    53 therfore I sayd vnto thee, that thou shouldest goe into a field, where
@c    is no fundation of building.  54 For the worke of mans building could not
@c    be borne in the place, where the citie of the Highest began to be shewed.
@c    55 Thou therfore feare not, neither let thy hart dread:  but goe in, and
@c    see the beautie, and greatnes of the building, as much as the sight of
@c    thyne eyes is capable to see:  56 & afterward thou shalt heare as much,
@c    as the hearing of thyne eares is capable to heare.  57 For thou art
@c    blessed aboue manie, and art called with the Highest as few.  58 And to
@c    morrow night thou shalt tarie here:  59 and the Highest wil shew thee
@c    those visions of the thinges on high, which the Highest wil doe to them
@c    that inhabite vpon the earth in the later dayes.  60 And I slept that
@c    night, and the other next, as he had sayd to me.



@c    CHAP. XI.


@c    An eagle appeareth to Esdras coming forth of the sea, with three heades,
@c    and twelue winges:  sometimes one reigning in the world, sometimes an
@c    other, but euerie one vanisheth away.  36. A lion also appeareth coming
@c    forth of the wood, to suppresse the eagle.

@c    AND I sawe a dreame, & behold an eagle came vp out of the sea:  which had
@c    twelue winges of fethers, and three heades.  2 And I saw, and behold she
@c    spred her winges into al the earth, and al the windes of heauen blew vpon
@c    her, and were gathered together.  3 And I saw, and of her fethers sprang
@c    contrarie feathers, and they became litle winges, and smale.  4 For her
@c    heades were at rest, and the midle head was greater then the other
@c    heades, but she rested with them.  5 And I saw, and behold the eagle flew
@c    with her winges, and reigned ouer the earth, and ouer them that dwel in
@c    it.  6 And I saw, that al thinges vnder heauen were subiect to her, and
@c    no man gaynesayd her, no not one of the creature that is vpon the earth.
@c    7 And I saw, and behold the eagle rose vp vpon her talons, and made a
@c    voice with her winges, saying:  8 Watch not al together, sleepe euerie
@c    one in his place, & watch according to time.  9 But let the heades be
@c    preserued to the last.  10 And I saw, and behold the voice came not out
@c    of her heades, but from the middes of her bodie.  11 And I numbered her
@c    contrarie winges, and behold they were eight.  12 And I saw, and behold
@c    on the right side rose one wing, and reighned ouer al the earth.  13 And
@c    it came to passe, when it reigned, an end came to it, and the place
@c    therof appeared not:  and the next rose vp, & reigned, that held much
@c    time.  14 And it came to passe, when it reigned, & the end of it also
@c    came, that it appeared not as the former.  15 And behold, a voice was
@c    sent forth to it, saying:  16 Heare thou that hast held the earth of long
@c    time.  Thus I tel thee before thou beginne not to appeare.  17 None after
@c    thee shal hold thy time, no nor the halfe therof.  18 And the third
@c    lifted vp it selfe, and held the principalitie as also the former:  and
@c    that also appeared not.  19 And so it chanced to al the other by one & by
@c    one to haue the principalitie, & agayne to appeare nowhere.  20 And I
@c    saw, and behold in time the rest of the winges were sent vp on the right
@c    side, that they also might hold the principalitie:  and of them there
@c    were that held it, but yet forthwith they appeared not.  21 For some also
@c    of them stoode vp, but they held not the principalitie.  22 And I saw
@c    after these thinges, and behold the twelue winges, and two litle winges
@c    appeared not:  23 and nothing remayned in the bodie of the eagle but two
@c    heades resting, and six litle winges.  24 And I saw, and behold from the
@c    six litle winges two were diuided, and they remayned vnder the head, that
@c    is on the right side.  For foure taried in their place.  25 And I saw,
@c    and behold the vnderwinges thought to set vp them selues, and to hold the
@c    principalities.  26 And I saw, and behold one was set vp, but forthwith
@c    it appeared not.  27 And they that were second did sooner vanish away
@c    then the former.  28 And I saw, and behold the two that remayned, thought
@c    with them selues that they also would reigne:  29 and when they were
@c    thincking thereon, behold one of the resting heades, which was the midde
@c    one awaked, for this was greater then the other two heades.  30 And I saw
@c    that the two heades were complete with themselues.  31 And behold the
@c    head with them that were with him turned, and did eate the two
@c    vnderwinges that thought to reigne.  32 And this head terrified al the
@c    earth, & ruled in it ouer them that inhabite the earth with much labour,
@c    and he that held the dominion of the whole world aboue al the winges that
@c    were.  33 And I saw after these thinges, and behold the midle head
@c    sodenly appeared not, as did the winges.  34 And there remained two
@c    heads, which reigned also themselues ouer the earth, and ouer them that
@c    dwelt therein.  35 And I saw, and behold the head on the right side
@c    deuoured that which was on the left.  36 And I heard a voice saying to
@c    me, Looke against thee, and consider what thou seest.  37 And I saw, &
@c    behold as a lion raysed out of the wood roaring:  and I saw that he sent
@c    out a mans voyce to the eagle.  And he spake saying.  38 Heare thou, and
@c    I wil speake to thee, and the Highest wil say to thee:  39 Is it not thou
@c    that hast ouercome of the foure beastes, which I made to reigne in my
@c    world, and that by them the end of their times might come?  40 And the
@c    fourth coming ouercame al the beastes that were past, and by might held
@c    the world with much feare, and al the world with most wicked laboure, and
@c    he inhabitied the whole earth so long time with deceipte.  41 And thou
@c    hast iudged the earth not with truth.  42 For thou hast afflicted the
@c    meeke, and hast trubled them that were quiet, and hast loued lyers, &
@c    hast destroyed their habitations that did fructifie, and hast ouerthrowen
@c    their walles that did not hurt thee.  43 And thy contumelie is ascended
@c    euen to the Highest, and thy pride to the Strong.  44 And the Highest
@c    hath looked vpon the proud times:  and behold they are ended, and the
@c    abominations therof are accomplished.  45 Therfore thou eagle appeare no
@c    more, and thy horrible winges, & thy litle winges most wicked, and thy
@c    heades malignant, and thy talons most wicked, and al thy bodie vayne,
@c    46 that al the earth may be refreshed, and may returne deliuered from thy
@c    violence, and may hope for his iudgement, and mercie that made it.



@c    CHAP. XII.


@c    The eagle vanisheth away, 5. Esdras prayeth, 10. and the former visions
@c    are declared to him.

@c    AND it came to passe, whiles the lyon spake these wordes to the eagle:  I
@c    saw, 2 and behold the head that had ouercome, and those foure winges
@c    appeared not which passed to him, and were set vp to reigne:  and their
@c    reigne was smal, and ful of tumult.  3 And I saw, and behold they
@c    appeared not, and al the bodie of the eagle was burnt, & the earth was
@c    afrayd excedingly, and I by the tumult and traunce of minde, and for
@c    great feare awaked, and sayd to my spirit:  4 Behold thou hast geuen me
@c    this, in that, that thou searchest the wayes of the Highest.  5 Behold
@c    yet I am wearie in minde, and in my spirit I am very feeble, and there is
@c    not so much as a litle strength in me for the great feare, that I was
@c    afrayd of this night.  6 Now therfore I wil pray the Highest, that he
@c    strengthen me euen to the end.  7 And I sayd:  Lord Dominatour, if I haue
@c    found grace before thine eyes, and if I am iustified before thee aboue
@c    manie, and if in deede my prayer be ascended before thy face,
@c    8 strengthen me, and shew vnto me thy seruant the interpretation, and
@c    distinction of this horrible vision, that thou mayst comfort my soule
@c    most fully.  9 For thou hast counted me worthie to shew vnto me the later
@c    times.  And he sayd to me:  10 This is the interpretation of this vision.
@c    11 The eagle which thou sawest coming vp from the sea, this is the
@c    kingdom which was sene in a vision to Daniel thy brother.  (Dan 7:7)
@c    12 But it was not interpreted to him, therfore I do now interprete it to
@c    thee.  13 Behold the dayes come, and there shal rise a kingdon vpon the
@c    earth, and the feare shal be more terrible then of al the kingdomes that
@c    were before it.  14 And there shal twelue kinges reigne in it, one after
@c    an other.  15 For the second shal beginne to reigne, and he shal continew
@c    more time then the rest of the twelue.  16 This is the interpretation of
@c    the twelue winges which thou sawest.  17 And the voice that spake which
@c    thou heardst, not coming forth of her heads, but from the middes of her
@c    bodie, 18 this is the interpretation, that after the time of that kingdom
@c    shal rise no smal contentions, and it shal be in danger to fal:  and it
@c    shal not fal then, but shal be constituted againe according to the
@c    beginning therof.  19 And wheras thou sawest eight vnderwings cleauing to
@c    the wings therof, 20 this is the interpretation, eight kinges shal arise
@c    in it, whose times shal be light, and yeares swift, and two of them shal
@c    perish.  21 But when the middest time approcheth, foure shal be kept til
@c    a time, when the time therof shal beginne to approch to be ended, yet two
@c    shal be kept to the end.  22 And wheras thou sawest three heads resting,
@c    23 this is the interpretation:  in her last dayes the Highest wil rayse
@c    vp three kingdoms, and wil cal backe manie thinges into them, and they
@c    shal rule ouer the earth, 24 and them that dwel in it, with much labour 
@c    aboue al them that vvere before them.  For this cause they are called the
@c    heads of the eagle.  25 For these shal be they that shal recapitulate her
@c    impieties, and that shal accomplish her last thinges.  26 And wheras thou
@c    sawest a greater head not appearing, this is the interpretation therof:
@c    that one of them shal dye vpon his bed, and yet with torments.  27 For
@c    the two that shal remayne, the sword shal eate them.  28 For the sword of
@c    one shal deuoure him that is with him:  but yet this also at the last
@c    shal fal by the sword.  29 And wheras thou sawest two vnderwings passing
@c    ouer the head that is on the right side, 30 this is the interpretation:
@c    these are they whom the Highest hath kept to their end, this is a smal
@c    kingdom, and ful of truble.  31 As thou sawest the lyon also, whom thou
@c    sawest awaking out of the wood, and roaring, and speaking to the eagle,
@c    and rebuking her, and her iniustices by al his wordes as thou hast heard:
@c    32 this is the wynde which the Highest hath kept vnto the end for them,
@c    and their impieties:  and he shal rebuke them, and shal cast in their
@c    spoyles before them.  33 For he shal sette them in iudgment aliue:  and
@c    it shal be, when he hath reproued them, then shal he chastise them.
@c    34 For the rest of my people he shal deliuer with miserie, them that are
@c    saued vpon my borders, and he shal make them ioyful til the end shal
@c    come, the day of iudgment, wherof I haue spoken to thee from the
@c    beginning.  35 This is the dreame which thou sawest, and these be the
@c    interpretations.  36 Thou therfore only hast bene worthie to know this
@c    secrete of the Highest.  37 Write therfore in a booke al these thinges
@c    which thou hast sene, and put them in a hidden place:  38 and thou shalt
@c    teach them the wise men of thy people, whose harts thou knowest able to
@c    take, and to kepe these secretes.  39 But doe thou stay here yet other
@c    seuen dayes, that there may be shewed thee whatsoeuer shal seme good to
@c    the Highest to shew thee.  40 And he departed from me.  And it came to
@c    passe, when al the people had heard that the seuen dayes were past, and I
@c    had not returned into the citie, and al gathered them selues together
@c    from the least vnto the greatest:  & came to me, & spake to me saying:
@c    41 What haue we sinned to thee, or what haue we done vniustly against
@c    thee, that leauing vs thou hast sitten in this place?  42 For thou alone
@c    art remayning to vs of al peoples, as a cluster of grapes of the
@c    vineyard, and as a candle in a darke place, and as an hauen and shippe
@c    saued from the tempest.  43 Or are not the euiles that chance, sufficient
@c    for vs?  44 If then thou shalt forsake vs, how much better had it bene to
@c    vs, if we also had bene burnt with the burning of Sion?  45 For we are
@c    not better then they that dyed there.  And they wept with a lowd voice.
@c    And I answered them, and sayd:  46 Be of good chere Israel, and be not
@c    sorowful thou house of Iacob.  47 For there is remebrance of you before
@c    the Highest, and the Strong hath not forgotten you in tentation.  48 For
@c    I haue not forsaken you, neither did I depart form you:  but I came into
@c    this place, to pray for the desolation of Sion, and to seeke mercie for
@c    the low estate of your sanctification.  49 And now goe euery one of you
@c    into his house, and I wil come to you after these dayes.  50 And the
@c    people departed, as I sayd to them, into the citie:  51 but I sate in the
@c    fielde seuen dayes, as he commanded me:  and I did eate of the flowers of
@c    the field only, of the herbes was my meate made in those dayes.



@c    CHAP. XIII.


@c    A vision of a winde (as it first semed, but) in dede, v. 3. of a man:
@c    5. strong against the enimies:  21. with the interpretation.

@c    AND it came to passe after seuen dayse, and I dreamed a dreame in the
@c    night.  2 And behold there rose a winde from the sea, that trubled al the
@c    waues therof.  3 And I saw, and behold that man grew strong with
@c    thousandes of heauen:  and when he turned his countenance to consider, al
@c    thinges trembled that were sene vnder him:  4 and whersoeuer voyce
@c    proceded out of his mouth, al that heard his voices begane to burne, as
@c    the earth is quiet when it feeleth the fire.  5 And I saw after these,
@c    and behold a multitude of men was gathered together, of whom there was no
@c    number, from the foure windes of heauen, to fight against the man that
@c    was come vp out of the sea.  6 And I saw, and behold he had grauen to
@c    himself a great mountaine, & he flew vpon it.  7 And I sought to see the
@c    countrie, or the place whence the mountaine was grauen, & I could not.
@c    8 And after these thinges I saw, and behold al that were gathered to him,
@c    to ouerthrowe him, feared exceedingly, yet they were bold to fieght.
@c    9 And behold as he sawe the violence of the multitude that came, he
@c    lifted not vp his hand, nor held sword, nor anie warlyke instrument but
@c    only as I saw, 10 that he sent forth out of his mouth as it were a blaste
@c    of fire, and from his lippes a spirit of flame, & from his tongue he
@c    sentforth sparkles & tempests, and al thinges were mingled together with
@c    this blast of fire, & spirit of flame, & multitude of tempests.  11 And
@c    it fel with violence vpon the multitude, that was prepared to fight, and
@c    burned them al, that suddenly there was nothing sene of an innumerable
@c    multitude, but only dust, & the sauour of smoke:  and I saw, and was
@c    afrayd.  12 And after these thinges I saw the man himself descending from
@c    the mountaine, and calling to him an other peaceable multitude, 13 and
@c    there came to him the countenance of manie men some reioycing, and some
@c    sorrowing:  and some bond, some bringing of them them that were offered.
@c    And I was sicke for much feare, and awaked, and sayd.  14 Thou from the
@c    beginning hast shewed thy seruant these meruelous thinges, and hast
@c    counted me worthie that thou wouldest receiue my petition.  15 And now
@c    shew me yet the interpretation of this dreame.  16 For as I thinke in my
@c    iudgement, woe to them that were leaft in those dayes:  & much more woe
@c    to them that were not leaft.  17 For they that were not leaft, were
@c    sorrowful.  18 I vnderstand now what thinges are layde vp in the later
@c    dayes, and they shal happen to them, yea and to them that are leaft.
@c    19 For therefore they came into great dangers, and manie necessities, as
@c    these dreames do shew.  20 But yet it is easier, aduenturing to come into
@c    it, then to passe, as a cloud from the world, and vow to see the thinges
@c    that happen in the later time.  And he answered me, and sayd:  21 Both
@c    the interpretation of the vision I wil tel thee:  and also concerning the
@c    thinges that thou hast spoken I wil open to thee.  22 Wheras thou
@c    speakest of them that were leaft, this is the interpretation.  23 He that
@c    taketh away danger at that time, he hath garded himself.  They that haue
@c    fallen into danger, these are they that haue workes, and fayth in the
@c    Strongest.  24 Know therefore that they are more blessed which are leaft,
@c    then they that are dead.  25 These are the interpretations of the vision,
@c    wheras thou sawest a man coming from the hart of the sea, 26 the same is
@c    he whom the Highest preserueth much time, which by himself shal deliuer
@c    his creature:  and he shal dispose them that are leaft.  27 And wheras
@c    thou sawest proceede out of his mouth, as it were winde, and fire, and
@c    tempest:  28 and wheras he held no sworde, nor warlike instrument:  for
@c    his violence destroyed the multitude that came to ouerthrow him:  this is
@c    the interpretation.  29 Behold the dayes come, when the Highest shal
@c    begin to deliuer them, that are vpon the earth:  30 and he shal come in
@c    excesse of minde vpon them that inhabit the earth.  31 And one shal
@c    thinke to ouerthrow an other:  one citie an other citie, one place an
@c    other place, and nation against nation, and kingdom against kingdom.
@c    (Matt 24 / Luke 21)  32 And it shal be, when these thinges shal come to
@c    passe, and the signes shal happen, which I shewed thee before:  and then
@c    shal my sonne be reueled, whom thou sawest, as a man coming vp.  33 And
@c    it shal be when al nations shal heare his voice:  and euery one in his
@c    countrie shal leaue their warre, that they haue toward each other:
@c    34 and an innumerable multitude shal be gathered in one, as willing to
@c    come to ouerthrow him.  35 But he shal stand vpon the top of mount Sion.
@c    36 And Sion shal come, and it shal be shewed to al prepared and builded,
@c    as thou sawest the mountaine to be grauen without handes.  37 And the
@c    same my sonne shal reproue the thinges that the gentils haue inuented,
@c    these their impieties which came nere to the tempest, because of their
@c    euil cogitaitons, and torments wherewith they shal begin to be tormented.
@c    38 Which were likened to the flame, and he shal destroy them without
@c    labour by the law that was likened to the fyre.  39 And wheras thou
@c    sawest him gathering vnto him an other peaceable multitude.  40 These are
@c    the ten tribes, which were made captiue out of their land in the dayes of
@c    Osee the King, whom Salmanasar the King of the Assyrians led captiue:
@c    and he transported them beyond the riuer, and they were transported into
@c    an other land.  (4 Kings 17)  41 But they gaue themselues this counsel,
@c    to forsake the multitude of nations, and to goe forth into a farther
@c    countrie, where mankind neuer inhabited.  42 Or there to obserue their
@c    ordinances, which they had not kept in their countrie.  43 And they
@c    entred in by the narrow entrances of the riuer Euphrates.  44 For the
@c    Highest then wrought them signes, and stayed the vaines of the riuer til
@c    they passed.  (Ex 14 / Jos 3)  45 For by that countie was a great way to
@c    goe, of one yeare and a half:  for the countrie is called Arsareth.
@c    46 Then did they inhabite there til in the later time:  and now againe
@c    when they beginne to come, 47 againe the Highest shal stay the vaines of
@c    the riuer, that they may passe:  for these thou sawest a multitiude with
@c    peace.  48 But they also that were leaft of the people, these are they
@c    that be within my border.  49 In shal come to passe therefore, when he
@c    shal begine to destroy the multitude of these nations, that are gathered,
@c    he shal protect them that haue ouercome the people:  50 and then shal he
@c    shew them very manie wonders.  51 And I sayd:  Lord dominatour, shew me
@c    this, why I saw a man comming vp from the hart of the sea, and he sayd to
@c    me:  52 As thou canst not either search these thinges, or know what
@c    thinges are in the depth of the sea:  so can not any man vpon the earth
@c    see my sonne, or them that are with him, but in the time of a day.
@c    53 This is the interpretation of the dreame which thou sawest, and for
@c    the which thou only art here illuminated.  54 For thou hast leaft thyne
@c    owne law, and hast bene occupied about my law, and hast sought it.
@c    55 For thou hast disposed thy lyfe in wisdom, and thyne vnderstanding
@c    thou hast called mother:  56 and for this I haue shewed thee riches with
@c    the Highest.  For it shal be after other three dayes, I wil speake other
@c    thinges to thee, and I wil expound to thee weightie and meruelous
@c    thinges.  57 And I went forth, and passed into the fielde, much
@c    glorifying & praising the Highest for the meruelous thinges that he did
@c    by time.  58 And because he gouerneth it, and the thinges that are
@c    brought in times, & I sate there three dayes.



@c    CHAP. XIIII.


@c    God appeareth in a bush, 6. reuealing some thinges to be published, and
@c    some thinges to be hid.  10. As the world waxeth old, al thinges become
@c    worse.  27. The people of Israel are vngratful.  32. Al shal be iudged in
@c    the Resurrection according to their deedes.

@c    AND it came to passe the third day, and I sate vnder an oke.  2 And
@c    behold a voice came forth against me out of a bush, and sayd:  Esdras,
@c    Esdras:  and I sayd:  Loe here I am Lord.  And I arose vpon my feete.
@c    And he sayd to me:  3 Reueling I was reueled vpon the bush, and spake to
@c    Moyses, when the people serued in AEgypt, (Ex 3) 4 and I sent him, and
@c    brought my people out of AEgypt, and brought him vpon mount Sina, & held
@c    him with me manie dayes.  5 And I told him manie meruelous thinges, &
@c    shewed him the secrets of times, and the end:  and I commanded him,
@c    saying:  6 These wordes thou shalt publish abroade, and these thou shalt
@c    hyde.  7 And now to thee I say:  8 The signes which I haue shewed, and
@c    the dreames which thou hast sene, and the interpretations which thou hast
@c    sene, lay them vp in thy hart.  9 For thou shalt be receiued of al, thou
@c    shalt be conuerted the residue with thy counsel, and with the like to
@c    thee, til the times be finished:  10 Because the world hath lost his
@c    youth, and the times draw nere to waxe old.  11 For the world is diuided
@c    by twelue partes, & the tenth part, & half of the tenth part are passed:
@c    12 and there remaineth hereafter the half of the tenth part.  13 Now
@c    therefore dispose thy house, and correct thy people, & comfort the humble
@c    of them, & forsake now corruption, 14 and put from thee mortal
@c    cogitations, and cast from thee humane burdens, and doe from thee now
@c    infirme nature, & lay at one side cogitations most trublesome to thee, &
@c    make speedie transmigration from these times, 15 for the euiles which
@c    thou hast sene to haue chanced now, worse then these wil they doe againe:
@c    (Matt 24 / 1 John 2)  16 for looke how much the world shal become weake
@c    by age, so much shal euiles be multiplied vpon the inhabitants.  17 For
@c    truth hath remoued it self farther of, and lying hath approched, for now
@c    the vision which thou sawest, hasteneth to come.  18 And I answered, and
@c    sayd before thee o Lord:  19 For behold I wil goe, as thou hast commanded
@c    me, & wil rebuke the people that now is.  But them that shal yet be born,
@c    who shal admonish?  20 The world therfore is set in darknes, and they
@c    that dwel in it without light.  21 Because thy law is burnt, therefore no
@c    man knowth the workes that haue bene done by thee, or that shal begin.
@c    22 For if I haue found grace with thee, send the Holie Ghost to me, & I
@c    wil write al that hath bene done in the world from the beginning, the
@c    thinges that were written in thy law, that men may finde the pathe:  and
@c    they that wil liue in the later times, may liue.  23 And he answered me,
@c    and sayd:  Goe gather together the people, and thou shalt say to them,
@c    that they seeke thee not for fourtie dayes.  24 And doe thou prepare thee
@c    manie tables of boxe, & take with thee Sarea, Dabria, Salemia, Echanus,
@c    and Asiel, these fiue which are readie to write sweeftly.  25 And come
@c    hither, & I wil light in thy hart a candle of vnderstanding, which shal
@c    not be put out til the things be finished, which thou shalt begine to
@c    write.  26 And then some thinges thou shalt open to the perfect, some
@c    thou shalt deliuer secretly to the wyse.  For to morrow this houre thou
@c    shalt begine to write.  27 And I went as he commanded me, & gathered
@c    together al the people, and sayd:  28 Heare Israel these wordes:  29 Our
@c    fathers were pilgrimes from the beginning in AEgypt, and were deliuered
@c    from thence.  (Gen 47)  30 And they receiued the law of life, which they
@c    kept not, which you also after them haue transgressed:  (Deut 4 / Acts 7)
@c    31 and the land was geuen you by lotte, and the land of Sion, and your
@c    fathers, and you haue done iniquitie, and haue not kept the wayes which
@c    the Highest commanded you.  32 And whereas he is a iust iudge, he hath
@c    taken from you in time that which he had geuen.  33 And now you are here,
@c    and your brethren are among you.  34 If then you wil rule ouer your
@c    sense, & instruct your hart, you shal be preserued aliue, and after death
@c    shal obtaine mercie.  35 For the iudgement shal come after death, when we
@c    shal returne to lyfe againe:  and then the names of the iust shal
@c    appeare, and the dedes of the impious shal be shewed.  36 Let no man
@c    therfore come to me now, nor aske for me vntil fourtie dayes.  37 And I
@c    tooke the fiue men, as he commandede me, and we went forth into the
@c    field, and taried there.  38 And I was come to the morrow, & behold as
@c    voice called me, saying:  Esdras open thy mouth, and drinke that which I
@c    wil geue thee to drinke.  (Ezech 3)  39 And I opened my mouth, & behold a
@c    ful cuppe was brought me, this was ful as it were with water:  but the
@c    colour therof like as fire.  40 And I tooke it, and dranke; and when I
@c    had drunken of it, my hart was tormented with vnderstanding, and wisdome
@c    grewe into my brest.  For my spirit was kept by memorie.  41 And my mouth
@c    was opened, and was shut no more.  42 The Highest gaue vnderstanding vnto
@c    the fiue men, and they wrote excesses of the night which were spoken,
@c    which they knewe not.  43 And at night they did eate breade, but I spake
@c    by day, & by night held not my peace.  44 And there were written in the
@c    fourtie dayes two hundred foure bookes.  45 And it came to passe when
@c    they had ended the fourtie daies, the Highest spake, saying:  46 The
@c    former thinges which thou hast written, set abrode, and let the worthie
@c    and vnworthiereade:  but the last seuentie bookes thou shalt keepe, that
@c    thou mayest deliuer them to the wyse of thy people.  47 For in these is
@c    the vaine of vnderstanding, and the fountaine of wisdome, and the streame
@c    of knowledge.  and I did soe.



@c    CHAP. XV.


@c    Esdras is bid to denounce, that assuredly manie euiles wil come to the
@c    world.  9. God wil protect his people, the wicked shal be punished, and
@c    lament their final miseries, God reuenging for the good.

@c    BEHOLD speake into the eares of my people the wordes of prophecie, which
@c    I shal put into thy mouth, sayth our Lord:  2 and see that they be
@c    written in paper, because they be faithful and true.  3 Be not afrayd of
@c    the cogitations against thee, neither let the incredulities truble thee
@c    of them that speake.  4 Because euerie incredulous person shal dye in his
@c    incredulitie.  5 Behold I bring in, sayth our Lord, vpon the whole earth
@c    euils, sword, and famine, and death, and destruction.  6 Because
@c    iniquitie hath fully polluted ouer al the earth, and their hurtful workes
@c    are accomplished.  7 Therefore sayth our Lord:  8 I wil not now kepe
@c    silence of their impieties which they doe irreligiously, neither wil I
@c    beare with those thinges, which they practise vniustly.  Behold the
@c    innocent & iust bloud crieth to me, & the soules of the iust crie
@c    continually.  9 Reuenging I wil reuenge them, sayth our Lord, and I wil
@c    take al innocent bloud out of them vnto me.  (Apoc 6:10 & 19:2)
@c    10 Behold my people is led to slaughter as a flocke, I wil no more suffer
@c    it to dwel in the land of AEgypt.  11 But I wil bring them forth in a
@c    mightie hand and valiant arme, and wil strike with plague as before, and
@c    wil corrupt al the land thereof.  12 AEgypt shal mourne, and fundations
@c    thereof beaten with plague, and with the chastisement which God wil bring
@c    vpon it.  13 The husbandmen that til the ground shal mourne, because
@c    their seedes shal perish by blasting, and haile, and by a terible starre.
@c    14 Woe to the world and them that dwel therein.  15 Because the sword is
@c    at hand and the destruction of them, and nation shal rise vp against
@c    nation to fight, & sword in their handes.  (Matt 24 / Luke 21)  16 For
@c    there shal be instabilitie to men, & growing one against an other they
@c    shal not care for their king, & the princes of the way of their doinges,
@c    in their might.  17 For a man shal desire to go into the citie & can not.
@c    18 Because of their prides the cities shal be trubled, the houses raised,
@c    the men shal feare.  19 Man shal not pitie his neighbour, to make their
@c    houses nothing worth in the sword, to spoyle their goodes for famine of
@c    bread, & much tribulation.  20 Behold, I cal together sayth God, al the
@c    kinges of the earth to feare me, that are from the Orient, & from the
@c    South, from the East, & from Libanus, to be turned vpon themselues, and
@c    to render the thinges that they haue geuen them.  21 As they doe vntil
@c    this day to myne elect, so wil I doe, and render in their bosome.  Thus
@c    sayth our Lord God:  22 My right hand shal not spare sinners, neither
@c    shal the sword cease vpon them that shede innocent bloud vpon the earth.
@c    23 Fire came forth from his wrath, and hath deuoured the fundations of
@c    the earth, and sinners as it were straw set on fire.  24 Woe to them that
@c    sinne, and obserue not my comandmentes, sayth our Lord.  25 I wil not
@c    spare them:  depart o children from the powre.  Defile not my
@c    sanctification:  26 because the Lord knoweth al that sinne against him;
@c    therefore hath he deliuered them into death and into slaughter.  27 For
@c    now are euils come vpon the world, and you shal tarrie in them.  For God
@c    wil not deliuer you, because you haue sinned against him.  28 Behold an
@c    horrible vision, and the face of it from the east.  29 And the nations of
@c    dragons of Arabians shal come forth in manie chariots, & as a winde the
@c    number of them is caried vpon the earth, so that now al doe feare and
@c    tremble, that shal heare them.  30 the Carmonians madde for anger, and
@c    they shal goe forth as wild boares out of the wood, & they shal come with
@c    great power, and shal stand in fight with them, & they shal waste the
@c    portion of the land of the Assirians.  31 And after these thinges the
@c    dragons shal preuaile mindful of their natiuitie, and conspiring shal
@c    turne themselues in great force to pursue them.  32 These shal be trubled
@c    and hold their peace at their force, and shal turne their fete into
@c    flight.  33 And from the territorie of the Assirians the besiegers shal
@c    beseige them, and shal consume one of them, and there shal be feare and
@c    trembling in their armie, and contention against their kinges.  34 Behold
@c    cloudes from the east, and from the north vnto the south, and their face
@c    very horrible, ful of wrath and storme.  35 And they shal beate one
@c    against an other, and they shal beate downe manie starres, and their
@c    starre vpon the earth, and bloud shal be from the sword vnto the bellie.
@c    36 And mans dung vnto the camels litter, and there shal be much feare,
@c    and trembling vpon the earth.  37 And they shal shake that shal see that
@c    wrath, and tremble shal take them:  and after these thinges there shal
@c    manie showers be moued:  38 from the south, and the north:  and an other
@c    portion from the weast.  39 And the windes from the east shal reuaile
@c    vpon it, and shal shut it vp, and the cloudes which he raised in wrath,
@c    and the starre to make terrour to the east winde, and the west shal be
@c    destroyed.  40 And there shal be exalted great and mightie cloudes ful of
@c    wrath, and a starre to terrifie al the earth, and the inhabitantes
@c    therof, and they shal powre in vpon euerie high, and eminent place a
@c    terrible starre, 41 fire, and haile, and flying swordes, and manie
@c    waters, so that al fildes also shal be filled, and al riuers with the
@c    fulnes of manie waters.  42 And they shal throw downe cities, and walles,
@c    and mountaines, and hilles, and the trees of the woodes, and the grasse
@c    of the medowes, and their corne.  43 And they shal passe constant vnto
@c    Babylon, and shal raise her.  (Apoc 18)  44 They shal come together
@c    against her, and shal compasse her, and shal power out the starre, and al
@c    wrath vpon her, and the dust and smoke shal goe vp euen into heauen, and
@c    round about shal lament her.  45 And they that shal remaine vnder her,
@c    shal serue them that terified her.  46 And thou Asia agreeing into the
@c    hope of Babylon, and the glorie of her person, 47 woe be to thee thou
@c    wretch, because thou art like to her, and hast adorned thy daughters in
@c    fornication, to please & glorie in thy louers, which haue desired alwayes
@c    to fornicate with thee.  48 Thou hast imitated the odious in al her
@c    workes, and in her inuentions:  therefore sayth God:  49 I wil send in
@c    euils vpon thee, widowhood, pouertie, and famine, and sword, and
@c    pestilence, to destroy thy houses by violation, and death, and glorie of
@c    thy vertue.  50 As a flower shal be withered, when the heate shal rise
@c    that is sent forth vpon thee, 51 thou shalt be weakned as a litle poore
@c    soule plaged and chastised of wemen, that the mightie and the louers may
@c    not receiue thee.  52 Wil I be zealous against thee sayth our Lord,
@c    53 vnles thou hadst slayne myne elect at al times, exalting the slaughter
@c    of the handes, and saying vpon their death, when thou wast drunken.
@c    54 Adorne the beautie of thy countenance.  55 The reward of thy
@c    fornication is in thy bosome, therefore thou shalt receiue recompence.
@c    56 As thou shalt doe to my elect, sayth our Lord, so shal God do to thee,
@c    and shal deliuer thee vnto euil.  57 And thy children shal dye for
@c    famine:  and thou shalt fal by the sword, and thy cities shal be
@c    destroyed, & al thyne shal fal in the filde by the sword.  58 And they
@c    that are in the mountaines, shal perish, with famine, and shal eate their
@c    owne flesh, & drinke bloud, for the famine of bread and thirst of waters.
@c    59 Vnhappie by the seas shalt thou come, and againe thou shalt receuie
@c    euils.  60 And in the passage they shal beate against the idle citie, and
@c    shal destroy some portion of thy land, and shal deface part of thy
@c    glorie, againe returning to Babylon ourethrowen.  61 And being throwen
@c    downe thou shalt be to them for stubble, and they shal be to thee fire:
@c    62 and deuoure thee, and thy cities, thy land, and thy mountaynes, al thy
@c    woodes and fruitful trees they wil burne with fire.  63 Thy children they
@c    shal lead captiue, & shal haue thy goodes for a praye, and the glorie of
@c    thy face they shal destroy.



@c    CHAP. XVI.


@c    Al are admonished, that extreme calamities shal fal vpon this world,
@c    36. the penitent returning to iustice shal escape, 55. & as al thinges
@c    were made by Gods omnipotent powre at his wil, so al thinges shal serue
@c    to the reward of the blessed, and punishment of the wicked.

@c    VVOE to thee Babylon & Asia, woe to thee AEgypt, and Syria.  2 Gird
@c    yourselues with sackclothes and shirtes of heare, & mourne for your
@c    children, & be sorie:  because your destruction is at hand.  3 The sword
@c    is sent in vpon you, and who is he that can turne it away?  4 Fire is
@c    sent in vpon you, and who is he that can quench it?  5 Euiles are sent in
@c    vpon you, and who is he that can repel them?  6 Shal anie man repel the
@c    lion being hungrie in the woode, or quench the fire in stubble, forthwith
@c    when it beginneth to burne?  7 Shal anie man repel the arrow shot of a
@c    strong archer?  8 Our strong Lord sendeth in euiles, and who is he that
@c    can repel them?  9 Fire came forth from his wrath, and who is he that can
@c    quench it?  10 He wil lighten, who shal not feare, he wil thunder, and
@c    who shal not be afrayed?  11 Our Lord wil threaten, and who shal not
@c    vtterly be destroyed before his face?  12 The earth hath trembled, and
@c    the fundations thereof, the sea tosseth vp waues from the depth, and the
@c    floudes of it shal be destroyed, and the fishes thereof at the face of
@c    our Lord, and at the glorie of his powre:  13 because his right hand is
@c    strong which bendeth the bow, his arrowes be sharpe that are shot of him,
@c    they shal not misse, when they shal begine to be shot into the endes of
@c    the earth.  14 Behold euiles are sent, and they shal not returne til they
@c    come vpon the earth.  15 The fire is kindled and it shal not be quenched,
@c    til it consume the fundations of the earth.  16 For as the arrow shot of
@c    a strong archer returneth not, so shal not the euils returne backe, that
@c    shal be sent vpon the earth.  17 Woe is me, woe is me:  who shal deliuer
@c    me in those dayes?  18 The beginning of sorrowes and much mourning, the
@c    beginning of famine and much destruction.  The beginning of warres and
@c    the potestates shal feare, the beginning of euiles and al shal tremble.
@c    19 In these what shal I doe, when the euils shal come?  20 Behold famine,
@c    and plague, and tribulation, and distresse are sent al as scourges for
@c    amendment, 21 and in al these they wil not conuert themselues from their
@c    iniquities, neither wil they be alwayes mindful of the scourges.
@c    22 Behold, there shal be good cheape victuals vpon the earth, so that
@c    they may thinke that peace is directly coming toward them, and then shal
@c    euiles spring vpon the earth, sword, famine, and great confusion.  23 For
@c    by famine manie that inhabit the earth shal dye, and the sword shal
@c    destroy the rest that remained aliue of the famine, 24 and the dead shal
@c    be cast forth as dung, and there shal be none to comfort them.  For the
@c    earth shal be left desert, and the cities therof shal be throwen downe.
@c    25 There shal not be left a man to til the ground and to sow it.  26 The
@c    trees shal yeeld fruites, and who shal gather them?  27 The grape shal
@c    become ripe, & who shal tread it?  For there shal be great desolation to
@c    places.  28 For a man shal desire to see a man, or to heare his voyce.
@c    29 For there shal be leaft ten of a citie, and two of the field that haue
@c    hid themselues in thicke woodes, and cliffes of rockes.  30 As there are
@c    left in the oliuet, and on euerie tree, three of foure oliues.  31 Or as
@c    in a vinyeard when it is gathered there are grapes left by them, that
@c    diligently search the vineyard:  32 so shal there be left in those dayes
@c    three or foure, by them that search their houses in the sword.  33 And
@c    the earth shal be left desolate, and the fildes thereof shal waxe old, &
@c    the wayes thereof, and al the pathes thereof shal bringforth thornes,
@c    because no man shal passe by it.  34 Virgins shal mourne hauing no
@c    bridegromes, wemen shal mourne hauing no husbandes, their daughters shal
@c    mourne hauing no helpe:  35 their bridegromes shal be consumed in battel,
@c    and their husbandes be destroyed in famine.  36 But heare these thinges,
@c    and know them ye seruantes of our Lord.  37 Behold the word of our Lord,
@c    receiue it:  beleue not the goddes of whom our Lord speaketh.  38 Behold
@c    the euiles approch, and slacke not.  39 As a woman with childe when shee
@c    bringeth forth her child in the ninth moneth, the houre of her
@c    deliuerance approching, two or three howres before, paines come about her
@c    wombe, and the infants coming out of her wombe, they wil not tarrie one
@c    moment.  40 So the euiles shal not slacke to come forth vpon the earth,
@c    and the world shal lament, and sorowes shal hold it round about.
@c    41 Heare the word, my people:  prepare yourselues vnto the fight, & in
@c    the euiles so be ye as strangers of the earth.  42 He that selleth as if
@c    he should flee, and he that byeth as he that should lose it.  43 He that
@c    playeth the marchant, as he that should take no fruite:  and he that
@c    buildeth as he that should not inhabite.  44 He that soweth, as he that
@c    shal not reape:  so he also that pruneth a vinyeard, as if he should not
@c    haue the vintage.  45 They that marie so as if they should not get
@c    children, & they that marie not, so as if were widowes.  46 Wherfore they
@c    that labour, labour without cause:  47 for foreners shal reape their
@c    fruites, & shal violently take their goodes, and ouerthrow their houses,
@c    and lead theire children captiue, because in captiuitie, and famine they
@c    beget their children.  48 And they that play the marchantes by robrie,
@c    the longer they adorne their cities and houses, and their possessions and
@c    persons:  49 so much the more wil I be zealous toward them, vpon their
@c    sinnes, sayth our Lord.  50 As a whore enuieth an honest & very good
@c    woman:  51 so shal iustice hate impietie when she adorneth herselfe, and
@c    accuseth her to her face, when he shal come that may defend him that
@c    searcheth out al vpon the earth.  52 Therefore be not made like to her,
@c    nor to her workes.  53 For yet a little whyle & iniquitie shal be taken
@c    away from the earth, & iustice shal reigne ouer you.  54 Let not the
@c    sinner say he hath not sinned:  because he shal burne coales of fire vpon
@c    his head, that sayth I haue not sinned before our Lord God and his
@c    glorie.  55 Behold our Lord shal know al the workes of men, and their
@c    inuentions, & their cogitations, and their hartes.  (Eccli 23 / Luke 16)
@c    56 For he sayd:  Let the earth be made, and it was made:  let the heauen
@c    be made, & it was made.  (Gen 1)  57 And by his worde the starrs were
@c    made, & he noweth the number of the starres.  (Ps 146:4)  58 Who
@c    searcheth the depth and the treasures therof:  who hath measured the sea,
@c    & capacitie therof.  (Job 38)  59 Who hath shut vp the sea in the midest
@c    of waters, & hath hanged the earth vpon the waters with his word.  60 Who
@c    hath spred heauen as it were a vault, ouer the waters he hath founded it.
@c    61 Who hath put fountaines of waters in the desert, and lakes vpon the
@c    toppes of mountaines, to send forth riuers from the high rocke to watter
@c    the earth.  62 Who made man & put his hart in the midds of the bodie, and
@c    gaue him spirit, life and vnderstanding.  63 And the inspiration of God
@c    omnipotent that made al thinges, and searcheth al hid thinges, in the
@c    secretes of the earth.  64 He knoweth your inuention, and what you thinke
@c    in your hartes sinning, and willing to hide your sinnes.  65 Wherfore our
@c    Lord in searching hath searched al your workes, and he wil put you al to
@c    open shame, 66 and you shal be confounded when your sinnes shal come
@c    forth before men, and the iniquities shal be they, that shal stand
@c    accusers in that day.  67 What wil you doe?  or how shal you hide your
@c    sinnes before God and his Angels?  68 Behold God is the Iudge, feare him.
@c    Cease from your sinnes, and now forget your iniquities to doe them anie
@c    more, & God wil bring you out, and deliuer you from al tribulation.
@c    69 For behold the heate of a great multitude is kindled ouer you, and
@c    they shal take certaine of you by violence, & shal make the slaine to be
@c    meate for idols.  70 And they that shal consent vnto them, shal be to
@c    them in derision, and in reproch, and in conculcation.  71 For there shal
@c    be place against places, and against the next cities great insurrection
@c    vpon them that feare our Lord.  72 They shal be as it were madde sparing
@c    no bodie, to spoyle and waste yet them that feare our Lord.  73 because
@c    they shal waste and spoyle the goodes, and shal cast them out of their
@c    houses.  74 Then shal appeare the probation of mine elect, as gold that
@c    is proued by the fire.  75 Heare be beloued, sayth our Lord:  Behold the
@c    dayes of tribulation are come:  and out of them I wil deliuer you.
@c    76 Doe not feare, nor stagger, because God is your guide.  77 And he that
@c    kepeth my commandmentes, and precepts, sayth our Lord God:  Let not your
@c    sinnes ouerway you, nor your inquities be aduanced ouer you.  78 Woe to
@c    them that are entangled with their sinnes, and are couered with their
@c    iniquities, as a filde is entangled with the wood, & the path therof
@c    couered with thornes, by which no man passeth, & it is closed out, & cast
@c    to be deuoured of the fire.

@c    FINIS.



@c    Note:  This translation comes from the Latin text, usually printed in an
@c    appendix to editions of the Vulgate, but these editions miss seventy
@c    verses between 7:35 and 7:36.  The missing fragment was discovered in a
@c    Latin manuscript by Robert Lubbock Bensly in 1874.  Below is a
@c    translation of this fragment from a revised Authorized Version.
@c    Although often numbered 7:36-7:105, they are here number as A:1-A:70 to
@c    avoid any repetition in chapter:verse designations.

@c    A:1. And the pit of torment shall appear, and over against it shall be
@c    the place of rest:  and the furnace of hell shall be shewed, and over
@c    against it the paradise of delight.
@c    A:2. And then shall the Most High say to the nations that are raised from
@c    the dead, See ye and understand whom ye have denied, or whom ye have not
@c    served, or whose commandments ye have despised.
@c    A:3. Look on this side and on that:  here is delight and rest, and there
@c    fire and torments.  Thus shall he speak unto them in the day of
@c    judgement:
@c    A:4. This is a day that hath neither sun, nor moon, nor stars,
@c    A:5. neither cloud, nor thunder, nor lightning, neither wind, nor water,
@c    nor air, neither darkness, nor evening, nor morning,
@c    A:6. neither summer, nor spring, nor heat, nor winter, neither frost, nor
@c    cold, nor hail, nor rain, nor dew,
@c    A:7. neither noon, nor night, nor dawn, neither shining, nor brightness,
@c    nor light, save only the splendour of the glory of the Most High, whereby
@c    all shall see the things that are set before them:
@c    A:8. for it shall endure as it were a week of years.
@c    A:9. This is my judgement and the ordinance thereof; but to thee only
@c    have I shewed these things.
@c    A:10. And I answered, I said even then, O Lord, and I say now:  Blessed
@c    are they that be now alive and keep the statutes ordained of thee.
@c    A:11. But as touching them for whom my prayer was made, what shall I say?
@c    for who is there of them that be alive that hath not sinned, and who of
@c    the sons of men that hath not transgressed thy covenant?
@c    A:12. And now I see, that the world to come shall bring delight to few,
@c    but torments unto many.
@c    A:13. For an evil heart hath grown up in us, which hath led us astray
@c    from these statutes, and hath brought us into corruption and into the
@c    ways of death, hath shewed us the paths of perdition and removed us far
@c    from life; and that, not a few only, but well nigh all that have been
@c    created.
@c    A:14. And he answered me, and said, Hearken unto me, and I will instruct
@c    thee; and I will admonish thee yet again:
@c    A:15. for this cause the Most High hath not made one world, but two.
@c    A:16. For whereas thou hast said that the just are not many, but few, and
@c    the ungodly abound, hear the answer thereunto.
@c    A:17. If thou have choice stones exceeding few, wilt thou set for thee
@c    over against them according to their number things of lead and clay?
@c    A:18. And I say, Lord, how shall this be?
@c    A:19. And he said unto me, Not only this, but ask the earth, and she
@c    shall tell thee; intreat her, and she shall declare unto thee.
@c    A:20. For thou shalt say unto her, Thou bringest forth gold and silver
@c    and brass, and iron also and lead and clay:
@c    A:21. but silver is more abundant than gold, and brass than silver, and
@c    iron than brass, lead than iron, and clay than lead.
@c    A:22. Judge thou therefore which things are precious and to be desired,
@c    whatso is abundant or what is rare.
@c    A:23. And I said, O Lord that bearest rule, that which is plentiful is of
@c    less worth, for that which is more rare is more precious.
@c    A:24. And he answered me, and said, Weigh within thyself the things that
@c    thou hast thought, for he that hath what is hard to get rejoiceth over
@c    him that hath what is plentiful.
@c    A:25. So also is the judgement which I have promised:  for I will rejoice
@c    over the few that shall be saved, inasmuch as these are they that have
@c    made my glory now to prevail, and of whom my name is now named.
@c    A:26. And I will not grieve over the multitude of them that perish; for
@c    these are they that are now like unto vapour, and are become as flame and
@c    smoke; they are set on fire and burn hotly, and are quenched.
@c    A:27. And I answered and said, O thou earth, wherefore hast thou brought
@c    forth, if the mind is made out of dust, like as all other created things?
@c    A:28. For it were better that the dust itself had been unborn, so that
@c    the mind might not have been made therefrom.
@c    A:29. But now the mind groweth with us, and by reason of this we are
@c    tormented, because we perish and know it.
@c    A:30. Let the race of men lament and the beasts of the field be glad; let
@c    all that are born lament, but let the fourfooted beasts and the cattle
@c    rejoice.
@c    A:31. For it is far better with them than with us; for they look not for
@c    judgement, neither do they know of torments or of salvation promised unto
@c    them after death.
@c    A:32. For what doth it profit us, that we shall be preserved alive, but
@c    yet be afflicted with torment?
@c    A:33. For all that are born are defiled with iniquities, and are full of
@c    sins and laden with offences:
@c    A:34. and if after death we were not to come into judgement, peradventure
@c    it had been better for us.
@c    A:35. And he answered me, and said, When the Most High made the world,
@c    and Adam and all them that came of him, he first prepared the judgement
@c    and the things that pertain unto the judgement.
@c    A:36. And now understand from thine own words, for thou hast said that
@c    the mind groweth with us.
@c    A:37. They therefore that dwell upon the earth shall be tormented for
@c    this reason, that having understanding they have wrought iniquity, and
@c    receiving commandments have not kept them, and having obtained a law they
@c    dealt unfaithfully with that which they received.
@c    A:38. What then will they have to say in the judgement, or how will they
@c    answer in the last times?
@c    A:39. For how great a time hath the Most High been longsuffering with
@c    them that inhabit the world, and not for their sakes, but because of the
@c    times which he hath foreordained!
@c    A:40. And I answered and said, If I have found grace in thy sight, O
@c    Lord, shew this also unto thy servant, whether after death, even now when
@c    every one of us giveth up his soul, we shall be kept in rest until those
@c    times come, in which thou shalt renew the creation, of whether we shall
@c    be tormented forthwith.
@c    A:41. And he answered me, and said, I will shew thee this also; but join
@c    not thyself with them that are scorners, nor number thyself with them
@c    that are tormented.
@c    A:42. For thou hast a treasure of good works laid up with the Most High,
@c    but it shall not be shewed thee until the last times.
@c    A:43. For concerning death the teaching is:  When the determinate
@c    sentence hath gone forth from the Most High that a man should die, as the
@c    spirit leaveth the body to return again to him who gave it, it adoreth
@c    the glory of the Most High first of all.
@c    A:44. And if it be one of those that have been scorners and have not kept
@c    the way of the Most High, and that have despised his law, and that hate
@c    them that fear God,
@c    A:45. these spirits shall not enter into habitations, but shall wander
@c    and be in torments forthwith, ever grieving and sad, in seven ways.
@c    A:46. The first way, because they have despised the law of the Most High.
@c    A:47. The second way, because they cannot now make a good returning that
@c    they may live.
@c    A:48. The third way, they shall see the reward laid up for them that have
@c    believed the covenants of the Most High.
@c    A:49. The fourth way, they shall consider the torment laid up for
@c    themselves in the last days.
@c    A:50. The fifth way, they shall see the dwelling places of the others
@c    guarded by angels, with great quietness.
@c    A:51. The sixth way, they shall see how forthwith some of them shall pass
@c    into torment.
@c    A:52. The seventh way, which is more grievous than all the aforesaid
@c    ways, because they shall pine away in confusion and be consumed with
@c    shame, and shall be withered up by fears, seeing the glory of the Most
@c    High before whom they have sinned whilst living, and before whom they
@c    shall be judged in the last times.
@c    A:53. Now this is the order of those who have kept the ways of the Most
@c    High, when they shall be separated from the corruptible vessel.
@c    A:54. In the time that they dwelt therin they painfully served the Most
@c    High, and were in jeopardy every hour, that they might keep the law of
@c    the lawgiver perfectly.
@c    A:55. Wherefore this is the teaching concerning them:
@c    A:56. First of all they shall see with great joy the glory of him who
@c    taketh them up, for they shall have rest in seven orders.
@c    A:57. The first order, because they have striven with great labour to
@c    overcome the evil thought which was fashioned together with them, that it
@c    might not lead them astray from life into death.
@c    A:58. The second order, because they see the perplexity in which the
@c    souls of the ungodly wander, and the punishment that awaiteth them.
@c    A:59. The third order, they see the witness which he that fashioned them
@c    beareth concerning them, that while they lived they kept the law which
@c    was given them in trust.
@c    A:60. The fourth order, they understand the rest which, being gathered in
@c    their chambers, they now enjoy with great quietness, guarded by angels,
@c    and the glory that awaiteth them in the last days.
@c    A:61. The fifth order, they rejoice, seeing how they have now escaped
@c    from that which is corruptible, and how they shall inherit that which is
@c    to come, while they see moreover the straitness and the painfulness from
@c    which they have been delivered, and the large room which they shall
@c    receive with joy and immortality.
@c    A:62. The sixth order, when it is shewed unto them how their face shall
@c    shine as the sun, and how they shall be made like unto the light of the
@c    stars, being henceforth incorruptible.
@c    A:63. The seventh order, which is greater than all the aforesaid orders,
@c    because they shall rejoice with confidence, and because they shall be
@c    bold without confusion, and shall be glad without fear, for they hasten
@c    to behold the face of him whom in their lifetime they served, and from
@c    whom they shall receive their reward in glory.
@c    A:64. This is the order of the souls of the just, as from henceforth is
@c    announced unto them, and aforesaid are the ways of torture which they
@c    that would not give heed shall suffer from henceforth.
@c    A:65. And I answered and said, Shall time therefore be given unto the
@c    souls after they are separated from the bodies, that they may see that
@c    whereof thou hast spoken unto me?
@c    A:66. And he said, Their freedom shall be for seven days, that for seven
@c    days they may see the things whereof thou hast been told, and afterwards
@c    they shall be gathered together in their habitations.
@c    A:67. And I answered and said, If I have found favour in thy sight, shew
@c    further unto me thy servant whether in the day of judgement the just will
@c    be able to intercede for the ungodly or to intreat the Most High for
@c    them,
@c    A:68. whether fathers for children, or children for parents, or brethren
@c    for brethren, or kinsfolk for their next of kin, or friends for them that
@c    are most dear.
@c    A:69. And he answered me, and said, Since thou hast found favour in my
@c    sight, I will shew thee this also:  The day of judgement is a day of
@c    decision, and displayeth unto all the seal of truth; even as now a father
@c    sendeth not his son, or a son his father, or a master his slave, or a
@c    friend him that is most dear, that in his stead he may be sick, or sleep,
@c    or eat, or be healed:
@c    A:70. so never shall any one pray for another in that day, neither shall
@c    one lay a burden on another, for then shall all bear every one his own
@c    righteousness or unrighteousness.





@c    BOOKS FOR COMPARISON




@c    THE PROPHECIE OF ABDIAS.



@c    ABDIAS borne in Sichem, of the tribe Ephraim, prophecied the same time
@c    with Amos; so briefly that his prophecie is not parted into chapters:
@c    1. against the Idumeans; foreshewing their destruction; 10. for their
@c    perpetual emnitie against the Iewes, and confederacie with the Chaldees.
@c    17. The captiuitie and relaxation of the Iewes.  19. And redemption of
@c    the whole world by Christ.


@c    THE vision of Abdias.  Thus sayth our Lord God to Edom:  We haue heard a
@c    bruit from our Lord, and he hath sent a legate to the Gentils:  Rise ye,
@c    and let vs arise against him into battel.  2 Behold I haue geuen thee a
@c    litle one in the Gentils:  thou art contemptible excedingly.  3 The pride
@c    of thy hart hath extolled thee, dwelling in the clefts of rockes,
@c    exalting thy throne:  which sayst in thy hart:  Who shal plucke me downe
@c    to the earth.  4 If thou shalt be exalted as an eagle, and if thou shalt
@c    set thy nest among the starres:  thence wil I plucke thee downe, sayth
@c    our Lord.  5 If theues had gone in to thee, if robbers by night, how
@c    hadst thou held thy peace.  would not they haue stolen thinges sufficent
@c    for themselues.  if the grape gathereres had entered in to thee, would
@c    they not haue left thee at the least a cluster.  6 How haue they searched
@c    Esau, haue they sought out his hidden thinges.  7 Euen to the border haue
@c    they cast thee out:  al the men of thy league haue mocked thee:  the men
@c    of thy peace haue peuailed against thee:  they that eate with thee, shal
@c    lay embushments vnder thee:  there is no wisedom in him.  8 Why, shal not
@c    I in that day, sayth our Lord, destroy the wise out of Idumea, and
@c    prudence from the mount of Esau, 9 And thy valients of the South shal
@c    feare, that man may perish from the mount of Esau.  10 For the slaughter,
@c    and for the iniquitie against thy brother Iacob, confusion shal couer
@c    thee, and thou shalt perish for euer.  11 In the day when thou stoodest
@c    against him, when strangers tooke his armie, and foreners entered his
@c    gates, and vpon Ierusalem cast lotte:  thou also wast as one of them.
@c    12 And thou shalt not dispise in the day of thy brother, in the day of
@c    his peregrination:  and thou shalt not reioyce ouer the children of Iuda,
@c    in the day of their perdition:  & thou shalt not magnifie thy mouth in
@c    the day of distresse.  13 Neither shalt thou enter the gate of my people
@c    in the day of their ruine:  neither shalt thou also dispise in his euils
@c    in the day of his distruction:  and thou shalt not be sent out against
@c    his armie in the day of his destruction.  14 Neither shalt thou stand in
@c    the outgoings to kil them that flee:  and thou shalt not shut vp his
@c    remnant in the day of tribulation.  15 Because the day of our Lord is at
@c    hand vpon al nations:  as thou hast done, so shal it be done to thee:
@c    thy retribution he wil returne vpon thine owne head.  16 For as you haue
@c    drunke vpon my holie mount, shal al Gentils drinke continually:  & they
@c    shal drinke, and swallow vp, and they shal be as though they were not.
@c    17 And in mount Sion shal be saluation, and it shal be holie:  and the
@c    house of Iacob shal possesse those that had possessed them.  18 And the
@c    house of Iacob shal be a fyre, and the house of Ioseph a flame, and the
@c    house of Esau stubble:  and they shal be kindled in them, and shal
@c    deuoure them:  and there shal be no remaynes of the house of Esau,
@c    because our Lord hath spoken.  19 And they that are toward the South,
@c    shal inherite the mount of Esau, and they in the champaine countries,
@c    Philisthiims:  and they shal possesse the region of Ephraim, and the
@c    region of Samaria:  and Beniamin shal possesse Galaad.  20 And the
@c    transmigration of this host of the children of Israel, al places of the
@c    Chananeits euen to Sarepta:  and the transmigration of Ierusalem, that is
@c    in Bosphorus, shal possesse the cities of the South.  21 And sauiours
@c    shal ascend into mount Sion to iudge the mount of Esau:  and the kingdom
@c    shal be to our Lord.




@c    THE CATHOLIKE EPISTLE OF IVDE THE APOSTLE.



@c    He exhorteth them to stand to their old faith, shevving them by examples,
@c    that it is damnable not to continue and be constant:  8 inueighing
@c    against the lecherie, blasphemie, apostasie, banketing of the heretikes,
@c    14 and that their damnation vvas long foretold.  17 Catholikes therfore
@c    to be vnmoueable, to reproue the obstinate, to recouer al not desperate,
@c    to confirme the vveake, and to liue them selues vertuously and vvithout
@c    mortal sinne, vvhich by Gods grace they may doe.


@c    IVDE the seruant of IESVS Christ, and brother of Iames:  to them that are
@c    in God the Father beloued, and in IESVS Christ preserued, and called.
@c    2 Mercie to you, and peace and charitie be accomplished.
@c        3 My deerest, taking al care to vvrite vnto you of your common
@c    saluation, I thought it necessarie to vvrite vnto you:  beseeching you to
@c    contend for the faith once deliuered to the sainctes.  4 For there are
@c    certaine men secretely entred in (vvhich vvere long ago prescribed vnto
@c    this iudgement) impious, transferring the grace of our God into
@c    riotousnes, and denying the onely Dominator, and our Lord IESVS Christ.
@c    5 But I vvil admonish you, that once knovv al things, that IESVS, sauing
@c    the people out of the land of AEgipt, secondly destroied them vvhich
@c    beleeued not.  6 But the Angels vvhich kept not their pricipalitie, but
@c    forsooke their owne habitation, he hath reserued vnder darkenesse in
@c    eternal bondes vnto the iudgement of the great day.  7 As Sodom and
@c    Gomorrhe, and the cities adioyning in like maner hauing fornicated, and
@c    going after other flesh, vvere made an example, sustaining the paine of
@c    eternal fire.  8 In like maner these also defile the flesh, and despise
@c    dominion, & blaspheme maiestie.  9 Vvhen Micheal the Archangel, disputing
@c    vvith the Diuel, made altercation for the body of Moyses:  he durst not
@c    inferre iudgment of blasphemie, but said, Our Lord 'commaund' thee.
@c    10 But these, vvhat things so euer certes they are ignorant of, they
@c    blaspheme:  and vvhat things so euer naturally, as dumme beastes, they
@c    knovv, in those they are corrupted.
@c        11 Vvo vnto them, 'vvhich' haue gone in the vvay of Cain:  and vvith
@c    the errour of Balaam, haue for revvard povvred out them selues, and haue
@c    perished in the contradiction of Core.  12 These are in their bankets,
@c    spottes, feasting together vvithout feare, feeding them selues, cloudes
@c    vvithout vvater vvhich are caried about of vvindes, trees of autumne,
@c    vnfruitful, tvvise dead, plucked vp by the rootes, 13 raging vvaues of
@c    the sea, foming out their ovvne confusions, vvandering starres:  to vvhom
@c    the storme of darkenesse is reserued for euer.  14 And of these 
@c    propheceied Enoch, the seuenth from Adam, saying, Behold our Lord is come
@c    in his holy thousandes, 15 to doe iudgement against al, and to reproue al
@c    the impious, of al the vvorkes of their impietie vvherby they haue done
@c    impiously, and of al the hard thinges vvhich impious sinners haue spoken
@c    against him.  16 These are murmurers, ful of complaintes, vvalking
@c    according to their ovvne desires, and their mouth speaketh pride,
@c    admiring persons for gaine sake.
@c        17 But you my deerest, be mindeful of the vvordes vvhich haue been
@c    spoken before by the Apostles of our Lord IESVS Christ, 18 vvho told you,
@c    that in the last time shal come mockers, according to their ovvne desires
@c    vvalking in impieties.  19 These are they vvhich segregate them selues,
@c    sensual, hauing not the Spirit.  20 But you my deerest, building your
@c    selues vpon 'our' most holy faith, in the holy Ghost, praying, 21 keepe
@c    your selues in the loue of God, expecting the mercie of our Lord IESVS
@c    Christ vnto life euerlasting.  22 And these certes reproue being iudged:
@c    23 but them saue, pulling out of the fire.  And on other haue mercie in
@c    feare:  hating also that vvhich is carnal, the spotted cote.
@c        24 And to him that is able to preserue you vvithout sinne, and to
@c    sette you immaculate before the sight of his glorie in exultation in the
@c    comming of our Lord IESVS Christ, 25 to the onely God our Sauiour by
@c    IESVS Christ our Lord be glorie and magnificence, empire and power before
@c    al worldes, and novv and for al vvorldes euermore.  Amen.





@c    SUPPLEMENTAL MATERIAL



@c    As recorded in the title, the Douay-Rheims version is a translation
@c    primarily from the Latin Vulgate.  A brief selection from the preface to
@c    the 1582 edition explains the reasons for this approach.  Together with
@c    the glossary the text shows the translators scholarly motivations, but
@c    also provides a glimpse into the charged climate of the period.  The
@c    transcriber hopes he did a tolerable job in transliterating the Greek
@c    words in the preface.  The glossary contains words newly used in the
@c    language of the day.  Some were later dropped from the Challoner
@c    revision, others have found common usage today.




@c    THE PREFACE TO THE READER



@c    Treating of the causes vvhy this nevv Testament is translated according
@c    to the auncient vulgar Latin text.


@c    THE holy Bible long since translated by vs into English, and the old
@c    Testament lying by vs for lacke of good meanes to publish the vvhole in
@c    such sort as a vvorke of so great charge and importance requireth:  vve
@c    haue yet through Gods goodnes at length fully finished for thee (most
@c    Christian reader) all the NEVV TESTAMENT, vvhich is the principal, most
@c    profitable & comfortable peece of holy vvrite:  and, as vvel for all 
@c    other institution of life and doctrine, as specially for deciding the
@c    doubtes of these daies, more propre and pregnant then the other part not
@c    yet printed.


@c    NOVV TO GIVE thee also intelligence in particular, most gentle Reader, of
@c    such thinges as it behoueth thee specially to knovv concerning our
@c    Translation:  Vve translate the old vulgar Latin text, not the common
@c    Greeke text, for these causes.

@c    1. It is so auncient, that it vvas vsed in the Church of God aboue 1300
@c    yeres agoe, as appeareth by the fathers of those times.

@c    2. It is that (by the common receiued opinion and by al probabilitie)
@c    vvhich S. Hierom aftervvard corrected according to the Greeke, by the
@c    appointment of Damasus then Pope, as he maketh mention in his preface
@c    before the foure Euangelistes, vnto the said Damasus:  and 'in Catalogo
@c    in fine,' and 'ep. 102.'

@c    3. Consequently it is the same vvhich S. Augustine so commendeth and
@c    allovveth in an Epistle to S. Hierom.

@c    4. It is that, vvhich for the most part euer since hath been vsed in the
@c    Churches seruice, expounded in sermons, alleaged and interpreted in the
@c    Commentaries and vvritings of the auncient fathers of the Latin Church.

@c    5. The holy Councel of Trent, for these and many other important
@c    considerations, hath declared and defined this onely of al other latin
@c    translations, to be authentical, and so onely to be vsed and taken in
@c    publike lessons, disputations, preachings, and expositions, and that no
@c    man presume vpon any pretence to reiect or refuse the same.

@c    6. It is the grauest, sincerest, of greatest maiestie, least partialitie,
@c    as being vvithout al respect of controuersies and contentions, specially
@c    these of our time, as appeareth by those places vvhich Erasmus and others
@c    at this day translate much more to the aduantage of the Catholike cause.

@c    7. It is so exact and precise according to the Greeke, both the phrase
@c    and the word, that delicate Heretikes therfore reprehend it of rudenes.
@c    And that it follovveth the Greeke far more exactly then the Protestants
@c    translations, beside infinite other places, we appeale to these.
@c    Tit. 3,14. 'Curent bonis operibus praeesse.' 'proissasthai.'  Engl. bib.
@c    1577, 'to mainteine good vvorks.' and Hebr. 10, 20. 'Viam nobis
@c    initiauit,' 'enekainisen.' English Bib. 'he prepared.'  So in these
@c    vvordes, 'Iustificationes,' 'Traditiones,' 'Idola' &c.  In al vvhich they
@c    come not neere the Greeke, but auoid it of purpose.

@c    8. The Aduersaries them selues, namely Beza, preferre it before al the
@c    rest.  (Inpraefat. no. Test an. 1556.)  And againe he saith, that the old
@c    Interpreter translated very religiously. (Annot. in 1. Luc. v. 1.)

@c    9. In the rest, there is such diuersitie and dissension, and no end of
@c    reprehending one an other, and translating euery man according to his
@c    fantasie, that Luther said, If the vvorld should stand any long time, vve
@c    must receiue againe (which he thought absurd) the Decrees of Councels,
@c    for preseruing the vnitie of faith, because of so diuers interpretations
@c    of the Scripture.  And Beza (in the place aboue mentioned) noteth the
@c    itching ambition of his fellovv-translators, that had much rather
@c    disagree and dissent from the best, then seeme them selues to haue said
@c    or vvritten nothing.  And Bezas translation it self, being so esteemed in
@c    our countrie, that the Geneua English Testaments be translated according
@c    to the same, yet sometime goeth so vvide from the Greeke, and from the
@c    meaning of the holy Ghost, that them selues which protest to translate
@c    it, dare not folow it.  For example, Luc. 3,36.  They haue put these
@c    wordes, 'The sonne of Cainan,' which he wittingly and wilfully left out:
@c    and (Act. 1,14.) they say, 'Vvith the vvomen,' agreably to the vulgar
@c    Latin:  where he saith, 'Cum vxoribus,' 'vvith their vviues.'

@c    10. It is not onely better then al other Latin translations, but then the
@c    Greeke text it self, in those places where they disagree.

@c    The proofe hereof is euident, because most of the auncient Heretikes were
@c    Grecians, & therfore the Scriptures in Greeke were more corrupted by
@c    them, as the auncient fathers often complaine.  Tertullian noteth the
@c    Greeke text which is at this day (1 Cor. 15,47) to be an old corruption
@c    of Marcion the Heretike, and the truth to be as in our vulgar latin,
@c    'Secundus homo de caelo caelestis,' 'The second man from heauen
@c    heauenly.'  So reade other auncient fathers, and Erasmus thinketh it must
@c    needes be so, and Caluin him self folovveth in 'Instit. li. 2. c. 13.
@c    parag. 2.'  Againe S. Hierom noteth that the Greeke text (1 Cor. 7, 33)
@c    which is at this day, is not the 'Apostolical veritie' or the true text
@c    of the Apostle:  but that which is in the vulgar Latin, 'Qui cum vxore
@c    est, solicitus est quae sunt mundi, quomodo placeat vxori, & diuisus
@c    est.'  'He that is vvith a vvife, is careful of vvorldly things, hovv he
@c    may please his vvife, and is deuided or distracted.'  The Ecclesiastical
@c    historie called the Tripartite, noteth the Greeke text that now is
@c    (1 Io. 4, 3) to be an old corruption of the auncient Greeke copies, by
@c    the Nestorian Heretikes, & the true reading to be as in our vulgar Latin,
@c    'Omnis spiritus qui soluit IESVM, Ex Deo non est.'  'Euery spirit that
@c    dissolueth IESVS, is not of God:'  and Beza confesseth that Socrates in
@c    his Ecclesiastical historie readeth so in the Greeke.

@c    But the proofe is more preganant out of the Aduersaires them selues.
@c    They forsake the Greeke text as corrupted, and translate according to the
@c    vulgar Latin, namely Beza and his scholers the English translatours of
@c    the Bible, in these places.  Hebr. chap. 9. vers. 1. saying, 'The first
@c    couenant,' for that vvhich is in the Greeke.  'The first tabernacle.'
@c    vvhere they put, 'couenant,' not as of the text, but in an other letter,
@c    as to be vnderstood, according to the vulgar Latin, vvhich most sincerely
@c    leaueth it out altogether, saying, 'Habuit quidem & prius iustificationes
@c    &c.'  'The former also in deede had iustifications &c.'  Againe, Ro. 11,
@c    vers. 21.  They translate not according to the Greek text, 'Tempori
@c    seruientes,' 'seruing the time,' vvhich Beza sayth must needes be a
@c    corruption:  but according to the vulgar Latin, 'Domino seruientes,'
@c    'seruing our Lord.'  Againe, Apoc. 11, vers. 2. they translate not the
@c    Greeke text, 'Atrium quod intra templum est,' 'the court vvhich is
@c    vvithin the temple:'  but cleane contrarie, according to the vulgar
@c    Latin, vvhich Beza saith is the true reading, 'Atrium quod est foris
@c    templum,' 'the court vvhich is vvithout the temple.'  Onely in this last
@c    place, one English Bible of the yere 1562, folovveth the errour of the
@c    Greeke.  Againe, 2 Tim. 23 vers. 14. they adde, 'but,' more then is in
@c    the Greeke, to make the sense more commodious and easie, according as it
@c    is in the vulgar Latin.  Againe, Ia. 5, 12. they leaue the Greeke, and
@c    folovv the vulgar Latin, saying, 'lest you fall into condemnation.'  "I
@c    doubt not (saith Beza) but this is the true and sincere reading, and I
@c    suspect the corruption in the Greeke came thus &c."  It vvere infinite to
@c    set dovvne al such places, vvhere the Aduersaries (specially Beza) folovv
@c    the old vulgar Latin and the Greeke copie agreable therevnto, condemning
@c    the Greeke text that novv is, of corruption.




@c    HARD VVORDES EXPLICATED



@c    The explication of certaine vvordes in this translation, not familiar to
@c    the vulgar reader, vvhich might not conueniently be vttered otherwise.


@c    A

@c    Abstracted.  Dravven avvay.  [James 1:14]
@c    Acquisition.  Getting, purchasing.  [Eph 1:14]
@c    Aduent.  The comming.  [Matt 24:27]
@c    Adulterating.  Corrupting.  [2 Cor 2:17]  The Greeke vvord signifieth to
@c      to make commoditie of the vvord of God, as vulgar Vinteners do of their
@c      vvine.  Vvhereby is expressed the peculiar trade of al Heretikes, and
@c      exceding proper to the Protestants, that so corrupt Scriptures
@c      by mixture of their ovvne phantasies, by false translations, glosses,
@c      colorable and pleasant commentaries, to deceiue the tast of the simple,
@c      as tauerners and tapsters do, to make their vvines salable by manifold
@c      artificial deceites.  The Apostles contrarievvise, as all Catholikes,
@c      deliuer the Scriptures and vtter the vvord of God sincerely and
@c      entirely, in the same sense and sort as the fathers left them to the
@c      Church, interpreting them by the same Spirit by vvhich they vvere
@c      vvritten or spoken.
@c    Agnition.  Knovvledge or acknovvledging.  [Philemon 1:6]
@c    Allegorie.  A Mystical speache, more then the bare letter.  [Gal 4:24]
@c      Here vve learne that the holy Scriptures haue beside the litteral
@c      sense, a deeper spiritual and more principal meaning:  which is not
@c      only to be taken of the holy vvordes, but of the very factes and
@c      persons reported:  both the speaches and the actions being
@c      significatiue ouer and aboue the letter.
@c    Amen.  What is it vvhen our Lord saith, Amen, amen?  He doth much commend
@c      and vrge the thing he so vttereth, doubling it.  Amen in Hebrue
@c      signifieth verum, a truth.  [John 8:34]
@c    Anathema.  By vse of Scripture is either that vvhich by separation from
@c      profane vse, and by dedication to God, is holy, dreadful, and not
@c      vulgarly to be touched:  or contrarievvise, that which is reiected,
@c      seuered or abandoned from God, as cursed and detested, and therfore is
@c      to be auoided.  [Rom 9:3]
@c    Archisynagogue.  Cheefe gouerner of a Synagogue.  [Mark 5:22]
@c    Assist.  Signifieth the Angels standing and attending, alvvaies readie
@c      to doe their ministerie.  [Luke 1:19]
@c    Assumption.  Christs departure out of this vvorld by his death and
@c      Ascension.  [Luke 9:51]
@c    Azymes.  Vnleauened bread.  [Matt 26:17]


@c    C

@c    Calumniate.  By this vvord is signified violent oppression by vvord or
@c      deede.  [Luke 3:14]
@c    Catechizeth, and, Catechized.  He catechizeth that teacheth the
@c      principles of the Christian faith:  and they that heare and learne,
@c      are catechized, and are therfore called often in the Annotations,
@c      Catechumens.  [Gal 6:6]
@c    Character.  A marke or stampe.  [Apoc 13:16]
@c    Commessations.  Immoderate bankets, and belly cheere, vvith vvanton
@c      riotousnes.  [Gal 5:21]
@c    Condigne.  Comparable.  [Rom 8:18]
@c    Contristate.  This vvord signifieth to make heauie and sad.  [Eph 4:30]
@c    Cooperate.  Signifieth vvorking vvith others, likevvise Cooperation,
@c      Cooperatours.  [Rom 8:28]
@c    Corbana.  This Corbana was a place about the Temple, which receiued the
@c      peoples gifts or offerings.  [Matt 27:6]


@c    D

@c    Depositum.  The vvhole doctrine of our Christianity being taught by the
@c      Apostles, and deliuered to their successors, and comming dovvne from
@c      one Bishop to an other, is called the Depositum, as it vvere a thing
@c      laid into their hands, and committed vnto them to keepe.  Vvhich
@c      because it passeth from hand to hand, from age to age, from Bishop to
@c      Bishop vvithout corruption, change, or alteration, is al one vvith
@c      Tradition, and is the truth giuen vnto the holy Bishops to keepe, and
@c      not to lay men.  [1 Tim 6:20]  It may signifie also, Gods graces giuen
@c      vs to keepe.  A great comfort to al Christians, that euery of their
@c      goode deedes and sufferings for Christ, and al the vvorldly losses
@c      susteined for defense or confession of their faith, be extant vvith
@c      God, and kept as depositum, to be repaied or receiued againe in heauen.
@c      [2 Tim 1:12,14]
@c    Didrachme.  These didrachmes were peeces of money which they payed for
@c      tribute.  [Matt 17:23,24]
@c    Dominical day.  Sunday.  [Apoc 1:10]  It is to be marked, that this holy
@c      day by the Apostles tradition also, vvas named Dominicus dies, our
@c      Lordes day, or the Dominike, vvhich is also an old Ecclesiastical vvord
@c      in our language, for the name Sunday is a heathenish calling, as al
@c      other of the vveeke daies be in our language.
@c    Donaries.  Giftes offered to God for his Temple, &c.  [Luke 21:5]


@c    E

@c    Euacuated from Christ.  That is, Made voide and hauing no part vvith
@c      him.  [Gal 5:4]  The scandal of the crosse euacuated, that is, made
@c      voide, cleane taken avvay.  [Gal 5:11]
@c    Euangelize.  Signifieth such preaching of good tidinges, as concerneth
@c      the Gospel.  How is it possible to expresse Euangelizo, but as vve do,
@c      Euangelize?  for Euangelium being the Gospel, what is, Euangelizo or to
@c      Euangelize, but to shew the glad tydings of the Gospel, of the time of
@c      grace, of al Christs benefites?  Al which signification is lost, by
@c      translating as the English bibles do, "I bring you good tydings."
@c    Eunuches.  Gelded men.
@c    Euro-aquilo.  A north-eastvvinde.  [Acts 27:14]
@c    Exinanited.  Abased excedingly.  [Phil 2:7]


@c    G

@c    Gratis.  An vsual vvord to signifie, for nothing, freely, for
@c      Godamercie, vvithout desert.


@c    H

@c    Holocauste.  A kinde of sacrifice vvhere al vvas burnt in the honour
@c      of God.  [Hebr 10:6]
@c    Hostes.  Sacrifices.  [1 Cor 10:18]


@c    I

@c    Inuocated.  Called vpon, praied vnto.  [Acts 9:21]  Hereof vve say,
@c      Inuocation of Saincts, and to inuocate.
@c    Issue.  Good euent.  [1 Cor 10:13]
@c    Iustice.  Taken in the nevv Testament, not as it is contrarie to vvrong
@c      or iniurie, but for that qualitie vvhereof a man is iust and
@c      iustified.  [Rom 4:9]


@c    N

@c    Neophyte.  Neophytus is he that vvas lately christened or nevvely
@c      planted in the mystical body of Christ.  [1 Tim 3:6]


@c    P

@c    Paraclete.  By interpretation is either a comforter, or an aduocate: and
@c      therfore to translate it by any one of them only, is perhaps to
@c      abridge the sense of this place.  [John 14:16]
@c    Parasceue.  The Ievves Sabboth-eue, Good friday.  [Mark 15:42]
@c      Parasceue is as solemne a word for the Sabboth eue, as Sabboth is for
@c      the Iewes seuenth day, and now among Christians much more solemner,
@c      taken for Good-friday onely.  These wordes then we thought it far
@c      better to keepe in the text, and to tel their signification in the
@c      margent or in a table for that purpose, then to disgrace bothe the text
@c      and them with translating them.
@c    Pasche.  Easter, and the Paschal lambe.  [Luke 22:1]
@c    Pentecost.  Vvhitsuntide, &, the space of fiftie daies.
@c    Prefinition.  A determination before.  [Eph 3:11]
@c    Prepuce.  The foreskinne not circumcised, & therfore signifieth the
@c      Gentiles:  as circumcision, the Ievves and their state.  [Rom 2:25]
@c    Prescience.  Foreknovvledge.  [Acts 2:23]
@c    Preuaricatour.  Transgressor:  and preuarication, transgression.
@c      [Rom 2:25]
@c    Loaues of Proposition.  So called, because they vvere proposed and set
@c      vpon the table in the Temple, before God.  [Matt 12:4]


@c    R

@c    Repropitiate the sinnes.  That is, make a reconciliation for them.
@c      [Heb 2:17]
@c    Resolution.  The separation of the body and the soule, the departing out
@c      of this life.  [2 Tim 4:6]
@c    Resuscitate the grace.  That is, Raise, quicken, renew and reviue the
@c      grace vvhich othervvise languisheth and decaieth.  [2 Tim 1:6]


@c    S

@c    Sabbatisme.  A time of resting and ceasing from labours.  [Heb 4:9]
@c    Sacrament.  For mysterie.  [Eph 1:9]
@c    Sancta Sanctorum.  The holie of holies, that is, the inmost and holiest
@c      place of the Ievves Temple, as it vvere the Chauncel.  [Heb 9:3]
@c    Superedified.  Builded vpon Christ the principal stone.  [1 Pet 2:5]


@c    T

@c    Tetrarch.  Gouernour or Prince of the 4 part of a countrie. [Matt 14:1]
@c    Thrones.  An higher order of Angels.  [Col 1:16]


@c    V

@c    Victims.  Sacrifice.  [Acts 7:42]





@c    End of Project Gutenberg Etext of The Holy Bible, Douay-Rheims Version

@bye
