\input texinfo   @c -*-texinfo-*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename drbible.info
@settitle [The Bible]
@setchapternewpage odd
@c %**end of header

@c Thanks to the Gutenberg project for the original text.
@c http://www.gutenberg.net/.  Feel free to send them donations!




@c #########################################
@c **********NOTE For Translators***********
@c #########################################

@c Lines that start with '@c ' or '@comment ' are comments, that will
@c show up in none of the compiled versions.  The original text has been
@c placed in lines of this type, with break for paragraphs.

@c To help with the translation, simply pick a paragraph and enter the
@c lojban text, straight up, _without_ '@c ' or any other markup,
@c _after_ the original paragraph.  Almost all the markup this file
@c needs has already been done for you.

@c Note that there should be a blank line before and after each
@c paragraph.

@c Paragraphs that do not start with x:y (chater:verse) are editorial
@c comments, and need not be translated.  Probably shouldn't be, even.
@c Try to bind the meaning into the lojban translation instead.




@titlepage
@title [The Bible]
@author la lojbangirz. .e le so'i remna

@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll

This work, in all forms, is explicitely placed in the public domain.

@c *** INSERT LOJBAN TRANSLATION OF THE ABOVE HERE ***

@end titlepage

@contents

@node 	  Top,     le fukpi,    ,          (dir)
@comment  node-name, next,      previous,  up

@ifinfo
This is the text of the lojban translation of Jehovah's "The Bible".  A
work in progress. 

Yes, the author's name was a joke.  

The English version this is primarily copied from is the Douay-Rheims
version.

*****NOTE*****

From what I've heard, and I am _NOT_ a biblical scholor, this isn't a
terribly good version.  So, make sure you use one of the many biblical
search engines online to make comparisons whenever you are doing
translation here.

@end ifinfo

@menu
* le fukpi::	le nu fukpi gau do cu se curmi fi da
* pamoi pagbu::	[The Old Testament]
* remoi pagbu::	[The New Testament]
* cimoi pagbu::	[Appendices]
@end menu

@node le fukpi, pamoi pagbu, Top, Top
@chapter le fukpi

Public domain.  Woot.

@c Not done yet.

@c ************
@c The rest of the text is now in the other files in the directory where
@c you found this one.

@include ot.texinfo
@include nt.texinfo
@include appendices.texinfo
