@c    THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST. PAUL TO THE THESSALONIANS



@c    Thessalonica was the capital of Macedonia, in which St. Paul, having
@c    preached the Gospel, converted some Jews and a great number of the
@c    Gentiles:  but the unbelieving Jews, envying his success, raised such a
@c    commotion against him that he, and his companion, Sylvanus were obliged
@c    to quit the city.  Afterwards he went to Athens, where he heard that the
@c    converts in Thessalonica were under a severe persecution, ever since
@c    his departure; and lest they should lose their fortitude, he sent
@c    Timothy to strengthen and comfort them in their sufferings.  In the
@c    meantime St. Paul came to Corinth, where he wrote this first Epistle,
@c    and also the second to the Thessalonians, both in the same year, being
@c    the nineteenth after our Lord's Ascension.  These are the first of his
@c    Epistles in the order of time.



@c    1 Thessalonians Chapter 1


@c    He gives thanks for the grace bestowed on the Thessalonians.

@c    1:1. Paul and Sylvanus and Timothy to the church of the Thessalonians:
@c    in God the Father and in the Lord Jesus Christ.

@c    1:2. Grace be to you and peace.  We give thanks to God always for you
@c    all:  making a remembrance of you in our prayers without ceasing,

@c    1:3. Being mindful of the work of your faith and labour and charity:
@c    and of the enduring of the hope of our Lord Jesus Christ before God and
@c    our Father.

@c    1:4. Knowing, brethren, beloved of God, your election:

@c    1:5. For our gospel hath not been unto you in word only, but in power
@c    also:  and in the Holy Ghost and in much fulness, as you know what
@c    manner of men we have been among you for your sakes.

@c    1:6. And you became followers of us and of the Lord:  receiving the word
@c    in much tribulation, with joy of the Holy Ghost:

@c    1:7. So that you were made a pattern to all that believe in Macedonia
@c    and in Achaia.

@c    1:8. For from you was spread abroad the word of the Lord not only in
@c    Macedonia and in Achaia but also in every place:  your faith which is
@c    towards God, is gone forth, so that we need not to speak any thing.

@c    1:9. For they themselves relate of us, what manner of entering in we
@c    had unto you:  and how you turned to God from idols to serve the living
@c    and true God.

@c    1:10. And to wait for his Son from heaven (whom he raised up from the
@c    dead), Jesus, who hath delivered us from the wrath to come.



@c    1 Thessalonians Chapter 2


@c    The sincerity of the apostle's preaching the gospel to them and of
@c    their receiving it.

@c    2:1. For yourselves know, brethren, our entrance in unto you, that it
@c    was not in vain:

@c    2:2. But having suffered many things before and been shamefully
@c    treated, (as you know) at Philippi, we had confidence in our God, to
@c    speak unto you the gospel of God in much carefulness.

@c    2:3. For our exhortation was not of error, nor of uncleanness, nor in
@c    deceit.

@c    2:4. But as we were approved by God that the gospel should be committed
@c    to us:  even so we speak, not as pleasing men but God, who proveth our
@c    hearts.

@c    2:5. For neither have we used at any time the speech of flattery, as
@c    you know:  nor taken an occasion of covetousness (God is witness):

@c    2:6. Nor sought we glory of men, neither of you, nor of others.

@c    2:7. Whereas we might have been burdensome to you, as the apostles of
@c    Christ:  but we became little ones in the midst of you, as if a nurse
@c    should cherish her children:

@c    2:8. So desirous of you, we would gladly impart unto you not only the
@c    gospel of God but also our own souls:  because you were become most dear
@c    unto us.

@c    2:9. For you remember, brethren, our labour and toil:  working night and
@c    day, lest we should be chargeable to any of you, we preached among you
@c    the gospel of God.

@c    2:10. You are witnesses, and God also, how holily and justly and
@c    without blame we have been to you that have believed:

@c    2:11. As you know in what manner, entreating and comforting you (as a
@c    father doth his children),

@c    2:12. We testified to every one of you that you would walk worthy of
@c    God, who hath called you unto his kingdom and glory.

@c    2:14. For you, brethren, are become followers of the churches of God
@c    which are in Judea, in Christ Jesus:  for you also have suffered the
@c    same things from your own countrymen, even as they have from the Jews:

@c    2:15. Who both killed the Lord Jesus, and the prophets, and have
@c    persecuted us, and please not God, and are adversaries to all men;

@c    2:16. Prohibiting us to speak to the Gentiles, that they may be saved,
@c    to fill up their sins always:  for the wrath of God is come upon them to
@c    the end.

@c    To fill up their sins. . .That is, to fill up the measure of their sins,
@c    after which God's justice would punish them.  For the wrath of God is
@c    come upon them to the end. . .That is, to continue on them to the end.

@c    2:17. But we, brethren, being taken away from you for a short time, in
@c    sight, not in heart, have hastened the more abundantly to see your face
@c    with great desire.

@c    2:18. For we would have come unto you, I Paul indeed, once and again:
@c    but Satan hath hindered us.

@c    2:19. For what is our hope or joy or crown of glory?  Are not you, in
@c    the presence of our Lord Jesus Christ at his coming?

@c    2:20. For you are our glory and joy.



@c    1 Thessalonians Chapter 3


@c    The apostle's concern and love for the Thessalonians.

@c    3:1. For which cause, forbearing no longer, we thought it good to
@c    remain at Athens alone.

@c    3:2. And we sent Timothy, our brother and the minister of God in the
@c    gospel of Christ, to confirm you and exhort you concerning your faith:

@c    3:3. That no man should be moved in these tribulations:  for yourselves
@c    know that we are appointed thereunto.

@c    3:4. For even when we were with you, we foretold you that we should
@c    suffer tribulations:  as also it is come to pass, and you know.

@c    3:5. For this cause also, I, forbearing no longer, sent to know your
@c    faith:  lest perhaps he that tempteth should have tempted you:  and our
@c    labour should be made vain.

@c    3:6. But now when Timothy came to us from you and related to us your
@c    faith and charity, and that you have a good remembrance of us always,
@c    desiring to see us as we also to see you:

@c    3:7. Therefore we were comforted, brethren, in you, in all our
@c    necessity and tribulation, by your faith.

@c    3:8. Because now we live, if you stand in the Lord.

@c    3:9. For what thanks can we return to God for you, in all the joy
@c    wherewith we rejoice for you before our God,

@c    3:10. Night and day more abundantly praying that we may see your face
@c    and may accomplish those things that are wanting to your faith?

@c    3:11. Now God himself and our Father and our Lord Jesus Christ, direct
@c    our way unto you.

@c    3:12. And may the Lord multiply you and make you abound in charity
@c    towards one another and towards all men:  as we do also towards you,

@c    3:13. To confirm your hearts without blame, in holiness, before God and
@c    our Father, at the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, with all his
@c    saints.  Amen.



@c    1 Thessalonians Chapter 4


@c    He exhorts them to purity and mutual charity.  He treats of the
@c    resurrection of the dead.

@c    4:1. For the rest therefore, brethren, pray and beseech you in the Lord
@c    Jesus that, as you have received from us, how you ought to walk and to
@c    please God, so also you would walk, that you may abound the more.

@c    4:2. For you know what precepts I have given to you by the Lord Jesus.

@c    4:3. For this is the will of God, your sanctification:  That you should
@c    abstain from fornication:

@c    4:4. That every one of you should know how to possess his vessel in
@c    sanctification and honour,

@c    4:5. Not in the passion of lust, like the Gentiles that know not God:

@c    4:6. And that no man overreach nor circumvent his brother in business:
@c    because the Lord is the avenger of all these things, as we have told
@c    you before and have testified.

@c    4:7. For God hath not called us unto uncleanness, but unto
@c    sanctification.

@c    4:8. Therefore, he that despiseth these things, despiseth not man, but
@c    God, who also hath given his holy Spirit in us.

@c    4:9. But as touching the charity of brotherhood, we have no need to
@c    write to you:  for yourselves have learned of God to love one another.

@c    4:10. For indeed you do it towards all the brethren in all Macedonia.
@c    But we entreat you, brethren, that you abound more:

@c    4:11. And that you use your endeavour to be quiet:  and that you do your
@c    own business and work with your own hands, as we commanded you:  and
@c    that you walk honestly towards them that are without:  and that you want
@c    nothing of any man's.

@c    4:12. And we will not have you ignorant brethren, concerning them that
@c    are asleep, that you be not sorrowful, even as others who have no hope.

@c    4:13. For if we believe that Jesus died and rose again:  even so them
@c    who have slept through Jesus, will God bring with him.

@c    4:14. For this we say unto you in the word of the Lord, that we who are
@c    alive, who remain unto the coming of the Lord, shall not prevent them
@c    who have slept.

@c    4:15. For the Lord himself shall come down from heaven with commandment
@c    and with the voice of an archangel and with the trumpet of God:  and the
@c    dead who are in Christ shall rise first.

@c    4:16. Then we who are alive, who are left, shall be taken up together
@c    with them in the clouds to meet Christ, into the air:  and so shall we
@c    be always with the Lord.

@c    4:17. Wherefore, comfort ye one another with these words.



@c    1 Thessalonians Chapter 5


@c    The day of the Lord shall come when least expected.  Exhortations to
@c    several duties.

@c    5:1. But of the times and moments, brethren, you need not, that we
@c    should write to you:

@c    5:2. For yourselves know perfectly that the day of the Lord shall so
@c    come as a thief in the night.

@c    5:3. For when they shall say:  Peace and security; then shall sudden
@c    destruction come upon them, as the pains upon her that is with child,
@c    and they shall not escape.

@c    5:4. But you, brethren, are not in darkness, that the day should
@c    overtake you as a thief.

@c    5:5. For all you are the children of light and children of the day:  we
@c    are not of the night nor of darkness.

@c    5:6. Therefore, let us not sleep, as others do:  but let us watch, and
@c    be sober.

@c    5:7. For they that sleep, sleep in the night; and they that are drunk,
@c    are drunk in the night.

@c    5:8. But let us, who are of the day, be sober, having on the breast
@c    plate of faith and charity and, for a helmet, the hope of salvation.

@c    5:9. For God hath not appointed us unto wrath:  but unto the purchasing
@c    of salvation by our Lord Jesus Christ,

@c    5:10. Who died for us:  that, whether we watch or sleep, we may live
@c    together with him.

@c    5:11. For which cause comfort one another and edify one another, as you
@c    also do.

@c    5:12. And we beseech you, brethren, to know them who labour among you
@c    and are over you in the Lord and admonish you;

@c    5:13. That you esteem them more abundantly in charity, for their work's
@c    sake.  Have peace with them.

@c    5:14. And we beseech you, brethren, rebuke the unquiet:  comfort the
@c    feeble minded:  support the weak:  be patient towards all men.

@c    The unquiet. . .That is, such as are irregular and disorderly.

@c    5:15. See that none render evil for evil to any man:  but ever follow
@c    that which is good towards each other and towards all men.

@c    5:16. Always rejoice.

@c    5:17. Pray without ceasing.

@c    5:18. In all things give thanks for this is the will of God in Christ
@c    Jesus concerning you all.

@c    5:19. Extinguish not the spirit.

@c    5:20. Despise not prophecies.

@c    5:21. But prove all things:  hold fast that which is good.

@c    5:22. From all appearance of evil refrain yourselves.

@c    5:23. And may the God of peace himself sanctify you in all things:  that
@c    your whole spirit and soul and body may be preserved blameless in the
@c    coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.

@c    5:24. He is faithful who hath called you, who also will do it.

@c    5:25. Brethren, pray for us.

@c    5:26. Salute all the brethren with a holy kiss.

@c    5:27. I charge you by the Lord that this epistle be read to all the
@c    holy brethren.

@c    5:28. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you.  Amen.
