@c    THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST. JOHN THE APOSTLE



@c    The same vein of divine love and charity towards our neighbour, which
@c    runs throughout the Gospel written by the beloved disciple and
@c    Evangelist, St. John, is found also in his Epistles.  He confirms the
@c    two principal mysteries of faith:  The mystery of the Trinity and the
@c    mystery of the incarnation of Jesus Christ the Son of God.  The
@c    sublimity and excellence of the evangelical doctrine he declares:  And
@c    this commandment we have from God, that he, who loveth God, love also
@c    his brother (chap. 4,21).  And again:  For this is the charity of God,
@c    that we keep his commandments, and:  His commandments are not heavy
@c    (chap. 5,3).  He shews how to distinguish the children of God from those
@c    of the devil:  marks out those who should be called Antichrists:
@c    describes the turpitude and gravity of sin.  Finally, he shews how the
@c    sinner may hope for pardon.  It was written, according to Baronius'
@c    account, sixty-six years after our Lord's Ascension.



@c    1 John Chapter 1


@c    He declares what he has seen and heard of Christ who is the life
@c    eternal, to the end that we may have fellowship with God and all good
@c    through him.  Yet so if we confess our sins.

@c    1:1. That which was from the beginning, which we have heard, which we
@c    have seen with our eyes, which we have looked upon and our hands have
@c    handled, of the word of life.

@c    1:2. For the life was manifested:  and we have seen and do bear witness
@c    and declare unto you the life eternal, which was with the Father and
@c    hath appeared to us.

@c    1:3. That which we have seen and have heard, we declare unto you:  that
@c    you also may have fellowship with us and our fellowship may be with the
@c    Father and with his Son Jesus Christ.

@c    1:4. And these things we write to you, that you may rejoice and your
@c    joy may be full.

@c    1:5. And this is the declaration which we have heard from him and
@c    declare unto you:  That God is light and in him there is no darkness.

@c    1:6. If we say that we have fellowship with him and walk in darkness,
@c    we lie and do not the truth.

@c    1:7. But if we walk in the light, as he also is in the light, we have
@c    fellowship one with another:  And the blood of Jesus Christ his Son
@c    cleanseth us from all sin.

@c    1:8. If we say that we have no sin, we deceive ourselves and the truth
@c    is not in us.

@c    1:9. If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just, to forgive us our
@c    sins and to cleanse us from all iniquity.

@c    1:10. If we say that we have not sinned, we make him a liar:  and his
@c    word is not in us.



@c    1 John Chapter 2


@c    Christ is our advocate.  We must keep his commandments and love one
@c    another.  We must not love the world nor give ear to new teachers, but
@c    abide by the spirit of God in the church.

@c    2:1. My little children, these things I write to you, that you may not
@c    sin.  But if any man sin, we have an advocate with the Father, Jesus
@c    Christ the just.

@c    2:2. And he is the propitiation for our sins:  and not for ours only,
@c    but also for those of the whole world.

@c    2:3. And by this we know that we have known him, if we keep his
@c    commandments.

@c    We have known him, if we keep his commandments. . .He speaks of that
@c    practical knowledge by love and affection, which can only be proved by
@c    our keeping his commandments; and without which we can not be said to
@c    know God as we should do.

@c    2:4. He who saith that he knoweth him and keepeth not his commandments
@c    is a liar:  and the truth is not in him.

@c    2:5. But he that keepeth his word, in him in very deed the charity of
@c    God is perfected.  And by this we know that we are in him.

@c    2:6. He that saith he abideth in him ought himself also to walk even as
@c    he walked.

@c    2:7. Dearly beloved, I write not a new commandment to you, but an old
@c    commandment which you had from the beginning.  The old commandment is
@c    the word which you have heard.

@c    2:8. Again a new commandment I write unto you:  which thing is true both
@c    in him and in you, because the darkness is passed and the true light
@c    now shineth.

@c    A new commandment. . .Viz., the commandment of love, which was first
@c    given in the old law; but was renewed and extended by Christ.  See John
@c    13.34.

@c    2:9. He that saith he is in the light and hateth his brother is in
@c    darkness even until now.

@c    2:10. He that loveth his brother abideth in the light:  and there is no
@c    scandal in him.

@c    2:11. But he that hateth his brother is in darkness and walketh in
@c    darkness and knoweth not whither he goeth:  because the darkness hath
@c    blinded his eyes.

@c    2:12. I write unto you, little children, because your sins are forgiven
@c    you for his name's sake.

@c    2:13. I write unto you, fathers, because you have known him who is from
@c    the beginning.  I write unto you, young men, because you have overcome
@c    the wicked one.

@c    2:14. I write unto you, babes, because you have known the Father.  I
@c    write unto you, young men, because you are strong, and the word of God
@c    abideth in you, and you have overcome the wicked one.

@c    2:15. Love not the world, nor the things which are in the world.  If any
@c    man love the world, the charity of the Father is not in him.

@c    2:16. For all that is in the world is the concupiscence of the flesh
@c    and the concupiscence of the eyes and the pride of life, which is not
@c    of the Father but is of the world.

@c    2:17. And the world passeth away and the concupiscence thereof:  but he
@c    that doth the will of God abideth for ever.

@c    2:18. Little children, it is the last hour:  and as you have heard that
@c    Antichrist cometh, even now there are become many Antichrists:  whereby
@c    we know that it is the last hour.

@c    It is the last hour. . .That is, it is the last age of the world.  Many
@c    Antichrists;. . .that is, many heretics, enemies of Christ and his
@c    church, and forerunners of the great Antichrist.

@c    2:19. They went out from us but they were not of us.  For if they had
@c    been of us, they would no doubt have remained with us:  but that they
@c    may be manifest, that they are not all of us.

@c    They were not of us. . .That is, they were not solid, steadfast, genuine
@c    Christians:  otherwise they would have remained in the church.

@c    2:20. But you have the unction from the Holy One and know all things.

@c    The unction from the Holy One. . .That is, grace and wisdom from the
@c    Holy Ghost.  Know all things. . .The true children of God's church,
@c    remaining in unity, under the guidance of their lawful pastors, partake
@c    of the grace of the Holy Ghost, promised to the church and her pastors;
@c    and have in the church all necessary knowledge and instruction; so as
@c    to have no need to seek it elsewhere, since it can be only found in
@c    that society of which they are members.

@c    2:21. I have not written to you as to them that know not the truth, but
@c    as to them that know it:  and that no lie is of the truth.

@c    2:22. Who is a liar, but he who denieth that Jesus is the Christ?  This
@c    is Antichrist, who denieth the Father and the Son.

@c    2:23. Whosoever denieth the Son, the same hath not the Father.  He that
@c    confesseth the Son hath the Father also.

@c    2:24. As for you, let that which you have heard from the beginning
@c    abide in you.  If that abide in you, which you have heard from the
@c    beginning, you also shall abide in the Son and in the Father.

@c    2:25. And this is the promise which he hath promised us, life
@c    everlasting.

@c    2:26. These things have I written to you concerning them that seduce
@c    you.

@c    2:27. And as for you, let the unction, which you have received from him
@c    abide in you.  And you have no need that any man teach you:  but as his
@c    unction teacheth you of all things and is truth and is no lie.  And as
@c    it hath taught you, abide in him.

@c    You have no need, etc. . .You want not to be taught by any of these men,
@c    who, under pretence of imparting more knowledge to you, seek to seduce
@c    you (ver. 26), since you are sufficiently taught already, and have all
@c    knowledge and grace in the church, with the unction of the Holy Ghost;
@c    which these new teachers have no share in.

@c    2:28. And now, little children, abide in him, that when he shall appear
@c    we may have confidence and not be confounded by him at his coming.

@c    2:29. If you know that he is just, know ye, that every one also who
@c    doth justice is born of him.



@c    1 John Chapter 3


@c    Of the love of God to us.  How we may distinguish the children of God
@c    and those of the devil.  Of loving one another and of purity of
@c    conscience.

@c    3:1. Behold what manner of charity the Father hath bestowed upon us,
@c    that we should be called and should be the sons of God.  Therefore the
@c    world knoweth not us, because it knew not him.

@c    3:2. Dearly beloved, we are now the sons of God:  and it hath not yet
@c    appeared what we shall be.  We know that when he shall appear we shall
@c    be like to him:  because we shall see him as he is.

@c    3:3. And every one that hath this hope in him sanctifieth himself, as
@c    he also is holy.

@c    3:4. Whosoever committeth sin committeth also iniquity.  And sin is
@c    iniquity.

@c    Iniquity. . .transgression of the law.

@c    3:5. And you know that he appeared to take away our sins:  and in him
@c    there is no sin.

@c    3:6. Whosoever abideth in him sinneth not:  and whosoever sinneth hath
@c    not seen him nor known him.

@c    Sinneth not. . .viz., mortally.  See chap. 1.8.

@c    3:7. Little children, let no man deceive you.  He that doth justice is
@c    just, even as he is just.

@c    3:8. He that committeth sin is of the devil:  for the devil sinneth from
@c    the beginning.  For this purpose the Son of God appeared, that he might
@c    destroy the works of the devil.

@c    3:9. Whosoever is born of God committeth not sin:  for his seed abideth
@c    in him.  And he cannot sin, because he is born of God.

@c    Committeth not sin. . .That is, as long as he keepeth in himself this
@c    seed of grace, and this divine generation, by which he is born of God.
@c    But then he may fall from this happy state, by the abuse of his free
@c    will, as appears from Rom. 11.20-22; Cor. 9.27; and 10.12; Phil. 2.12;
@c    Apoc. 3.11.

@c    3:10. In this the children of God are manifest, and the children of the
@c    devil.  Whosoever is not just is not of God, or he that loveth not his
@c    brother.

@c    3:11. For this is the declaration which you have heard from the
@c    beginning, that you should love one another.

@c    3:12. Not as Cain, who was of the wicked one and killed his brother.
@c    And wherefore did he kill him?  Because his own works were wicked:  and
@c    his brother's just.

@c    3:13. Wonder not, brethren, if the world hate you.

@c    3:14. We know that we have passed from death to life, because we love
@c    the brethren.  He that loveth not abideth in death.

@c    3:15. Whosoever hateth his brother is a murderer.  And you know that no
@c    murderer hath eternal life abiding in himself.

@c    3:16. In this we have known the charity of God, because he hath laid
@c    down his life for us:  and we ought to lay down our lives for the
@c    brethren.

@c    3:17. He that hath the substance of this world and shall see his
@c    brother in need and shall shut up his bowels from him:  how doth the
@c    charity of God abide in him?

@c    3:18. My little children, let us not love in word nor in tongue, but in
@c    deed and in truth.

@c    3:19. In this we know that we are of the truth and in his sight shall
@c    persuade our hearts.

@c    3:20. For if our heart reprehend us, God is greater than our heart and
@c    knoweth all things.

@c    3:21. Dearly beloved, if our heart do not reprehend us, we have
@c    confidence towards God.

@c    3:22. And whatsoever we shall ask, we shall receive of him:  because we
@c    keep his commandments and do those things which are pleasing in his
@c    sight.

@c    3:23. And this is his commandment:  That we should believe in the name
@c    of his Son Jesus Christ and love one another, as he hath given
@c    commandment unto us.

@c    3:24. And he that keepeth his commandments abideth in him, and he in
@c    him.  And in this we know that he abideth in us by the Spirit which he
@c    hath given us.



@c    1 John Chapter 4


@c    What spirits are of God, and what are not.  We must love one another,
@c    because God has loved us.

@c    4:1. Dearly beloved, believe not every spirit, but try the spirits if
@c    they be of God:  because many false prophets are gone out into the
@c    world.

@c    Try the spirits. . .Viz., by examining whether their teaching be
@c    agreeable to the rule of the Catholic faith, and the doctrine of the
@c    church.  For as he says, (ver. 6,) He that knoweth God, heareth us [the
@c    pastors of the church].  By this we know the spirit of truth, and the
@c    spirit of error.

@c    4:2. By this is the spirit of God known.  Every spirit which confesseth
@c    that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh is of God:

@c    Every spirit which confesseth, etc. . .Not that the confession of this
@c    point of faith alone, is, at all times, and in all cases, sufficient;
@c    but that with relation to that time, and for that part of the Christian
@c    doctrine, which was then particularly to be confessed, taught, and
@c    maintained against the heretics of those days, this was the most proper
@c    token, by which the true teachers might be distinguished form the
@c    false.

@c    4:3. And every spirit that dissolveth Jesus is not of God.  And this is
@c    Antichrist, of whom you have heard that he cometh:  and he is now
@c    already in the world.

@c    That dissolveth Jesus. . .Viz., either by denying his humanity, or his
@c    divinity.  He is now already in the world. . .Not in his person, but in
@c    his spirit, and in his precursors.

@c    4:4. You are of God, little children, and have overcome him.  Because
@c    greater is he that is in you, than he that is in the world.

@c    4:5. They are of the world.  Therefore of the world they speak:  and the
@c    world heareth them.

@c    4:6. We are of God.  He that knoweth God heareth us.  He that is not of
@c    God heareth us not.  By this we know the spirit of truth and the spirit
@c    of error.

@c    4:7. Dearly beloved, let us love one another:  for charity is of God.
@c    And every one that loveth is born of God and knoweth God.

@c    4:8. He that loveth not knoweth not God:  for God is charity.

@c    4:9. By this hath the charity of God appeared towards us, because God
@c    hath sent his only begotten Son into the world, that we may live by
@c    him.

@c    4:10. In this is charity:  not as though we had loved God, but because
@c    he hath first loved us, and sent his Son to be a propitiation for our
@c    sins.

@c    4:11. My dearest, if God hath so loved us, we also ought to love one
@c    another.

@c    4:12. No man hath seen God at any time.  If we love one another, God
@c    abideth in us:  and his charity is perfected in us.

@c    4:13. In this we know that we abide in him, and he in us:  because he
@c    hath given us of his spirit.

@c    4:14. And we have seen and do testify that the Father hath sent his Son
@c    to be the Saviour of the world.

@c    4:15. Whosoever shall confess that Jesus is the Son of God, God abideth
@c    in him, and he in God.

@c    4:16. And we have known and have believed the charity which God hath to
@c    us.  God is charity:  and he that abideth in charity abideth in God, and
@c    God in him.

@c    4:17. In this is the charity of God perfected with us, that we may have
@c    confidence in the day of judgment:  because as he is, we also are in
@c    this world.

@c    4:18. Fear is not in charity:  but perfect charity casteth out fear,
@c    because fear hath sin.  And he that feareth is not perfected in charity.

@c    Fear is not in charity, etc. . .Perfect charity, or love, banisheth
@c    human fear, that is, the fear of men; as also all perplexing fear,
@c    which makes men mistrust or despair of God's mercy; and that kind of
@c    servile fear, which makes them fear the punishment of sin more than the
@c    offence offered to God.  But it no way excludes the wholesome fear of
@c    God's judgments, so often recomended in holy writ; nor that fear and
@c    trembling, with which we are told to work out our salvation.  Phil.
@c    2.12.

@c    4:19. Let us therefore love God:  because God first hath loved us.

@c    4:20. If any man say:  I love God, and hateth his brother; he is a liar.
@c    For he that loveth not his brother whom he seeth, how can he love God
@c    whom he seeth not?

@c    4:21. And this commandment we have from God, that he who loveth God
@c    love also his brother.



@c    1 John Chapter 5


@c    Of them that are born of God, and of true charity.  Faith overcomes the
@c    world.  Three that bear witness to Christ.  Of faith in his name and of
@c    sin that is and is not to death.

@c    5:1. Whosoever believeth that Jesus is the Christ, is born of God.  And
@c    every one that loveth him who begot, loveth him also who is born of
@c    him.

@c    Is born of God. . .That is, is justified, and become a child of God by
@c    baptism:  which is also to be understood; provided the belief of this
@c    fundamental article of the Christian faith be accompanied with all the
@c    other conditions, which, by the word of God, and his appointment, are
@c    also required to justification; such as a general belief of all that
@c    God has revealed and promised:  hope, love, repentance, and a sincere
@c    disposition to keep God's holy law and commandments.

@c    5:2. In this we know that we love the children of God:  when we love God
@c    and keep his commandments.

@c    5:3. For this is the charity of God:  That we keep his commandments.  And
@c    his commandments are not heavy.

@c    5:4. For whatsoever is born of God overcometh the world.  And this is
@c    the victory which overcameth the world:  Our faith.

@c    Our faith. . .Not a bare, speculative, or dead faith; but a faith that
@c    worketh by charity.  Gal. 5.6

@c    5:5. Who is he that overcometh the world, but he that believeth that
@c    Jesus is the Son of God?

@c    5:6. This is he that came by water and blood, Jesus Christ:  not by
@c    water only but by water and blood.  And it is the Spirit which
@c    testifieth that Christ is the truth.

@c    Came by water and blood. . .Not only to wash away our sins by the water
@c    of baptism, but by his own blood.

@c    5:7. And there are Three who give testimony in heaven, the Father, the
@c    Word, and the Holy Ghost.  And these three are one.

@c    5:8. And there are three that give testimony on earth:  the spirit and
@c    the water and the blood.  And these three are one.

@c    The spirit, and the water, and the blood. . .As the Father, the Word,
@c    and the Holy Ghost, all bear witness to Christ's divinity; so the
@c    spirit, which he yielded up, crying out with a loud voice upon the
@c    cross; and the water and blood that issued from his side, bear witness
@c    to his humanity, and are one; that is, all agree in one testimony.

@c    5:9. If we receive the testimony of men, the testimony of God is
@c    greater.  For this is the testimony of God, which is greater, because he
@c    hath testified of his Son.

@c    5:10. He that believeth in the Son of God hath the testimony of God in
@c    himself.  He that believeth not the Son maketh him a liar:  because he
@c    believeth not in the testimony which God hath testified of his Son.

@c    He that believeth not the Son, etc. . .By refusing to believe the
@c    testimonies given by the three divine persons, that Jesus was the
@c    Messias, and the true Son of God, by whom eternal life is obtained and
@c    promised to all that comply with his doctrine.  In him we have also this
@c    lively confidence, that we shall obtain whatever we ask, according to
@c    his will, when we ask what is for our good, with perseverance, and in
@c    the manner we ought.  And this we know, and have experience of, by
@c    having obtained the petitions that we have made.

@c    5:11. And this is the testimony that God hath given to us eternal life.
@c    And this life is in his Son.

@c    5:12. He that hath the Son hath life.  He that hath not the Son hath not
@c    life.

@c    5:13. These things I write to you that you may know that you have
@c    eternal life:  you who believe in the name of the Son of God.

@c    5:14. And this is the confidence which we have towards him:  That,
@c    whatsoever we shall ask according to his will, he heareth us.

@c    5:15. And we know that he heareth us whatsoever we ask:  we know that we
@c    have the petitions which we request of him.

@c    5:16. He that knoweth his brother to sin a sin which is not to death,
@c    let him ask:  and life shall be given to him who sinneth not to death.
@c    There is a sin unto death.  For that I say not that any man ask.

@c    A sin which is not to death, etc. . .It is hard to determine what St.
@c    John here calls a sin which is not to death, and a sin which is unto
@c    death.  The difference can not be the same as betwixt sins that are
@c    called venial and mortal:  for he says, that if a man pray for his
@c    brother, who commits a sin that is not to death, life shall be given
@c    him:  therefore such a one had before lost the life of grace, and been
@c    guilty of what is commonly called a mortal sin.  And when he speaks of a
@c    sin that is unto death, and adds these words, for that I say not that
@c    any man ask, it cannot be supposed that St. John would say this of
@c    every mortal sin, but only of some heinous sins, which are very seldom
@c    remitted, because such sinners very seldom repent.  By a sin therefore
@c    which is unto death, interpreters commonly understand a wilfull
@c    apostasy from the faith, and from the known truth, when a sinner,
@c    hardened by his own ingratitude, becomes deaf to all admonitions, will
@c    do nothing for himself, but runs on to a final impenitence.  Nor yet
@c    does St. John say, that such a sin is never remitted, or cannot be
@c    remitted, but only has these words, for that I say not that any man ask
@c    the remission :  that is, though we must pray for all sinners
@c    whatsoever, yet men can not pray for such sinners with such a
@c    confidence of obtaining always their petitions, as St. John said
@c    before, ver. 14.  Whatever exposition we follow on this verse, our faith
@c    teacheth us from the holy scriptures, that God desires not the death of
@c    any sinner, but that he be converted and live, Ezech. 33.11.  Though
@c    men's sins be as red as scarlet, they shall become as white as snow,
@c    Isa. 3.18.  It is the will of God that every one come to the knowledge
@c    of the truth, and be saved.  There is no sin so great but which God is
@c    willing to forgive, and has left a power in his church to remit the
@c    most enormous sins:  so that no sinner need despair of pardon, nor will
@c    any sinner perish, but by his own fault.  A sin unto death. . .Some
@c    understand this of final impenitence, or of dying in mortal sin; which
@c    is the only sin that never can be remitted.  But, it is probable, he may
@c    also comprise under this name, the sin of apostasy from the faith, and
@c    some other such heinous sins as are seldom and hardly remitted:  and
@c    therefore he gives little encouragement, to such as pray for these
@c    sinners, to expect what they ask.

@c    5:17. All iniquity is sin.  And there is a sin unto death.

@c    5:18. We know that whosoever is born of God sinneth not:  but the
@c    generation of God preserveth him and the wicked one toucheth him not.

@c    5:19. We know that we are of God and the whole world is seated in
@c    wickedness.

@c    And the whole world is seated in wickedness. . .That is, a great part of
@c    the world.  It may also signify, is under the wicked one, meaning the
@c    devil, who is elsewhere called the prince of this world, that is, of
@c    all the wicked.  John 12.31.

@c    5:20. And we know that the Son of God is come.  And he hath given us
@c    understanding that we may know the true God and may be in his true Son.
@c    This is the true God and life eternal.

@c    And may be in his true Son.  He is, or this is the true God, and life
@c    eternal. . .Which words are a clear proof of Christ's divinity, and as
@c    such made use of by the ancient fathers.

@c    5:21. Little children, keep yourselves from idols.  Amen.

@c    Keep yourselves from idols. . .An admonition to the newly converted
@c    Christians, lest conversing with heathens and idolaters, they might
@c    fall back into the sin of idolatry, which may be the sin unto death
@c    here mentioned by St. John.
