@c    THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST. PAUL TO THE CORINTHIANS



@c    St. Paul, having planted the faithful in Corinth, where he had preached
@c    a year and a half and converted a great many, went to Ephesus.  After
@c    being there three years, he wrote this first Epistle to the Corinthians
@c    and sent it by the same persons, Stephanus, Fortunatus and Achaicus,
@c    who had brought their letter to him.  It was written about twenty-four
@c    years after our Lord's Ascension and contains several matters
@c    appertaining to faith and morals and also to ecclesiastical discipline.



@c    1 Corinthians Chapter 1


@c    He reproveth their dissensions about their teachers.  The world was to
@c    be saved by preaching of the cross, and not by human wisdom or
@c    eloquence.

@c    1:1. Paul, called to be an apostle of Jesus Christ by the will of God,
@c    and Sosthenes a brother,

@c    1:2. To the church of God that is at Corinth, to them that are
@c    sanctified in Christ Jesus, called to be saints, with all that invoke
@c    the name of our Lord Jesus Christ in every place of theirs and ours.

@c    1:3. Grace to you and peace, from God our father and from the Lord
@c    Jesus Christ.

@c    1:4. I give thanks to my God always for you, for the grace of God that
@c    is given you in Christ Jesus:

@c    1:5. That in all things you are made rich in him, in all utterance and
@c    in all knowledge;

@c    1:6. As the testimony of Christ was confirmed in you,

@c    1:7. So that nothing is wanting to you in any grace, waiting for the
@c    manifestation of our Lord Jesus Christ.

@c    1:8. Who also will confirm you unto the end without crime, in the days
@c    of the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.

@c    1:9. God is faithful:  by whom you are called unto the fellowship of his
@c    Son, Jesus Christ our Lord.

@c    1:10. Now I beseech you, brethren, by the name of our Lord Jesus
@c    Christ, that you all speak the same thing and that there be no schisms
@c    among you:  but that you be perfect in the same mind and in the same
@c    judgment.

@c    1:11. For it hath been signified unto me, my brethren, of you, by them
@c    that are of the house of Chloe, that there are contentions among you.

@c    1:12. Now this I say, that every one of you saith:  I indeed am of Paul;
@c    and I am of Apollo; and I of Cephas; and I of Christ.

@c    1:13. Is Christ divided?  Was Paul then crucified for you?  Or were you
@c    baptized in the name of Paul?

@c    1:14. I give God thanks, that I baptized none of you but Crispus and
@c    Caius:

@c    1:15. Lest any should say that you were baptized in my name.

@c    1:16. And I baptized also the household of Stephanus.  Besides, I know
@c    not whether I baptized any other.

@c    1:17. For Christ sent me not to baptize, but to preach the gospel:  not
@c    in wisdom of speech, lest the cross of Christ should be made void.

@c    1:18. For the word of the cross, to them indeed that perish, is
@c    foolishness:  but to them that are saved, that is, to us, it is the
@c    power of God.

@c    1:19. For it is written:  I will destroy the wisdom of the wise:  and the
@c    prudence of the prudent I will reject.

@c    1:20. Where is the wise?  Where is the scribe?  Where is the disputer of
@c    this world?  Hath not God made foolish the wisdom of this world?

@c    1:21. For, seeing that in the wisdom of God, the world, by wisdom, knew
@c    not God, it pleased God, by the foolishness of our preaching, to save
@c    them that believe.

@c    1:22. For both the Jews require signs:  and the Greeks seek after
@c    wisdom.

@c    1:23. But we preach Christ crucified:  unto the Jews indeed a
@c    stumblingblock, and unto the Gentiles foolishness:

@c    1:24. But unto them that are called, both Jews and Greeks, Christ, the
@c    power of God and the wisdom of God.

@c    1:25. For the foolishness of God is wiser than men:  and the weakness of
@c    God is stronger than men.

@c    The foolishness, etc. . .That is to say, what appears foolish to the
@c    world in the ways of God, is indeed most wise; and what appears weak is
@c    indeed above all the strength and comprehension of man.

@c    1:26. For see your vocation, brethren, that there are not many wise
@c    according to the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble.

@c    1:27. But the foolish things of the world hath God chosen, that he may
@c    confound the wise:  and the weak things of the world hath God chosen,
@c    that he may confound the strong.

@c    1:28. And the base things of the world and the things that are
@c    contemptible, hath God chosen:  and things that are not, that he might
@c    bring to nought things that are:

@c    1:29. That no flesh should glory in his sight.

@c    1:30. But of him are you in Christ Jesus, who of God is made unto us
@c    wisdom and justice and sanctification and redemption:

@c    1:31. That, as it is written:  He that glorieth may glory in the Lord.



@c    1 Corinthians Chapter 2


@c    His preaching was not in loftiness of words, but in spirit and power.
@c    And the wisdom he taught was not to be understood by the worldly wise
@c    or sensual man, but only by the spiritual man.

@c    2:1. And I, brethren, when I came to you, came not in loftiness of
@c    speech or of wisdom, declaring unto you the testimony of Christ.

@c    2:2. For I judged not myself to know anything among you, but Jesus
@c    Christ:  and him crucified.

@c    2:3. And I was with you in weakness and in fear and in much trembling.

@c    2:4. And my speech and my preaching was not in the persuasive words of
@c    human wisdom.  but in shewing of the Spirit and power:

@c    2:5. That your faith might not stand on the wisdom of men, but on the
@c    power of God.

@c    2:6. Howbeit we speak wisdom among the perfect:  yet not the wisdom of
@c    this world, neither of the princes of this world that come to nought.

@c    2:7. But we speak the wisdom of God in a mystery, a wisdom which is
@c    hidden, which God ordained before the world, unto our glory:

@c    2:8. Which none of the princes of this world knew.  For if they had
@c    known it, they would never have crucified the Lord of glory.

@c    2:9. But, as it is written:  That eye hath not seen, nor ear heard:
@c    neither hath it entered into the heart of man, what things God hath
@c    prepared for them that love him.

@c    2:10. But to us God hath revealed them by his Spirit.  For the Spirit
@c    searcheth all things, yea, the deep things of God.

@c    2:11. For what man knoweth the things of a man, but the spirit of a man
@c    that is in him?  So the things also that are of God, no man knoweth, but
@c    the Spirit of God.

@c    2:12. Now, we have received not the spirit of this world, but the
@c    Spirit that is of God:  that we may know the things that are given us
@c    from God.

@c    2:13. Which things also we speak:  not in the learned words of human
@c    wisdom, but in the doctrine of the Spirit, comparing spiritual things
@c    with spiritual.

@c    2:14. But the sensual man perceiveth not these things that are of the
@c    Spirit of God.  For it is foolishness to him:  and he cannot understand,
@c    because it is spiritually examined.

@c    The sensual man--the spiritual man. . .The sensual man is either he who
@c    is taken up with sensual pleasures, with carnal and worldly affections;
@c    or he who measureth divine mysteries by natural reason, sense, and
@c    human wisdom only.  Now such a man has little or no notion of the things
@c    of God.  Whereas the spiritual man is he who, in the mysteries of
@c    religion, takes not human sense for his guide:  but submits his judgment
@c    to the decisions of the church, which he is commanded to hear and obey.
@c    For Christ hath promised to remain to the end of the world with his
@c    church, and to direct her in all things by the Spirit of truth.

@c    2:15. But the spiritual man judgeth all things:  and he himself is
@c    judged of no man.

@c    2:16. For who hath known the mind of the Lord, that he may instruct
@c    him?  But we have the mind of Christ.



@c    1 Corinthians Chapter 3


@c    They must not contend about their teachers, who are but God's ministers
@c    and accountable to him.  Their works shall be tried by fire.

@c    3:1. And I, brethren, could not speak to you as unto spiritual, but as
@c    unto carnal.  As unto little ones in Christ.

@c    3:2. I gave you milk to drink, not meat:  for you were not able as yet.
@c    But neither indeed are you now able:  for you are yet carnal.

@c    3:3. For, whereas there is among you envying and contention, are you
@c    not carnal and walk you not according to man?

@c    3:4. For while one saith:  I indeed am of Paul:  and another:  I am of
@c    Apollo:  are you not men?  What then is Apollo and what is Paul?

@c    3:5. The ministers of him whom you have believed:  and to every one as
@c    the Lord hath given.

@c    3:6. I have planted, Apollo watered:  but God gave the increase.

@c    3:7. Therefore, neither he that planteth is any thing, nor he that
@c    watereth:  but God that giveth the increase.

@c    3:8. Now he that planteth and he that watereth, are one.  And every man
@c    shall receive his own reward, according to his own labour.

@c    3:9. For we are God's coadjutors.  You are God's husbandry:  you are
@c    God's building.

@c    3:10. According to the grace of God that is given to me, as a wise
@c    architect, I have laid the foundation:  and another buildeth thereon.
@c    But let every man take heed how he buildeth thereupon.

@c    3:11. For other foundation no man can lay, but that which is laid:
@c    which is Christ Jesus.

@c    3:12. Now, if any man build upon this foundation, gold, silver,
@c    precious stones, wood, hay, stubble:

@c    Upon this foundation. . .The foundation is Christ and his doctrine:  or
@c    the true faith in him, working through charity.  The building upon this
@c    foundation gold, silver, and precious stones, signifies the more
@c    perfect preaching and practice of the gospel; the wood, hay, and
@c    stubble, such preaching as that of the Corinthian teachers (who
@c    affected the pomp of words and human eloquence) and such practice as is
@c    mixed with much imperfection, and many lesser sins.  Now the day of the
@c    Lord, and his fiery trial, (in the particular judgment immediately
@c    after death,) shall make manifest of what sort every man's work has
@c    been:  of which, during this life, it is hard to make a judgment.  For
@c    then the fire of God's judgment shall try every man's work.  And they,
@c    whose works, like wood, hay, and stubble, cannot abide the fire, shall
@c    suffer loss; these works being found to be of no value; yet they
@c    themselves, having built upon the right foundation, (by living and
@c    dying in the true faith and in the state of grace, though with some
@c    imperfection,) shall be saved yet so as by fire; being liable to this
@c    punishment, by reason of the wood, hay, and stubble, which was mixed
@c    with their building.

@c    3:13. Every man's work shall be manifest.  For the day of the Lord shall
@c    declare it, because it shall be revealed in fire.  And the fire shall
@c    try every man's work, of what sort it is.

@c    3:14. If any man's work abide, which he hath built thereupon, he shall
@c    receive a reward.

@c    3:15. If any mans work burn, he shall suffer loss:  but he himself shall
@c    be saved, yet so as by fire.

@c    3:16. Know you not that you are the temple of God and that the Spirit
@c    of God dwelleth in you?

@c    3:17. But if any man violate the temple of God, him shall God destroy.
@c    For the temple of God is holy, which you are.

@c    3:18. Let no man deceive himself.  If any man among you seem to be wise
@c    in this world, let him become a fool, that he may be wise.

@c    3:19. For the wisdom of this world is foolishness with God.  For it is
@c    written:  I will catch the wise in their own craftiness.

@c    3:20. And again:  The Lord knoweth the thoughts of the wise, that they
@c    are vain.

@c    3:21. Let no man therefore glory in men.

@c    3:22. For all things are yours, whether it be Paul or Apollo or Cephas,
@c    or the world, or life, or death, or things present, or things to come.
@c    For all are yours.

@c    3:23. And you are Christ's.  And Christ is God's.



@c    1 Corinthians Chapter 4


@c    God's ministers are not to be judged.  He reprehends their boasting of
@c    their preachers and describes the treatment the apostles every where
@c    met with.

@c    4:1. Let a man so account of us as of the ministers of Christ and the
@c    dispensers of the mysteries of God.

@c    4:2. Here now it is required among the dispensers that a man be found
@c    faithful.

@c    4:3. But to me it is a very small thing to be judged by you or by man's
@c    day.  But neither do I judge my own self.

@c    4:4. For I am not conscious to myself of anything.  Yet am I not hereby
@c    justified:  but he that judgeth me is the Lord.

@c    4:5. Therefore, judge not before the time:  until the Lord come, who
@c    both will bring to light the hidden things of darkness and will make
@c    manifest the counsels of the hearts.  And then shall every man have
@c    praise from God.

@c    4:6. But these things, brethren, I have in a figure transferred to
@c    myself and to Apollo, for your sakes:  that in us you may learn that one
@c    be not puffed up against the other for another, above that which is
@c    written.

@c    4:7. For who distinguisheth thee?  Or what hast thou that thou hast not
@c    received, and if thou hast received, why dost thou glory, as if thou
@c    hadst not received it?

@c    4:8. You are now full:  you are now become rich:  you reign without us;
@c    and I would to God you did reign, that we also might reign with you.

@c    4:9. For I think that God hath set forth us apostles, the last, as it
@c    were men appointed to death.  We are made a spectacle to the world and
@c    to angels and to men.

@c    4:10. We are fools for Christs sake, but you are wise in Christ:  we are
@c    weak, but you are strong:  you are honourable, but we without honour.

@c    4:11. Even unto this hour we both hunger and thirst and are naked and
@c    are buffeted and have no fixed abode.

@c    4:12. And we labour, working with our own hands.  We are reviled:  and we
@c    bless.  We are persecuted:  and we suffer it.

@c    4:13. We are blasphemed:  and we entreat.  We are made as the refuse of
@c    this world, the offscouring of all, even until now.

@c    4:14. I write not these things to confound you:  but I admonish you as
@c    my dearest children.

@c    4:15. For if you have ten thousand instructors in Christ, yet not many
@c    fathers.  For in Christ Jesus, by the gospel, I have begotten you.

@c    4:16. Wherefore, I beseech you, be ye followers of me as I also am of
@c    Christ.

@c    4:17. For this cause have I sent to you Timothy, who is my dearest son
@c    and faithful in the Lord.  Who will put you in mind of my ways, which
@c    are in Christ Jesus:  as I teach every where in every church.

@c    4:18. As if I would not come to you, so some are puffed up.

@c    4:19. But I will come to you shortly, if the Lord will:  and will know,
@c    not the speech of them that are puffed up, but the power.

@c    4:20. For the kingdom of God is not in speech, but in power.

@c    4:21. What will you?  Shall I come to you with a rod?  Or in charity and
@c    in the spirit of meekness?



@c    1 Corinthians Chapter 5


@c    He excommunicates the incestuous adulterer and admonishes them to purge
@c    out the old leaven.

@c    5:1. It is absolutely heard that there is fornication among you and
@c    such fornication as the like is not among the heathens:  that one should
@c    have his father's wife.

@c    5:2. And you are puffed up and have not rather mourned:  that he might
@c    be taken away from among you that hath done this thing.

@c    5:3. I indeed, absent in body but present in spirit, have already
@c    judged, as though I were present, him that hath so done,

@c    5:4. In the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, you being gathered together
@c    and my spirit, with the power of our Lord Jesus:

@c    5:5. To deliver such a one to Satan for the destruction of the flesh,
@c    that the spirit may be saved in the day of our Lord Jesus Christ.

@c    5:6. Your glorying is not good.  Know you not that a little leaven
@c    corrupteth the whole lump?

@c    5:7. Purge out the old leaven, that you may be a new paste, as you are
@c    unleavened.  For Christ our pasch is sacrificed.

@c    5:8. Therefore, let us feast, not with the old leaven, nor with the
@c    leaven of malice and wickedness:  but with the unleavened bread of
@c    sincerity and truth.

@c    9. I wrote to you in an epistle not to keep company with fornicators.

@c    5:10. I mean not with the fornicators of this world or with the
@c    covetous or the extortioners or the servers of idols:  otherwise you
@c    must needs go out of this world.

@c    5:11. But now I have written to you, not to keep company, if any man
@c    that is named a brother be a fornicator or covetous or a server of
@c    idols or a railer or a drunkard or an extortioner:  with such a one, not
@c    so much as to eat.

@c    5:12. For what have I to do to judge them that are without?  Do not you
@c    judge them that are within?

@c    5:13. For them that are without, God will judge.  Put away the evil one
@c    from among yourselves.



@c    1 Corinthians Chapter 6


@c    He blames them for going to law before unbelievers.  Of sins that
@c    exclude from the kingdom of heaven.  The evil of fornication.

@c    6:1. Dare any of you, having a matter against another, go to be judged
@c    before the unjust:  and not before the saints?

@c    6:2. Know you not that the saints shall judge this world?  And if the
@c    world shall be judged by you, are you unworthy to judge the smallest
@c    matters?

@c    6:3. Know you not that we shall judge angels?  How much more things of
@c    this world?

@c    6:4. If therefore you have judgments of things pertaining to this
@c    world, set them to judge who are the most despised in the church.

@c    6:5. I speak to your shame.  Is it so that there is not among you any
@c    one wise man that is able to judge between his brethren?

@c    6:6. But brother goeth to law with brother:  and that before
@c    unbelievers.

@c    6:7. Already indeed there is plainly a fault among you, that you have
@c    law suits one with another.  Why do you not rather take wrong?  Why do
@c    you not rather suffer yourselves to be defrauded?

@c    A fault. . .Lawsuits can hardly ever be without a fault, on the one side
@c    or the other; and oftentimes on both sides.

@c    6:8. But you do wrong and defraud:  and that to your brethren.

@c    6:9. Know you not that the unjust shall not possess the kingdom of God?
@c    Do not err:  Neither fornicators nor idolaters nor adulterers:

@c    6:10. Nor the effeminate nor liers with mankind nor thieves nor
@c    covetous nor drunkards nor railers nor extortioners shall possess the
@c    kingdom of God.

@c    6:11. And such some of you were.  But you are washed:  but you are
@c    sanctified:  but you are justified:  in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ
@c    and the Spirit of our God.

@c    6:12. All things are lawful to me:  but all things are not expedient.
@c    All things are lawful to me:  but I will not be brought under the power
@c    of any.

@c    All things are lawful, etc. . .That is, all indifferent things are
@c    indeed lawful, inasmuch as they are not prohibited; but oftentimes they
@c    are not expedient; as in the case of lawsuits, etc.  And much less would
@c    it be expedient to be enslaved by an irregular affection to any thing,
@c    how indifferent soever.

@c    6:13. Meat for the belly and the belly for the meats:  but God shall
@c    destroy both it and them.  But the body is not for fornication, but for
@c    the Lord:  and the Lord for the body.

@c    6:14. Now God hath raised up the Lord and will raise us up also by his
@c    power.

@c    6:15. Know you not that your bodies are the members of Christ?  Shall I
@c    then take the members of Christ and make them the members of an harlot?
@c    God forbid!

@c    6:16. Or know you not that he who is joined to a harlot is made one
@c    body?  For they shall be, saith he, two in one flesh.

@c    6:17. But he who is joined to the Lord is one spirit.

@c    6:18. Fly fornication.  Every sin that a man doth is without the body:
@c    but he that committeth fornication sinneth against his own body.

@c    6:19. Or know you not that your members are the temple of the Holy
@c    Ghost, who is in you, whom you have from God:  and you are not your own?

@c    6:20. For you are bought with a great price.  Glorify and bear God in
@c    your body.



@c    1 Corinthians Chapter 7


@c    Lessons relating to marriage and celibacy.  Virginity is preferable to a
@c    married state.

@c    7:1. Now concerning the things whereof you wrote to me:  It is good for
@c    a man not to touch a woman.

@c    7:2. But for fear of fornication, let every man have his own wife:  and
@c    let every woman have her own husband.

@c    Have his own wife. . .That is, keep to his wife, which he hath.  His
@c    meaning is not to exhort the unmarried to marry:  on the contrary, he
@c    would have them rather continue as they are.  (Ver. 7:8.)  But he speaks
@c    here to them that are already married; who must not depart from one
@c    another, but live together as they ought to do in the marriage state.

@c    7:3. Let the husband render the debt to his wife:  and the wife also in
@c    like manner to the husband.

@c    7:4. The wife hath not power of her own body:  but the husband.  And in
@c    like manner the husband also hath not power of his own body:  but the
@c    wife.

@c    7:5. Defraud not one another, except, perhaps, by consent, for a time,
@c    that you may give yourselves to prayer:  and return together again, lest
@c    Satan tempt you for your incontinency.

@c    7:6. But I speak this by indulgence, not by commandment.

@c    By indulgence. . .That is, by a condescension to your weakness.

@c    7:7. For I would that all men were even as myself.  But every one hath
@c    his proper gift from God:  one after this manner, and another after
@c    that.

@c    7:8. But I say to the unmarried and to the widows:  It is good for them
@c    if they so continue, even as I.

@c    7:9. But if they do not contain themselves, let them marry.  For it is
@c    better to marry than to be burnt.

@c    If they do not contain, etc. . .This is spoken of such as are free, and
@c    not of such as, by vow, have given their first faith to God; to whom if
@c    they will use proper means to obtain it, God will never refuse the gift
@c    of continency.  Some translators have corrupted this text, by rendering
@c    it, if they cannot contain.

@c    7:10. But to them that are married, not I, but the Lord, commandeth
@c    that the wife depart not from her husband.

@c    7:11. And if she depart, that she remain unmarried or be reconciled to
@c    her husband.  And let not the husband put away his wife.

@c    7:12. For to the rest I speak, not the Lord.  If any brother hath a wife
@c    that believeth not and she consent to dwell with him:  let him not put
@c    her away.

@c    I speak, not the Lord. . .Viz., by any express commandment, or
@c    ordinance.

@c    7:13. And if any woman hath a husband that believeth not and he consent
@c    to dwell with her:  let her not put away her husband.

@c    7:14. For the unbelieving husband is sanctified by the believing wife:
@c    and the unbelieving wife is sanctified by the believing husband.
@c    Otherwise your children should be unclean:  but now they are holy.

@c    Is sanctified. . .The meaning is not, that the faith of the husband or
@c    the wife is of itself sufficient to put the unbelieving party, or their
@c    children, in the state of grace and salvation; but that it is very
@c    often an occasion of their sanctification, by bringing them to the true
@c    faith.

@c    7:15. But if the unbeliever depart, let him depart.  For a brother or
@c    sister is not under servitude in such cases.  But God hath called us in
@c    peace.

@c    7:16. For how knowest thou, O wife, whether thou shalt save thy
@c    husband?  Or how knowest thou, O man, whether thou shalt save thy wife?

@c    7:17. But as the Lord hath distributed to every one, as God hath called
@c    every one:  so let him walk.  And so in all churches I teach.

@c    7:18. Is any man called, being circumcised?  Let him not procure
@c    uncircumcision.  Is any man called in uncircumcision?  Let him not be
@c    circumcised.

@c    7:19. Circumcision is nothing and uncircumcision is nothing:  but the
@c    observance of the commandments of God.

@c    7:20. Let every man abide in the same calling in which he was called.

@c    7:21. Wast thou called, being a bondman?  Care not for it:  but if thou
@c    mayest be made free, use it rather.

@c    7:22. For he that is called in the Lord, being a bondman, is the
@c    freeman of the Lord.  Likewise he that is called, being free, is the
@c    bondman of Christ.

@c    7:23. You are bought with a price:  be not made the bondslaves of men.

@c    7:24. Brethren, let every man, wherein he was called, therein abide
@c    with God.

@c    7:25. Now, concerning virgins, I have no commandment of the Lord:  but I
@c    give counsel, as having obtained mercy of the Lord, to be faithful.

@c    7:26. I think therefore that this is good for the present necessity:
@c    that it is good for a man so to be.

@c    7:27. Art thou bound to a wife?  Seek not to be loosed.  Art thou loosed
@c    from a wife?  Seek not a wife.

@c    7:28. But if thou take a wife, thou hast not sinned.  And if a virgin
@c    marry, she hath not sinned:  nevertheless, such shall have tribulation
@c    of the flesh.  But I spare you.

@c    7:29. This therefore I say, brethren:  The time is short.  It remaineth,
@c    that they also who have wives be as if they had none:

@c    7:30. And they that weep, as though they wept not:  and they that
@c    rejoice, as if they rejoiced not:  and they that buy as if they
@c    possessed not:

@c    7:31. And they that use this world, as if they used it not.  For the
@c    fashion of this world passeth away.

@c    7:32. But I would have you to be without solicitude.  He that is without
@c    a wife is solicitous for the things that belong to the Lord:  how he may
@c    please God.

@c    7:33. But he that is with a wife is solicitous for the things of the
@c    world:  how he may please his wife.  And he is divided.

@c    7:34. And the unmarried woman and the virgin thinketh on the things of
@c    the Lord:  that she may be holy both in body and in spirit.  But she that
@c    is married thinketh on the things of the world:  how she may please her
@c    husband.

@c    7:35. And this I speak for your profit, not to cast a snare upon you,
@c    but for that which is decent and which may give you power to attend
@c    upon the Lord, without impediment.

@c    7:36. But if any man think that he seemeth dishonoured with regard to
@c    his virgin, for that she is above the age, and it must so be:  let him
@c    do what he will.  He sinneth not if she marry.

@c    Let him do what he will; he sinneth not, etc. . .The meaning is not, as
@c    libertines would have it, that persons may do what they will and not
@c    sin, provided they afterwards marry; but that the father, with regard
@c    to the giving his virgin in marriage, may do as he pleaseth; and that
@c    it will be no sin to him if she marry.

@c    7:37. For he that hath determined, being steadfast in his heart, having
@c    no necessity, but having power of his own will:  and hath judged this in
@c    his heart, to keep his virgin, doth well.

@c    7:38. Therefore both he that giveth his virgin in marriage doth well:
@c    and he that giveth her not doth better.

@c    7:39. A woman is bound by the law as long as her husband liveth:  but if
@c    her husband die, she is at liberty.  Let her marry to whom she will:
@c    only in the Lord.

@c    7:40. But more blessed shall she be, if she so remain, according to my
@c    counsel.  And I think that I also have the spirit of God.



@c    1 Corinthians Chapter 8


@c    Though an idol be nothing, yet things offered up to idols are not to be
@c    eaten, for fear of scandal.

@c    8:1. Now concerning those things that are sacrificed to idols:  we know
@c    we all have knowledge.  Knowledge puffeth up:  but charity edifieth.

@c    Knowledge puffeth up, etc. . .Knowledge, without charity and humility,
@c    serveth only to puff persons up.

@c    8:2. And if any man think that he knoweth any thing, he hath not yet
@c    known as he ought to know.

@c    8:3. But if any man love God, the same is known by him.

@c    8:4. But as for the meats that are sacrificed to idols, we know that an
@c    idol is nothing in the world and that there is no God but one.

@c    8:5. For although there be that are called gods, either in heaven or on
@c    earth (for there be gods many and lords many):

@c    Gods many, etc. . .Reputed for such among the heathens.

@c    8:6. Yet to us there is but one God, the Father, of whom are all
@c    things, and we unto him:  and one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all
@c    things, and we by him.

@c    8:7. But there is not knowledge in every one.  For some until this
@c    present, with conscience of the idol, eat as a thing sacrificed to an
@c    idol:  and their conscience, being weak, is defiled.

@c    8:8. But meat doth not commend us to God.  For neither, if we eat, shall
@c    we have the more:  nor, if we eat not, shall we have the less.

@c    8:9. But take heed lest perhaps this your liberty become a
@c    stumblingblock to the weak.

@c    8:10. For if a man see him that hath knowledge sit at meat in the
@c    idol's temple, shall not his conscience, being weak, be emboldened to
@c    eat those things which are sacrificed to idols?

@c    8:11. And through thy knowledge shall the weak brother perish, for whom
@c    Christ hath died?

@c    8:12. Now when you sin thus against the brethren and wound their weak
@c    conscience, you sin against Christ.

@c    8:13. Wherefore, if meat scandalize my brother, I will never eat flesh,
@c    lest I should scandalize my brother.

@c    If meat scandalize. . .That is, if my eating cause my brother to sin.



@c    1 Corinthians Chapter 9


@c    The apostle did not make use of his power of being maintained at the
@c    charges of those to whom he preached, that he might give no hindrance
@c    to the gospel.  Of running in the race and striving for the mastery.

@c    9:1. Am I not I free?  Am not I an apostle?  Have not I seen Christ Jesus
@c    our Lord?  Are not you my work in the Lord?

@c    9:2. And if unto others I be not an apostle, but yet to you I am.  For
@c    you are the seal of my apostleship in the Lord.

@c    9:3. My defence with them that do examine me is this.

@c    9:4. Have not we power to eat and to drink?

@c    9:5. Have we not power to carry about a woman, a sister as well as the
@c    rest of the apostles and the brethren of the Lord and Cephas?

@c    A woman, a sister. . .Some erroneous translators have corrupted this
@c    text by rendering it, a sister, a wife:  whereas, it is certain, St.
@c    Paul had no wife (chap. 7 ver. 7, 8) and that he only speaks of such
@c    devout women, as, according to the custom of the Jewish nation, waited
@c    upon the preachers of the gospel, and supplied them with necessaries.

@c    9:6. Or I only and Barnabas, have not we power to do this?

@c    9:7. Who serveth as a soldier, at any time, at his own charges?  Who
@c    planteth a vineyard and eateth not of the fruit thereof?  Who feedeth
@c    the flock and eateth not of the milk of the flock?

@c    9:8. Speak I these things according to man?  Or doth not the law also
@c    say; these things?

@c    9:9. For it is written in the law of Moses:  Thou shalt not muzzle the
@c    mouth of the ox that treadeth out the corn.  Doth God take care for
@c    oxen?

@c    9:10. Or doth he say this indeed for our sakes?  For these things are
@c    written for our sakes:  that he that plougheth, should plough in hope
@c    and he that thrasheth, in hope to receive fruit.

@c    9:11. If we have sown unto you spiritual things, is it a great matter
@c    if we reap your carnal things?

@c    9:12. If others be partakers of this power over you, why not we rather?
@c    Nevertheless, we have not used this power:  but we bear all things, lest
@c    we should give any hindrance to the gospel of Christ.

@c    9:13. Know you not that they who work in the holy place eat the things
@c    that are of the holy place; and they that serve the altar partake with
@c    the altar?

@c    9:14. So also the Lord ordained that they who preach the gospel should
@c    live by the gospel.

@c    9:15. But I have used none of these things.  Neither have I written
@c    these things, that they should be so done unto me:  for it is good for
@c    me to die rather than that any man should make my glory void.

@c    9:16. For if I preach the gospel, it is no glory to me:  for a necessity
@c    lieth upon me.  For woe is unto me if I preach not the gospel.

@c    It is no glory. . .That is, I have nothing to glory of.

@c    9:17. For if I do this thing willingly, I have a reward:  but if against
@c    my will, a dispensation is committed to me.

@c    9:18. What is my reward then?  That preaching the gospel, I may deliver
@c    the gospel without charge, that I abuse not my power in the gospel.

@c    9:19. For whereas I was free as to all, I made myself the servant of
@c    all, that I might gain the more.

@c    9:20. And I became to the Jews a Jew, that I might gain the Jews:

@c    9:22. To the weak I became weak, that I might gain the weak.  I became
@c    all things to all men, that I might save all.

@c    9:23. And I do all things for the gospel's sake, that I may be made
@c    partaker thereof.

@c    9:24. Know you not that they that run in the race, all run indeed, but
@c    one receiveth the prize.  So run that you may obtain.

@c    9:25. And every one that striveth for the mastery refraineth himself
@c    from all things.  And they indeed that they may receive a corruptible
@c    crown:  but we an incorruptible one.

@c    9:26. I therefore so run, not as at an uncertainty:  I so fight, not as
@c    one beating the air.

@c    9:27. But I chastise my body and bring it into subjection:  lest
@c    perhaps, when I have preached to others, I myself should become a
@c    castaway.

@c    I chastise, etc. . .Here St. Paul shews the necessity of self-denial and
@c    mortification, to subdue the flesh, and its inordinate desires.



@c    1 Corinthians Chapter 10


@c    By the example of the Israelites, he shews that we are not to build too
@c    much upon favours received but to avoid their sins and fly from the
@c    service of idols and from things offered to idols.

@c    10:1. For I would not have you ignorant, brethren, that our fathers
@c    were all under the cloud:  and all passed through the sea.

@c    10:2. And all in Moses were baptized, in the cloud and in the sea:

@c    In Moses. . .Under the conduct of Moses, they received baptism in
@c    figure, by passing under the cloud, and through the sea; and they
@c    partook of the body and blood of Christ in figure, by eating of the
@c    manna, (called here a spiritual food because it was a figure of the
@c    true bread which comes down from heaven,) and drinking the water,
@c    miraculously brought out of the rock, called here a spiritual rock,
@c    because it was also a figure of Christ.

@c    10:3. And did all eat the same spiritual food:

@c    10:4. And all drank the same spiritual drink:  (And they drank of the
@c    spiritual rock that followed them:  and the rock was Christ.)

@c    10:5. But with most of them God was not well pleased:  for they were
@c    overthrown in the desert.

@c    10:6. Now these things were done in a figure of us, that we should not
@c    covet evil things, as they also coveted.

@c    10:7. Neither become ye idolaters, as some of them, as it is written:
@c    The people sat down to eat and drink and rose up to play.

@c    10:8. Neither let us commit fornication, as some of them that committed
@c    fornication:  and there fell in one day three and twenty thousand.

@c    10:9. Neither let us tempt Christ, as some of them tempted and perished
@c    by the serpent.

@c    10:10. Neither do you murmur, as some of them murmured and were
@c    destroyed by the destroyer.

@c    10:11. Now all these things happened to them in figure:  and they are
@c    written for our correction, upon whom the ends of the world are come.

@c    The ends of the world. . .That is, the last ages.

@c    10:12. Wherefore, he that thinketh himself to stand, let him take heed
@c    lest he fall.

@c    10:13. Let no temptation take hold on you, but such as is human.  And
@c    God is faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted above that which
@c    you are able:  but will make also with temptation issue, that you may be
@c    able to bear it.

@c    Or. . .no temptation hath taken hold of you. . .or come upon you as yet,
@c    but what is human, or incident to man.  Issue. . .or a way to escape.

@c    10:14. Wherefore, my dearly beloved, fly from the service of idols.

@c    10:15. I speak as to wise men:  judge ye yourselves what I say.

@c    10:16. The chalice of benediction which we bless, is it not the
@c    communion of the blood of Christ?  And the bread which we break, is it
@c    not the partaking of the body of the Lord?

@c    Which we bless. . .Here the apostle puts them in mind of their partaking
@c    of the body and blood of Christ in the sacred mysteries, and becoming
@c    thereby one mystical body with Christ.  From whence he infers, ver. 21,
@c    that they who are made partakers with Christ, by the eucharistic
@c    sacrifice and sacrament, must not be made partakers with devils by
@c    eating of the meats sacrificed to them.

@c    10:17. For we, being many, are one bread, one body:  all that partake of
@c    one bread.

@c    One bread. . .or, as it may be rendered, agreeably both to the Latin and
@c    Greek, because the bread is one, all we, being many, are one body, who
@c    partake of that one bread.  For it is by our communicating with Christ,
@c    and with one another, in this blessed sacrament, that we are formed
@c    into one mystical body; and made, as it were, one bread, compounded of
@c    many grains of corn, closely united together.

@c    10:18. Behold Israel according to the flesh.  Are not they that eat of
@c    the sacrifices partakers of the altar?

@c    10:19. What then?  Do I say that what is offered in sacrifice to idols
@c    is any thing?  Or that the idol is any thing?

@c    10:20. But the things which the heathens sacrifice, they sacrifice to
@c    devils and not to God.  And I would not that you should be made
@c    partakers with devils.

@c    10:21. You cannot drink the chalice of the Lord and the chalice of
@c    devils:  you cannot be partakers of the table of the Lord and of the
@c    table of devils.

@c    10:22. Do we provoke the Lord to jealousy?  Are we stronger than he?  All
@c    things are lawful for me:  but all things are not expedient.

@c    10:23. All things are lawful for me:  but all things do not edify.

@c    10:24. Let no man seek his own, but that which is another's.

@c    10:25. Whatsoever is sold in the shambles, eat:  asking no question for
@c    conscience' sake.

@c    10:26. The earth is the Lord's and the fulness thereof.

@c    10:27. If any of them that believe not, invite you, and you be willing
@c    to go:  eat of any thing that is set before you, asking no question for
@c    conscience' sake.

@c    10:28. But if any man say:  This has been sacrificed to idols:  do not
@c    eat of it, for his sake that told it and for conscience' sake.

@c    10:29. Conscience I say, not thy own, but the other's.  For why is my
@c    liberty judged by another man's conscience?

@c    10:30. If I partake with thanksgiving, why am I evil spoken of for that
@c    for which I give thanks?

@c    10:31. Therefore, whether you eat or drink, or whatsoever else you do,
@c    do all to the glory of God.

@c    10:32. Be without offence to the Jew, and to the Gentiles and to the
@c    church of God:

@c    10:33. As I also in all things please all men, not seeking that which
@c    is profitable to myself but to many:  that they may be saved.



@c    1 Corinthians Chapter 11


@c    Women must have a covering over their heads.  He blameth the abuses of
@c    their love feasts and upon that occasion treats of the Blessed
@c    Sacrament.

@c    11:1. Be ye followers of me, as I also am of Christ.

@c    11:2. Now I praise you, brethren, that in all things you are mindful of
@c    me and keep my ordinances as I have delivered them to you.

@c    11:3. But I would have you know that the head of every man is Christ:
@c    and the head of the woman is the man:  and the head of Christ is God.

@c    11:4. Every man praying or prophesying with his head covered disgraceth
@c    his head.

@c    11:5. But every woman praying or prophesying with her head not covered
@c    disgraceth her head:  for it is all one as if she were shaven.

@c    11:6. For if a woman be not covered, let her be shorn.  But if it be a
@c    shame to a woman to be shorn or made bald, let her cover her head.

@c    11:7. The man indeed ought not to cover his head:  because he is the
@c    image and glory of God.  But the woman is the glory of the man.

@c    11:8. For the man is not of the woman:  but the woman of the man.

@c    11:9. For the man was not created for the woman:  but the woman for the
@c    man.

@c    11:10. Therefore ought the woman to have a power over her head, because
@c    of the angels.

@c    A power. . .that is, a veil or covering, as a sign that she is under the
@c    power of her husband:  and this, the apostle adds, because of the
@c    angels, who are present in the assemblies of the faithful.

@c    11:11. But yet neither is the man without the woman, nor the woman
@c    without the man, in the Lord.

@c    11:12. For as the woman is of the man, so also is the man by the woman:
@c    but all things of God.

@c    11:13. You yourselves judge.  Doth it become a woman to pray unto God
@c    uncovered?

@c    11:14. Doth not even nature itself teach you that a man indeed, if he
@c    nourish his hair, it is a shame unto him?

@c    11:15. But if a woman nourish her hair, it is a glory to her; for her
@c    hair is given to her for a covering.

@c    11:16. But if any man seem to be contentious, we have no such custom,
@c    nor the Church of God.

@c    11:17. Now this I ordain:  not praising you, that you come together, not
@c    for the better, but for the worse.

@c    11:18. For first of all I hear that when you come together in the
@c    church, there are schisms among you.  And in part I believe it.

@c    11:19. For there must be also heresies:  that they also, who are
@c    approved may be made manifest among you.

@c    There must be also heresies. . .By reason of the pride and perversity of
@c    man's heart; not by God's will or appointment; who nevertheless draws
@c    good out of this evil, manifesting, by that occasion, who are the good
@c    and firm Christians, and making their faith more remarkable.

@c    11:20. When you come therefore together into one place, it is not now
@c    to eat the Lord's supper.

@c    The Lord's supper. . .So the apostle here calls the charity feasts
@c    observed by the primitive Christians; and reprehends the abuses of the
@c    Corinthians, on these occasions; which were the more criminal, because
@c    these feasts were accompanied with the celebrating of the eucharistic
@c    sacrifice and sacrament.

@c    11:21. For every one taketh before his own supper to eat.  And one
@c    indeed is hungry and another is drunk.

@c    11:22. What, have you no houses to eat and to drink in?  Or despise ye
@c    the church of God and put them to shame that have not?  What shall I say
@c    to you?  Do I praise you?  In this I praise you not.

@c    11:23. For I have received of the Lord that which also I delivered unto
@c    you, that the Lord Jesus, the same night in which he was betrayed, took
@c    bread,

@c    11:24. And giving thanks, broke and said:  Take ye and eat:  This is my
@c    body, which shall be delivered for you.  This do for the commemoration
@c    of me.

@c    11:25. In like manner also the chalice, after he had supped, saying:
@c    This chalice is the new testament in my blood.  This do ye, as often as
@c    you shall drink, for the commemoration of me.

@c    11:26. For as often as you shall eat this bread and drink the chalice,
@c    you shall shew the death of the Lord, until he come.

@c    11:27. Therefore, whosoever shall eat this bread, or drink the chalice
@c    of the Lord unworthily, shall be guilty of the body and of the blood of
@c    the Lord.

@c    Or drink. . .Here erroneous translators corrupted the text, by putting
@c    and drink (contrary to the original) instead of or drink.

@c    Guilty of the body, etc., not discerning the body, etc. . .This
@c    demonstrates the real presence of the body and blood of Christ, even to
@c    the unworthy communicant; who otherwise could not be guilty of the body
@c    and blood of Christ, or justly condemned for not discerning the Lord's
@c    body.

@c    11:28. But let a man prove himself:  and so let him eat of that bread
@c    and drink of the chalice.

@c    Drink of the chalice. . .This is not said by way of command, but by way
@c    of allowance, viz., where and when it is agreeable to the practice and
@c    discipline of the church.

@c    11:29. For he that eateth and drinketh unworthily eateth and drinketh
@c    judgment to himself, not discerning the body of the Lord.

@c    11:30. Therefore are there many infirm and weak among you:  and many
@c    sleep.

@c    11:31. But if we would judge ourselves, we should not be judged.

@c    11:32. But whilst we are judged, we are chastised by the Lord, that we
@c    be not condemned with this world.

@c    11:33. Wherefore, my brethren, when you come together to eat, wait for
@c    one another.

@c    11:34. If any man be hungry, let him eat at home; that you come not
@c    together unto judgment.  And the rest I will set in order, when I come.



@c    1 Corinthians Chapter 12


@c    Of the diversity of spiritual gifts.  The members of the mystical body,
@c    like those of the natural body, must mutually cherish one another.

@c    12:1. Now concerning spiritual things, my brethren, I would not have
@c    you ignorant.

@c    12:2. You know that when you were heathens, you went to dumb idols,
@c    according as you were led.

@c    12:3. Wherefore, I give you to understand that no man, speaking by the
@c    Spirit of God, saith Anathema to Jesus.  And no man can say The Lord
@c    Jesus, but by the Holy Ghost.

@c    12:4. Now there are diversities of graces, but the same Spirit.

@c    12:5. And there are diversities of ministries.  but the same Lord.

@c    12:6. And there are diversities of operations, but the same God, who
@c    worketh all in all.

@c    12:7. And the manifestation of the Spirit is given to every man unto
@c    profit.

@c    12:8. To one indeed, by the Spirit, is given the word of wisdom:  and to
@c    another, the word of knowledge, according to the same Spirit:

@c    12:9. To another, faith in the same spirit:  to another, the grace of
@c    healing in one Spirit:

@c    12:10. To another the working of miracles:  to another, prophecy:  to
@c    another, the discerning of spirits:  to another, diverse kinds of
@c    tongues:  to another, interpretation of speeches.

@c    12:11. But all these things, one and the same Spirit worketh, dividing
@c    to every one according as he will.

@c    12:12. For as the body is one and hath many members; and all the
@c    members of the body, whereas they are many, yet are one body:  So also
@c    is Christ.

@c    12:13. For in one Spirit were we all baptized into one body, whether
@c    Jews or Gentiles, whether bond or free:  and in one Spirit we have all
@c    been made to drink.

@c    12:14. For the body also is not one member, but many.

@c    12:15. If the foot should say:  Because I am not the hand, I am not of
@c    the body:  Is it therefore not of the Body?

@c    12:16. And if the ear should say:  Because I am not the eye, I am not of
@c    the body:  Is it therefore not of the body?

@c    12:17. If the whole body were the eye, where would be the hearing?  If
@c    the whole were hearing, where would be the smelling?

@c    12:18. But now God hath set the members, every one of them, in the body
@c    as it hath pleased him.

@c    12:19. And if they all were one member, where would be the body?

@c    12:20. But now there are many members indeed, yet one body.

@c    12:21. And the eye cannot say to the hand:  I need not thy help.  Nor
@c    again the head to the feet:  I have no need of you.

@c    12:22. Yea, much, more those that seem to be the more feeble members of
@c    the body are more necessary

@c    12:23. And such as we think to be the less honourable members of the
@c    body, about these we put more abundant honour:  and those that are our
@c    uncomely parts have more abundant comeliness.

@c    12:24. But our comely parts have no need:  but God hath tempered the
@c    body together, giving to that which wanted the more abundant honour.

@c    12:25. That there might be no schism in the body:  but the members might
@c    be mutually careful one for another.

@c    12:26. And if one member suffer any thing, all the members suffer with
@c    it:  or if one member glory, all the members rejoice with it.

@c    12:27. Now you are the body of Christ and members of member.

@c    12:28. And God indeed hath set some in the church; first apostles,
@c    secondly prophets, thirdly doctors:  after that miracles:  then the
@c    graces of healings, helps, governments, kinds of tongues,
@c    interpretations of speeches.

@c    12:29. Are all apostles?  Are all prophets?  Are all doctors?

@c    12:30. Are all workers of miracles?  Have all the grace of healing?  Do
@c    all speak with tongues?  Do all interpret?

@c    12:31. But be zealous for the better gifts.  And I shew unto you yet a
@c    more excellent way.



@c    1 Corinthians Chapter 13


@c    Charity is to be preferred before all gifts.

@c    13:1. If I speak with the tongues of men and of angels, and have not
@c    charity, I am become as sounding brass, or a tinkling cymbal.

@c    13:2. And if I should have prophecy and should know all mysteries and
@c    all knowledge, and if I should have all faith, so that I could remove
@c    mountains, and have not charity, I am nothing.

@c    13:3. And if I should distribute all my goods to feed the poor, and if
@c    I should deliver my body to be burned, and have not charity, it
@c    profiteth me nothing.

@c    13:4. Charity is patient, is kind:  charity envieth not, dealeth not
@c    perversely, is not puffed up,

@c    13:5. Is not ambitious, seeketh not her own, is not provoked to anger,
@c    thinketh no evil:

@c    13:6. Rejoiceth not in iniquity, but rejoiceth with the truth:

@c    13:7. Beareth all things, believeth all things, hopeth all things,
@c    endureth all things.

@c    13:8. Charity never falleth away:  whether prophecies shall be made void
@c    or tongues shall cease or knowledge shall be destroyed.

@c    13:9. For we know in part:  and we prophesy in part.

@c    13:10. But when that which is perfect is come, that which is in part
@c    shall be done away.

@c    13:11. When I was a child, I spoke as a child, I understood as a child,
@c    I thought as a child.  But, when I became a man, I put away the things
@c    of a child.

@c    13:12. We see now through a glass in a dark manner:  but then face to
@c    face.  Now I know in part:  but then I shall know even as I am known.

@c    13:13. And now there remain faith, hope, and charity, these three:  but
@c    the greatest of these is charity.



@c    1 Corinthians Chapter 14


@c    The gift of prophesying is to be preferred before that of speaking
@c    strange tongues.

@c    14:1. Follow after charity, be zealous for spiritual gifts; but rather
@c    that you may prophesy.

@c    Prophesy. . .That is, declare or expound the mysteries of faith.

@c    14:2. For he that speaketh in a tongue speaketh not unto men, but unto
@c    God:  for no man heareth.  Yet by the Spirit he speaketh mysteries.

@c    Not unto men. . .Viz., so as to be heard, that is, so as to be
@c    understood by them.

@c    14:3. But he that prophesieth speaketh to men unto edification and
@c    exhortation and comfort.

@c    14:4. He that speaketh in a tongue edifieth himself:  but he that
@c    prophesieth, edifieth the church.

@c    14:5. And I would have you all to speak with tongues, but rather to
@c    prophesy.  For greater is he that prophesieth than he that speaketh with
@c    tongues:  unless perhaps he interpret, that the church may receive
@c    edification.

@c    14:6. But now, brethren, if I come to you speaking with tongues, what
@c    shall I profit you, unless I speak to you either in revelation or in
@c    knowledge or in prophecy or in doctrine?

@c    14:7. Even things without life that give sound, whether pipe or harp,
@c    except they give a distinction of sounds, how shall it be known what is
@c    piped or harped?

@c    14:8. For if the trumpet give an uncertain sound, who shall prepare
@c    himself to the battle?

@c    14:9. So likewise you, except you utter by the tongue plain speech, how
@c    shall it be known what is said?  For you shall be speaking into the air.

@c    14:10. There are, for example, so many kinds of tongues in this world:
@c    and none is without voice.

@c    14:11. If then I know not the power of the voice, I shall be to him to
@c    whom I speak a barbarian:  and he that speaketh a barbarian to me.

@c    14:12. So you also, forasmuch as you are zealous of spirits, seek to
@c    abound unto the edifying of the church.

@c    Of spirits. . .Of spiritual gifts.

@c    14:13. And therefore he that speaketh by a tongue, let him pray that he
@c    may interpret.

@c    14:14. For if I pray in a tongue, my spirit prayeth:  but my
@c    understanding is without fruit.

@c    14:15. What is it then?  I will pray with the spirit, I will pray also
@c    with the understanding, I will sing with the spirit, I will sing also
@c    with the understanding.

@c    14:16. Else, if thou shalt bless with the spirit, how shall he that
@c    holdeth the place of the unlearned say, Amen, to thy blessing?  Because
@c    he knoweth not what thou sayest.

@c    Amen. . .The unlearned, not knowing that you are then blessing, will not
@c    be qualified to join with you by saying Amen to your blessing.  The use
@c    or abuse of strange tongues, of which the apostle here speaks, does not
@c    regard the public liturgy of the church, (in which strange tongues were
@c    never used,) but certain conferences of the faithful, ver. 26, etc., in
@c    which, meeting together, they discovered to one another their various
@c    miraculous gifts of the Spirit, common in those primitive times;
@c    amongst which the apostle prefers that of prophesying before that of
@c    speaking strange tongues, because it was more to the public
@c    edification.  Where also not, that the Latin, used in our liturgy, is so
@c    far from being a strange or unknown tongue, that it is perhaps the best
@c    known tongue in the world.

@c    14:17. For thou indeed givest thanks well:  but the other is not
@c    edified.

@c    14:18. I thank my God I speak with all your tongues.

@c    14:19. But in the church I had rather speak five words with my
@c    understanding, that I may instruct others also:  than ten thousand words
@c    in a tongue.

@c    14:20. Brethren, do not become children in sense.  But in malice be
@c    children:  and in sense be perfect.

@c    14:21. In the law it is written:  In other tongues and other lips I will
@c    speak to this people:  and neither so will they hear me, saith the Lord.

@c    14:22. Wherefore tongues are for a sign, not to believers but to
@c    unbelievers:  but prophecies, not to unbelievers but to believers.

@c    14:23. If therefore the whole church come together into one place, and
@c    all speak with tongues, and there come in unlearned persons or
@c    infidels, will they not say that you are mad?

@c    14:24. But if all prophesy, and there come in one that believeth not or
@c    an unlearned person, he is convinced of all:  he is judged of all.

@c    14:25. The secrets of his heart are made manifest.  And so, falling down
@c    on his face, he will adore God, affirming that God is among you indeed.

@c    14:26. How is it then, brethren?  When you come together, every one of
@c    you hath a psalm, hath a doctrine, hath a revelation, hath a tongue,
@c    hath an interpretation:  let all things be done to edification.

@c    14:27. If any speak with a tongue, let it be by two, or at the most by
@c    three, and in course:  and let one interpret.

@c    14:28. But if there be no interpreter, let him hold his peace in the
@c    church and speak to himself and to God.

@c    14:29. And let the prophets speak, two or three:  and let the rest
@c    judge.

@c    14:30. But if any thing be revealed to another sitting, let the first
@c    hold his peace.

@c    14:31. For you may all prophesy, one by one, that all may learn and all
@c    may be exhorted.

@c    14:32. And the spirits of the prophets are subject to the prophets.

@c    14:33. For God is not the God of dissension, but of peace:  as also I
@c    teach in all the churches of the saints.

@c    14:34. Let women keep silence in the churches:  for it is not permitted
@c    them to speak but to be subject, as also the law saith.

@c    14:35. But if they would learn anything, let them ask their husbands at
@c    home.  For it is a shame for a woman to speak in the church.

@c    14:36. Or did the word of God come out from you?  Or came it only unto
@c    you?

@c    14:37. If any seem to be a prophet or spiritual, let him know the
@c    things that I write to you, that they are the commandments of the Lord.

@c    14:38. But if any man know not, he shall not be known.

@c    14:39. Wherefore, brethren, be zealous to prophesy:  and forbid not to
@c    speak with tongues.

@c    14:40. But let all things be done decently and according to order.



@c    1 Corinthians Chapter 15


@c    Christ's resurrection and ours.  The manner of our resurrection.

@c    15:1. Now I make known unto you, brethren, the gospel which I preached
@c    to you, which also you have received and wherein you stand.

@c    15:2. By which also you are saved, if you hold fast after what manner I
@c    preached unto you, unless you have believed in vain.

@c    15:3. For I delivered unto you first of all, which I also received:  how
@c    that Christ died for our sins, according to the scriptures:

@c    15:4. And that he was buried:  and that he rose again according to the
@c    scriptures:

@c    15:5. And that he was seen by Cephas, and after that by the eleven.

@c    15:6. Then was he seen by more than five hundred brethren at once:  of
@c    whom many remain until this present, and some are fallen asleep.

@c    15:7. After that, he was seen by James:  then by all the apostles.

@c    15:8. And last of all, he was seen also by me, as by one born out of
@c    due tine.

@c    15:9. For I am the least of the apostles, who am not worthy to be
@c    called an apostle, because I persecuted the church of God.

@c    15:10. But by the grace of God, I am what I am.  And his grace in me
@c    hath not been void:  but I have laboured more abundantly than all they.
@c    Yet not I, but the grace of God with me:

@c    15:11. For whether I or they, so we preach:  and so you have believed.

@c    15:12. Now if Christ be preached, that he arose again from the dead,
@c    how do some among you say that there is no resurrection of the dead?

@c    15:13. But if there be no resurrection of the dead, then Christ is not
@c    risen again.

@c    15:14. And if Christ be not risen again, then is our preaching vain:
@c    and your faith is also vain.

@c    15:15. Yea, and we are found false witnesses of God:  because we have
@c    given testimony against God, that he hath raised up Christ, whom he
@c    hath not raised up, if the dead rise not again.

@c    15:16. For if the dead rise not again, neither is Christ risen again.

@c    15:17. And if Christ be not risen again, your faith is vain:  for you
@c    are yet in your sins.

@c    15:18. Then they also that are fallen asleep in Christ are perished.

@c    15:19. If in this life only we have hope in Christ, we are of all men
@c    most miserable.

@c    15:20. But now Christ is risen from the dead, the firstfruits of them
@c    that sleep:

@c    15:21. For by a man came death:  and by a man the resurrection of the
@c    dead.

@c    15:22. And as in Adam all die, so also in Christ all shall be made
@c    alive.

@c    15:23. But every one in his own order:  the firstfruits, Christ:  then
@c    they that are of Christ, who have believed in his coming.

@c    15:24. Afterwards the end:  when he shall have delivered up the kingdom
@c    to God and the Father:  when he shall have brought to nought all
@c    principality and power and virtue.

@c    15:25. For he must reign, until he hath put all his enemies under his
@c    feet.

@c    15:26. And the enemy, death, shall be destroyed last:  For he hath put
@c    all things under his feet.  And whereas he saith:

@c    15:27. All things are put under him; undoubtedly, he is excepted, who
@c    put all things under him.

@c    15:28. And when all things shall be subdued unto him, then the Son also
@c    himself shall be subject unto him that put all things under him, that
@c    God may be all in all.

@c    The Son also himself shall be subject unto him. . .That is, the Son will
@c    be subject to the Father, according to his human nature, even after the
@c    general resurrection; and also the whole mystical body of Christ will
@c    be entirely subject to God, obeying him in every thing.

@c    15:29. Otherwise, what shall they do that are baptized for the dead, if
@c    the dead rise not again at all?  Why are they then baptized for them?

@c    That are baptized for the dead. . .Some think the apostle here alludes
@c    to a ceremony then in use; but others, more probably, to the prayers
@c    and penitential labours, performed by the primitive Christians for the
@c    souls of the faithful departed; or to the baptism of afflictions and
@c    sufferings undergone for sinners spiritually dead.

@c    15:30. Why also are we in danger every hour?

@c    15:31. I die daily, I protest by your glory, brethren, which I have in
@c    Christ Jesus our Lord.

@c    15:32. If (according to man) I fought with beasts at Ephesus, what doth
@c    it profit me, if the dead rise not again?  Let us eat and drink, for to
@c    morrow we shall die.

@c    Let us eat and drink, etc. . .That is, if we did not believe that we
@c    were to rise again from the dead, we might live like the impious and
@c    wicked, who have no belief in the resurrection.

@c    15:33. Be not seduced:  Evil communications corrupt good manners.

@c    15:34. Awake, ye just, and sin not.  For some have not the knowledge of
@c    God.  I speak it to your shame.

@c    15:35. But some man will say:  How do the dead rise again?  Or with what
@c    manner of body shall they come?

@c    15:36. Senseless man, that which thou sowest is not quickened, except
@c    it die first.

@c    15:37. And that which thou sowest, thou sowest not the body that shall
@c    be:  but bare grain, as of wheat, or of some of the rest.

@c    15:38. But God giveth it a body as he will:  and to every seed its
@c    proper body.

@c    15:39. All flesh is not the same flesh:  but one is the flesh of men,
@c    another of beasts, other of birds, another of fishes.

@c    15:40. And there are bodies celestial and bodies terrestrial:  but, one
@c    is the glory of the celestial, and another of the terrestrial.

@c    15:41. One is the glory of the sun, another the glory of the moon, and
@c    another the glory of the stars.  For star differeth from star in glory.

@c    15:42. So also is the resurrection of the dead.  It is sown in
@c    corruption:  it shall rise in incorruption.

@c    15:43. It is sown in dishonour:  it shall rise in glory.  It is sown in
@c    weakness:  it shall rise in power.

@c    15:44. It is sown a natural body:  it shall rise a spiritual body.  If
@c    there be a natural body, there is also a spiritual body, as it is
@c    written:

@c    15:45. The first man Adam was made into a living soul; the last Adam
@c    into a quickening spirit.

@c    15:46. Yet that was not first which is spiritual, but that which is
@c    natural:  afterwards that which is spiritual.

@c    15:47. The first man was of the earth, earthly:  the second man, from
@c    heaven, heavenly.

@c    15:48. Such as is the earthly, such also are the earthly:  and such as
@c    is the heavenly, such also are they that are heavenly.

@c    15:49. Therefore, as we have borne the image of the earthly, let us
@c    bear also the image of the heavenly.

@c    15:50. Now this I say, brethren, that flesh and blood cannot possess
@c    the kingdom of God:  neither shall corruption possess incorruption.

@c    15:51. Behold, I tell you a mystery.  We shall all indeed rise again:
@c    but we shall not all be changed.

@c    15:52. In a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, at the last trumpet:
@c    for the trumpet shall sound and the dead shall rise again
@c    incorruptible.  And we shall be changed.

@c    15:53. For this corruptible must put on incorruption:  and this mortal
@c    must put on immortality.

@c    15:54. And when this mortal hath put on immortality, then shall come to
@c    pass the saying that is written:  Death is swallowed up in victory.

@c    15:55. O death, where is thy victory?  O death, where is thy sting?

@c    15:56. Now the sting of death is sin:  and the power of sin is the law.

@c    15:57. But thanks be to God, who hath given us the victory through our
@c    Lord Jesus Christ.

@c    15:58. Therefore, my beloved brethren, be ye steadfast and unmoveable:
@c    always abounding in the work of the Lord, knowing that your labour is
@c    not in vain in the Lord.



@c    1 Corinthians Chapter 16


@c    Of collection of alms.  Admonitions and salutations.

@c    16:1. Now concerning the collections that are made for the saints:  as I
@c    have given order to the churches of Galatia, so do ye also.

@c    16:2. On the first day of the week, let every one of you put apart with
@c    himself, laying up what it shall well please him:  that when I come, the
@c    collections be not then to be made.

@c    16:3. And when I shall be with you, whomsoever you shall approve by
@c    letters, them will I send to carry your grace to Jerusalem.

@c    16:4. And if it be meet that I also go, they shall go with me.

@c    16:5. Now I will come to you, when I shall have passed through
@c    Macedonia.  For I shall pass through Macedonia.

@c    16:6. And with you perhaps I shall abide, or even spend the winter:
@c    that you may bring me on my way whithersoever I shall go.

@c    16:7. For I will not see you now by the way:  for I trust that I shall
@c    abide with you some time, if the Lord permit.

@c    16:8. But I will tarry at Ephesus, until Pentecost.

@c    16:9. For a great door and evident is opened unto me:  and many
@c    adversaries.

@c    16:10. Now if Timothy come, see that he be with you without fear:  for
@c    he worketh the work of the Lord, as I also do.

@c    16:11. Let no man therefore despise him:  but conduct ye him on his way
@c    in peace, that he may come to me.  For I look for him with the brethren.

@c    16:12. And touching our brother Apollo, I give you to understand that I
@c    much entreated him to come unto you with the brethren:  and indeed it
@c    was not his will at all to come at this time.  But he will come when he
@c    shall have leisure.

@c    16:13. Watch ye:  stand fast in the faith:  do manfully and be
@c    strengthened.

@c    16:14. Let all your things be done in charity.

@c    16:15. And I beseech you, brethren, you know the house of Stephanus,
@c    and of Fortunatus, and of Achaicus, that they are the firstfruits of
@c    Achaia, and have dedicated themselves to the ministry of the saints:

@c    16:16. That you also be subject to such and to every one that worketh
@c    with us and laboureth.

@c    16:17. And I rejoice in the presence of Stephanus and Fortunatus and
@c    Achaicus:  because that which was wanting on your part, they have
@c    supplied.

@c    16:18. For they have refreshed both my spirit and yours.  Know them,
@c    therefore, that are such.

@c    16:19. The churches of Asia salute you.  Aquila and Priscilla salute you
@c    much in the Lord, with the church that is in their house, with whom I
@c    also lodge.

@c    16:20. All the brethren salute you.  Salute one another with a holy
@c    kiss.

@c    16:21. The salutation of me Paul, with my own hand.

@c    16:22. If any man love not our Lord Jesus Christ, let him be anathema,
@c    maranatha.

@c    Let him be anathema, maranatha. . .Anathema signifies here a thing
@c    accursed.  Maran-atha, which, according to St. Jerome and St.
@c    Chrysostom, signify, 'The Lord is come' already, and therefore is to be
@c    taken as an admonition to those who doubted of the resurrection, and to
@c    put them in mind that Christ, the judge of the living and the dead, is
@c    come already.  Others explain Maran-atha:  'May our Lord come', that is,
@c    to judge and punish those with exemplary judgments and punishments,
@c    that do not love the Lord Jesus Christ.

@c    16:23. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you.

@c    16:24. My charity be with you all in Christ Jesus.  Amen.
