@c    THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST. PAUL TO TIMOTHY



@c    St. Paul write this Epistle to his BELOVED TIMOTHY, being then bishop
@c    of Ephesus, to instruct him in the duties of a bishop, both in respect
@c    to himself and to his charge; and that he ought to be well informed of
@c    the good morals of those on whom he was to impose hands:  Impose not
@c    hands lightly upon any man.  He tells him also how he should behave
@c    towards his clergy.  The Epistle was written about 33 years after our
@c    Lord's Ascension; but where it was written is uncertain:  the more
@c    general opinion is, that it was in Macedonia.



@c    1 Timothy Chapter 1


@c    He puts Timothy in mind of his charge and blesses God for the mercy he
@c    himself had received.

@c    1:1. Paul, an apostle of Jesus Christ, according to the commandment of
@c    God our Saviour and Christ Jesus our hope:

@c    1:2. To Timothy, his beloved son in faith.  Grace, mercy and peace, from
@c    God the Father and from Christ Jesus our Lord.

@c    1:3. As I desired thee to remain at Ephesus when I went into Macedonia,
@c    that thou mightest charge some not to teach otherwise:

@c    1:4. Not to give heed to fables and endless genealogies, which furnish
@c    questions rather than the edification of God which is in faith.

@c    1:5. Now the end of the commandment is charity from a pure heart, and a
@c    good conscience, and an unfeigned faith.

@c    1:6. From which things some, going astray, are turned aside unto vain
@c    babbling:

@c    1:7. Desiring to be teachers of the law:  understanding neither the
@c    things they say, nor whereof they affirm.

@c    1:8. But we know that the law is good, if a man use it lawfully.

@c    1:9. Knowing this:  That the law is not made for the just man but for
@c    the unjust and disobedient, for the ungodly and for sinners, for the
@c    wicked and defiled, for murderers of fathers and murderers of mothers,
@c    for manslayers,

@c    The law is not. . .He means, that the just man doth good, and avoideth
@c    evil, not as compelled by the law, and merely for fear of the
@c    punishment appointed for transgressors; but voluntarily, and out of the
@c    love of God and virtue; and would do so, though there were no law.

@c    1:10. For fornicators, for them who defile themselves with mankind, for
@c    menstealers, for liars, for perjured persons, and whatever other thing
@c    is contrary to sound doctrine:

@c    1:11. Which is according to the gospel of the glory of the blessed God
@c    which hath been committed to my trust.

@c    1:12. I give him thanks who hath strengthened me, even to Christ Jesus
@c    our Lord, for that he hath counted me faithful, putting me in the
@c    ministry:

@c    1:13. Who before was a blasphemer and a persecutor and contumelious.
@c    But I obtained the mercy of God, because I did it ignorantly in
@c    unbelief.

@c    1:14. Now the grace of our Lord hath abounded exceedingly with faith
@c    and love, which is in Christ Jesus.

@c    1:15. A faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptation, that Christ
@c    Jesus came into the world to save sinners, of whom I am the chief.

@c    1:16. But for this cause have I obtained mercy:  that in me first Christ
@c    Jesus might shew forth all patience, for the information of them that
@c    shall believe in him unto life everlasting.

@c    1:17. Now to the king of ages, immortal, invisible, the only God, be
@c    honour and glory for ever and ever.  Amen.

@c    1:18. This precept, I commend to thee, O son Timothy:  according to the
@c    prophecies going before on thee, that thou war in them a good warfare,

@c    1:19. Having faith and a good conscience, which some rejecting have
@c    made shipwreck concerning the faith.

@c    1:20. Of whom is Hymeneus and Alexander, whom I have delivered up to
@c    Satan, that they may learn not to blaspheme.



@c    1 Timothy Chapter 2


@c    Prayers are to be said for all men, because God wills the salvation of
@c    all.  Women are not to teach.

@c    2:1. I desire therefore, first of all, that supplications, prayers,
@c    intercessions and thanksgivings be made for all men:

@c    2:2. For kings and for all that are in high station:  that we may lead a
@c    quiet and a peaceable life in all piety and chastity.

@c    2:3. For this is good and acceptable in the sight of God our Saviour,

@c    2:4. Who will have all men to be saved and to come to the knowledge of
@c    the truth.

@c    2:5. For there is one God:  and one mediator of God and men, the man
@c    Christ Jesus:

@c    One mediator. . .Christ is the one and only mediator of redemption, who
@c    gave himself, as the apostle writes in the following verse.

@c    2:6. Who gave himself a redemption for all, a testimony in due times.

@c    a redemption for all. . .  He is also the only mediator, who stands in
@c    need of no other to recommend his petitions to the Father.  But this is
@c    not against our seeking the prayers and intercession, as well of the
@c    faithful upon earth, as of the saints and angels in heaven, for
@c    obtaining mercy, grace, and salvation, through Jesus Christ.  As St.
@c    Paul himself often desired the help of the prayers of the faithful,
@c    without any injury to the mediatorship of Jesus Christ.

@c    2:7. Whereunto I am appointed a preacher and an apostle (I say the
@c    truth, I lie not), a doctor of the Gentiles in faith and truth.

@c    2:8. I will therefore that men pray in every place, lifting up pure
@c    hands, without anger and contention.

@c    2:9. In like manner, women also in decent apparel:  adorning themselves
@c    with modesty and sobriety, not with plaited hair, or gold, or pearls,
@c    or costly attire:

@c    2:10. But, as it becometh women professing godliness, with good works.

@c    2:11. Let the woman learn in silence with all subjection.

@c    2:12. But I suffer not a woman to teach, nor to use authority over the
@c    man:  but to be in silence.

@c    2:13.For Adam was first formed; then Eve.

@c    2:14. And Adam was not seduced; but the woman, being seduced, was in
@c    the transgression.

@c    2:15. Yet she shall be saved through child bearing; if she continue in
@c    faith and love and sanctification with sobriety.



@c    1 Timothy Chapter 3


@c    What sort of men are to be admitted into the clergy.  The church is the
@c    pillar of truth.

@c    3:1. A faithful saying:  If a man desire the office of a bishop, he
@c    desireth good work.

@c    3:2. It behoveth therefore a bishop to be blameless, the husband of one
@c    wife, sober, prudent, of good behaviour, chaste, given to hospitality,
@c    a teacher,

@c    Of one wife. . .  The meaning is not that every bishop should have a wife
@c    (for St. Paul himself had none), but that no one should be admitted to
@c    the holy orders of bishop, priest, or deacon, who had been married more
@c    than once.

@c    3:3. Not given to wine, no striker, but modest, not quarrelsome, not
@c    covetous, but

@c    3:4. One that ruleth well his own house, having his children in
@c    subjection with all chastity.

@c    3:5. But if a man know not how to rule his own house, how shall he take
@c    care of the church of God?

@c    3:6. Not a neophyte:  lest, being puffed up with pride, he fall into the
@c    judgment of the devil.

@c    A neophyte. . .  That is, one lately baptized, a young convert.

@c    3:7. Moreover, he must have a good testimony of them who are without:
@c    lest he fall into reproach and the snare of the devil.

@c    3:8. Deacons in like manner:  chaste, not double tongued, not given to
@c    much wine, not greedy of filthy lucre:

@c    3:9. Holding the mystery of faith in a pure conscience.

@c    3:10. And let these also first be proved:  and so let them minister,
@c    having no crime.

@c    3:11. The women in like manner:  chaste, not slanderers, but sober,
@c    faithful in all things.

@c    3:12. Let deacons be the husbands of one wife:  who rule well their
@c    children and their own houses.

@c    3:13. For they that have ministered well shall purchase to themselves a
@c    good degree and much confidence in the faith which is in Christ Jesus.

@c    3:14. These things I write to thee, hoping that I shall come to thee
@c    shortly.

@c    3:15. But if I tarry long, that thou mayest know how thou oughtest to
@c    behave thyself in the house of God, which is the church of the living
@c    God, the pillar and ground of the truth.

@c    The pillar and ground of the truth. . .  Therefore the church of the
@c    living God can never uphold error, nor bring in corruptions,
@c    superstition, or idolatry.

@c    3:16. And evidently great is the mystery of godliness, which was
@c    manifested in the flesh, was justified in the spirit, appeared unto
@c    angels, hath been preached unto the Gentiles, is believed in the world,
@c    is taken up in glory.



@c    1 Timothy Chapter 4


@c    He warns him against heretics, and exhorts him to the exercise of
@c    piety.

@c    4:1. Now the Spirit manifestly saith that in the last times some shall
@c    depart from the faith, giving heed to spirits of error and doctrines of
@c    devils,

@c    4:2. Speaking lies in hypocrisy and having their conscience seared,

@c    4:3. Forbidding to marry, to abstain from meats, which God hath created
@c    to be received with thanksgiving by the faithful and by them that have
@c    known the truth.

@c    Forbidding to marry, to abstain from meats. . .  He speaks of the
@c    Gnostics, the Marcionites, the Eneratites, the Manicheans, and other
@c    ancient heretics, who absolutely condemned marriage, and the use of all
@c    kind of meat; because they pretended that all flesh was from an evil
@c    principle.  Whereas the church of God, so far from condemning marriage,
@c    holds it a holy sacrament; and forbids it to none but such as by vow
@c    have chosen the better part:  and prohibits not the use of any meats
@c    whatsoever in proper times and seasons; though she does not judge all
@c    kind of diet proper for days of fasting and penance.

@c    4:4. For every creature of God is good, and nothing to be rejected that
@c    is received with thanksgiving:

@c    4:5. For it is sanctified by the word of God and prayer.

@c    4:6. These things proposing to the brethren, thou shalt be a good
@c    minister of Christ Jesus, nourished up in the words of faith and of the
@c    good doctrine which thou hast attained unto.

@c    4:7. But avoid foolish and old wives fables:  and exercise thyself unto
@c    godliness.

@c    4:8. For bodily exercise is profitable to little:  but godliness is
@c    profitable to all things, having promise of the life that now is and of
@c    that which is to come.

@c    4:9. A faithful saying and worthy of all acceptation.

@c    4:10. For therefore we labour and are reviled, because we hope in the
@c    living God, who is the Saviour of all men, especially of the faithful.

@c    4:11. These things command and teach:

@c    4:12. Let no man despise thy youth:  but be thou an example of the
@c    faithful, in word, in conversation, in charity, in faith, in chastity.

@c    4:13. Till I come, attend unto reading, to exhortation and to doctrine.

@c    4:14. Neglect not the grace that is in thee, which was given thee by
@c    prophecy, with imposition of the hands of the priesthood.

@c    4:15. Meditate upon these things, be wholly in these things:  that thy
@c    profiting may be manifest to all.

@c    4:16. Take heed to thyself and to doctrine:  be earnest in them.  For in
@c    doing this thou shalt both save thyself and them that hear thee.



@c    1 Timothy Chapter 5


@c    He gives him lessons concerning widows, and how he is to behave to his
@c    clergy.

@c    5:1. An ancient man rebuke not, but entreat him as a father:  young men,
@c    as brethren:

@c    5:2. Old women, as mothers:  young women, as sisters, in all chastity.

@c    5:3. Honour widows that are widows indeed.

@c    5:4. But if any widow have children or grandchildren, let her learn
@c    first to govern her own house and to make a return of duty to her
@c    parents; for this is acceptable before God.

@c    5:5. But she that is a widow indeed, and desolate, let her trust in God
@c    and continue in supplications and prayers night and day.

@c    5:6. For she that liveth in pleasures is dead while she is living.

@c    5:7. And this give in charge, that they may be blameless.

@c    5:8. But if any man have not care of his own and especially of those of
@c    his house, he hath denied the faith and is worse than an infidel.

@c    5:9. Let a widow be chosen of no less than threescore years of age, who
@c    hath been the wife of one husband.

@c    5:10. Having testimony for her good works, if she have brought up
@c    children, if she have received to harbour, if she have washed the
@c    saints' feet, if she have ministered to them that suffer tribulation,
@c    if she have diligently followed every good work.

@c    5:11. But the younger widows avoid.  For when they have grown wanton in
@c    Christ, they will marry:

@c    5:12. Having damnation, because they have made void their first faith.

@c    Their first faith. . .  Their vow, by which they had engaged themselves
@c    to Christ.

@c    5:13. And withal being idle they learn to go about from house to house:
@c    and are not only idle, but tattlers also and busy bodies, speaking
@c    things which they ought not.

@c    5:14. I will, therefore, that the younger should marry, bear children,
@c    be mistresses of families, give no occasion to the adversary to speak
@c    evil.

@c    5:15. For some are already turned aside after Satan.

@c    5:16. If any of the faithful have widows, let him minister to them, and
@c    let not the church be charged:  that there may be sufficient for them
@c    that are widows indeed.

@c    5:17. Let the priests that rule well be esteemed worthy of double
@c    honour:  especially they who labour in the word and doctrine.

@c    5:18. For the scripture saith:  Thou shalt not muzzle the ox that
@c    treadeth out the corn:  and, The labourer is worthy of his reward.

@c    5:19. Against a priest receive not an accusation, but under two or
@c    three witnesses.

@c    5:20. Them that sin reprove before all that the rest also may have
@c    fear.

@c    5:21. I charge thee, before God and Christ Jesus and the elect angels,
@c    that thou observe these things without prejudice, doing nothing by
@c    declining to either side.

@c    5:22. Impose not hands lightly upon any man, neither be partaker of
@c    other men's sins.  Keep thyself chaste.

@c    5:23. Do not still drink water, but use a little wine for thy stomach's
@c    sake and thy frequent infirmities.

@c    5:24. Some men's sins are manifest, going before to judgment:  and some
@c    men they follow after.

@c    5:25. In like manner also good deeds are manifest:  and they that are
@c    otherwise cannot be hid.



@c    1 Timothy Chapter 6


@c    Duties of servants.  The danger of covetousness.  Lessons for the rich.

@c    6:1. Whosoever are servants under the yoke, let them count their
@c    masters worthy of all honour; lest the name of the Lord and his
@c    doctrine be blasphemed.

@c    6:2. But they that have believing masters, let them not despise them,
@c    because they are brethren; but serve them the rather, because they are
@c    faithful and beloved, who are partakers of the benefit.  These things
@c    teach and exhort.

@c    6:3. If any man teach otherwise and consent not to the sound words of
@c    our Lord Jesus Christ and to that doctrine which is according to
@c    godliness,

@c    6:4. He is proud, knowing nothing, but sick about questions and strifes
@c    of words; from which arise envies, contentions, blasphemies, evil
@c    suspicions,

@c    6:5. Conflicts of men corrupted in mind and who are destitute of the
@c    truth, supposing gain to be godliness.

@c    6:6. But godliness with contentment is great gain.

@c    6:7. For we brought nothing into this world:  and certainly we can carry
@c    nothing out.

@c    6:8. But having food and wherewith to be covered, with these we are
@c    content.

@c    6:9. For they that will become rich fall into temptation and into the
@c    snare of the devil and into many unprofitable and hurtful desires,
@c    which drown men into destruction and perdition.

@c    6:10. For the desire of money is the root of all evils; which some
@c    coveting have erred from the faith and have entangled themselves in
@c    many sorrows.

@c    6:11. But thou, O man of God, fly these things:  and pursue justice,
@c    godliness, faith, charity, patience, mildness.

@c    6:12. Fight the good fight of faith.  Lay hold on eternal life,
@c    whereunto thou art called and be it confessed a good confession before
@c    many witnesses.

@c    6:13. I charge thee before God who quickeneth all things, and before
@c    Christ Jesus who gave testimony under Pontius Pilate, a good
@c    confession:

@c    6:14. That thou keep the commandment without spot, blameless, unto the
@c    coming of our Lord Jesus Christ,

@c    6:15. Which in his times he shall shew, who is the Blessed and only
@c    Mighty, the King of kings and Lord of lords:

@c    6:16. Who only hath immortality and inhabiteth light inaccessible:  whom
@c    no man hath seen, nor can see:  to whom be honour and empire
@c    everlasting.  Amen.

@c    6:17. Charge the rich of this world not to be highminded nor to trust
@c    in the uncertainty of riches, but in the living God (who giveth us
@c    abundantly all things to enjoy)

@c    6:18. To do good, to be rich in good work, to give easily, to
@c    communicate to others,

@c    6:19. To lay up in store for themselves a good foundation against the
@c    time to come, that they may lay hold on the true life.

@c    6:20. O Timothy, keep that which is committed to thy trust, avoiding
@c    the profane novelties of words and oppositions of knowledge falsely so
@c    called.

@c    6:21. Which some promising, have erred concerning the faith.  Grace be
@c    with thee.  Amen.
