@c    THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST. PETER THE APOSTLE



@c    The first Epistle of St. Peter, though brief, contains much doctrine
@c    concerning Faith, Hope, and Charity, with divers instructions to all
@c    persons of what state or condition soever.  The Apostle commands
@c    submission to rulers and superiors and exhorts all to the practice of a
@c    virtuous life in imitation, of Christ.  This Epistle is written with
@c    such apostolical dignity as to manifest the supreme authority with
@c    which its writer, the Prince of the Apostles, had been vested by his
@c    Lord and Master, Jesus Christ.  He wrote it at Rome, which figuratively
@c    he calls Babylon, about fifteen years after our Lord's Ascension.



@c    1 Peter Chapter 1


@c    He gives thanks to God for the benefit of our being called to the true
@c    faith and to eternal life, into which we are to enter by many
@c    tribulations.  He exhorts to holiness of life, considering the holiness
@c    of God and our redemption by the blood of Christ.

@c    1:1. Peter, an apostle of Jesus Christ, to the strangers dispersed
@c    through Pontus, Cappadocia, Asia and Bithynia, elect,

@c    1:2. According to the foreknowledge of God the Father, unto the
@c    sanctification of the Spirit, unto obedience and sprinkling of the
@c    blood of Jesus Christ.  Grace unto you and peace be multiplied.

@c    1:3. Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who
@c    according to his great mercy hath regenerated us unto a lively hope, by
@c    the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead:

@c    1:4. Unto an inheritance, incorruptible, and undefiled and that cannot
@c    fade, reserved in heaven for you,

@c    1:5. Who, by the power of God, are kept by faith unto salvation, ready
@c    to be revealed in the last time.

@c    1:6. Wherein you shalt greatly rejoice, if now you must be for a little
@c    time made sorrowful in divers temptations:

@c    1:7. That the trial of your faith (much more precious than gold which
@c    is tried by the fire) may be found unto praise and glory and honour at
@c    the appearing of Jesus Christ.

@c    1:8. Whom having not seen, you love:  in whom also now though you see
@c    him not, you believe and, believing, shall rejoice with joy unspeakable
@c    and glorified;

@c    1:9. Receiving the end of your faith, even the salvation of your souls.

@c    1:10. Of which salvation the prophets have inquired and diligently
@c    searched, who prophesied of the grace to come in you.

@c    1:11. Searching what or what manner of time the Spirit of Christ in
@c    them did signify, when it foretold those sufferings that are in Christ
@c    and the glories that should follow.

@c    1:12. To whom it was revealed that, not to themselves but to you, they
@c    ministered those things which are now declared to you by them that have
@c    preached the gospel to you:  the Holy Ghost being sent down from heaven,
@c    on whom the angels desire to look.

@c    1:13. Wherefore, having the loins of your mind girt up, being sober,
@c    trust perfectly in the grace which is offered you in the revelation of
@c    Jesus Christ.

@c    1:14. As children of obedience, not fashioned according to the former
@c    desires of your ignorance,

@c    1:15. But according to him that hath called you, who is holy, be you
@c    also in all manner of conversation holy:

@c    1:16. Because it is written:  You shall be holy, for I am holy.

@c    1:17. And if you invoke as Father him who, without respect of persons,
@c    judgeth according to every one's work:  converse in fear during the time
@c    of your sojourning here.

@c    1:18. Knowing that you were not redeemed with corruptible things, as
@c    gold or silver, from your vain conversation of the tradition of your
@c    fathers:

@c    1:19. But with the precious blood of Christ, as of a lamb unspotted and
@c    undefiled

@c    1:20. Foreknown indeed before the foundation of the world, but
@c    manifested in the last times for you:

@c    1:21. Who through him are faithful in God who raised him up from the
@c    dead and hath given him glory, that your faith and hope might be in
@c    God.

@c    1:22. Purifying your souls in the obedience of charity, with a
@c    brotherly love, from a sincere heart love one another earnestly:

@c    1:23. Being born again, not of corruptible seed, but incorruptible, by
@c    the word of God who liveth and remaineth for ever.

@c    1:24. For all flesh is as grass and all the glory thereof as the flower
@c    of grass.  The grass is withered and the flower thereof is fallen away.

@c    1:25. But the word of the Lord endureth for ever.  And this is the word
@c    which by the gospel hath been preached unto you.



@c    1 Peter Chapter 2


@c    We are to lay aside all guile and go to Christ the living stone, and,
@c    as being now his people, walk worthily of him, with submission to
@c    superiors and patience under sufferings.

@c    2:1. Wherefore laying away all malice and all guile and dissimulations
@c    and envies and all detractions,

@c    2:2. As newborn babes, desire the rational milk without guile, that
@c    thereby you may grow unto salvation:

@c    2:3. If so be you have tasted that the Lord is sweet.

@c    2:4. Unto whom coming, as to a living stone, rejected indeed by men but
@c    chosen and made honourable by God:

@c    2:5. Be you also as living stones built up, a spiritual house, a holy
@c    priesthood, to offer up spiritual sacrifices, acceptable to God by
@c    Jesus Christ.

@c    2:6. Wherefore it is said in the scripture:  Behold, I lay in Sion a
@c    chief corner stone, elect, precious.  And he that shall believe in him
@c    shall not be confounded.

@c    2:7. To you therefore that believe, he is honour:  but to them that
@c    believe not, the stone which the builders rejected, the same is made
@c    the head of the corner:

@c    2:8. And a stone of stumbling and a rock of scandal, to them who
@c    stumble at the word, neither do believe, whereunto also they are set.

@c    2:9. But you are a chosen generation, a kingly priesthood, a holy
@c    nation, a purchased people:  that you may declare his virtues, who hath
@c    called you out of darkness into his marvelous light:

@c    2:10. Who in times past were not a people:  but are now the people of
@c    God.  Who had not obtained mercy:  but now have obtained mercy.

@c    2:11. Dearly beloved, I beseech you, as strangers and pilgrims, to
@c    refrain yourselves from carnal desires which war against the soul,

@c    2:12. Having your conversation good among the Gentiles:  that whereas
@c    they speak against you as evildoers, they may, by the good works which
@c    they shall behold in you, glorify God in the day of visitation.

@c    2:13. Be ye subject therefore to every human creature for God's sake:
@c    whether it be to the king as excelling,

@c    2:14. Or to governors as sent by him for the punishment of evildoers
@c    and for the praise of the good.

@c    2:15. For so is the will of God, that by doing well you may put to
@c    silence the ignorance of foolish men:

@c    2:16. As free and not as making liberty a cloak for malice, but as the
@c    servants of God.

@c    2:17. Honour all men.  Love the brotherhood.  Fear God.  Honour the king.

@c    2:18. Servants, be subject to your masters with all fear, not only to
@c    the good and gentle but also to the froward.

@c    2:19. For this is thankworthy:  if, for conscience towards God, a man
@c    endure sorrows, suffering wrongfully.

@c    2:20. For what glory is it, if, committing sin and being buffeted for
@c    it, you endure?  But if doing well you suffer patiently:  this is
@c    thankworthy before God.

@c    2:21. For unto this are you called:  because Christ also suffered for
@c    us, leaving you an example that you should follow his steps.

@c    2:22. Who did no sin, neither was guile found in his mouth.

@c    2:23. Who, when he was reviled, did not revile:  when he suffered, he
@c    threatened not, but delivered himself to him that judged him unjustly.

@c    2:24. Who his own self bore our sins in his body upon the tree:  that
@c    we, being dead to sins, should live to justice:  by whose stripes you
@c    were healed.

@c    2:25. For you were as sheep going astray:  but you are now converted to
@c    the shepherd and bishop of your souls.



@c    1 Peter Chapter 3


@c    How wives are to behave to their husbands.  What ornaments they are to
@c    seek.  Exhortations to divers Virtues.

@c    3:1. In like manner also, let wives be subject to their husbands:  that,
@c    if any believe not the word, they may be won without the word, by the
@c    conversation of the wives,

@c    3:2. Considering your chaste conversation with fear.

@c    3:3. Whose adorning, let it not be the outward plaiting of the hair, or
@c    the wearing of gold, or the putting on of apparel:

@c    3:4. But the hidden man of the heart, in the incorruptibility of a
@c    quiet and a meek spirit which is rich in the sight of God.

@c    3:5. For after this manner heretofore, the holy women also who trusted
@c    in God adorned themselves, being in subjection to their own husbands:

@c    3:6. As Sara obeyed Abraham, calling him lord:  whose daughters you are,
@c    doing well and not fearing any disturbance.

@c    3:7. Ye husbands, likewise dwelling with them according to knowledge,
@c    giving honour to the female as to the weaker vessel and as to the
@c    co-heirs of the grace of life:  that your prayers be not hindered.

@c    3:8. And in fine, be ye all of one mind, having compassion one of
@c    another, being lovers of the brotherhood, merciful, modest, humble:

@c    3:9. Not rendering evil for evil, nor railing for railing, but
@c    contrariwise, blessing:  for unto this are you called, that you may
@c    inherit a blessing.

@c    3:10. For he that will love life and see good days, let him refrain his
@c    tongue from evil, and his lips that they speak no guile.

@c    3:11. Let him decline from evil and do good:  Let him seek after peace
@c    and pursue it:

@c    3:12. Because the eyes of the Lord are upon the just, and his ears unto
@c    their prayers but the countenance of the Lord upon them that do evil
@c    things.

@c    3:13. And who is he that can hurt you, if you be zealous of good?

@c    3:14. But if also you suffer any thing for justice' sake, blessed are
@c    ye.  And be not afraid of their fear:  and be not troubled.

@c    3:15. But sanctify the Lord Christ in your hearts, being ready always
@c    to satisfy every one that asketh you a reason of that hope which is in
@c    you.

@c    3:16. But with modesty and fear, having a good conscience:  that whereas
@c    they speak evil of you, they may be ashamed who falsely accuse your
@c    good conversation in Christ.

@c    3:17. For it is better doing well (if such be the will of God) to
@c    suffer than doing ill.

@c    3:18. Because Christ also died once for our sins, the just for the
@c    unjust:  that he might offer us to God, being put to death indeed in the
@c    flesh, but enlivened in the spirit,

@c    3:19. In which also coming he preached to those spirits that were in
@c    prison:

@c    Spirits that were in prison. . .See here a proof of a third place, or
@c    middle state of souls:  for these spirits in prison, to whom Christ went
@c    to preach, after his death, were not in heaven; nor yet in the hell of
@c    the damned:  because heaven is no prison:  and Christ did not go to
@c    preach to the damned.

@c    3:20. Which had been some time incredulous, when they waited for the
@c    patience of God in the days of Noe, when the ark was a building:
@c    wherein a few, that is, eight souls, were saved by water.

@c    3:21. Whereunto baptism, being of the like form, now saveth you also:
@c    not the putting away of the filth of the flesh, but, the examination of
@c    a good conscience towards God by the resurrection of Jesus Christ.

@c    Whereunto baptism, etc. . .Baptism is said to be of the like form with
@c    the water by which Noe was saved, because the one was a figure of the
@c    other.  Not the putting away, etc. . .As much as to say, that baptism
@c    has not its efficacy, in order to salvation, from its washing away any
@c    bodily filth or dirt; but from its purging the conscience from sin,
@c    when accompanied with suitable dispositions in the party, to answer the
@c    interrogations made at that time, with relation to faith, the
@c    renouncing of Satan with all his works; and the obedience to God's
@c    commandments.

@c    3:22. Who is on the right hand of God, swallowing down death that we
@c    might be made heirs of life everlasting:  being gone into heaven, the
@c    angels and powers and virtues being made subject to him.



@c    1 Peter Chapter 4


@c    Exhortations to cease from sin, to mutual charity, to do all for the
@c    glory of God, to be willing to suffer for Christ.

@c    4:1. Christ therefore having suffered in the flesh, be you also armed
@c    with the same thought:  for he that hath suffered in the flesh hath
@c    ceased from sins:

@c    4:2. That now he may live the rest of his time in the flesh, not after
@c    the desires of men but according to the will of God.

@c    4:3. For the time past is sufficient to have fulfilled the will of the
@c    Gentiles, for them who have walked in riotousness, lusts, excess of
@c    wine, revellings, banquetings and unlawful worshipping of idols.

@c    4:4. Wherein they think it strange that you run not with them into the
@c    same confusion of riotousness:  speaking evil of you.

@c    4:5. Who shall render account to him who is ready to judge the living
@c    and the dead.

@c    4:6. For, for this cause was the gospel preached also to the dead:  That
@c    they might be judged indeed according to men, in the flesh:  but may
@c    live according to God, in the Spirit.

@c    4:7. But the end of all is at hand.  Be prudent therefore and watch in
@c    prayers.

@c    4:8. But before all things have a constant mutual charity among
@c    yourselves:  for charity covereth a multitude of sins.

@c    4:9. Using hospitality one towards another, without murmuring,

@c    4:10. As every man hath received grace, ministering the same one to
@c    another:  as good stewards of the manifold grace of God.

@c    4:11. If any man speak, let him speak, as the words of God.  If any
@c    minister, let him do it, as of the power which God administereth:  that
@c    in all things God may be honoured through Jesus Christ:  to whom is
@c    glory and empire for ever and ever.  Amen.

@c    4:12. Dearly beloved, think not strange the burning heat which is to
@c    try you:  as if some new thing happened to you.

@c    4:13. But if you partake of the sufferings of Christ, rejoice that,
@c    when his glory shall be revealed, you may also be glad with exceeding
@c    joy.

@c    4:14. If you be reproached for the name of Christ, you shall be
@c    blessed:  for that which is of the honour, glory and power of God, and
@c    that which is his Spirit resteth upon you.

@c    4:15. But let none of you suffer as a murderer or a thief or a railer
@c    or coveter of other men's things.

@c    4:16. But, if as a Christian, let him not be ashamed:  but let him
@c    glorify God in that name.

@c    4:17. For the time is, that judgment should begin at the house of God.
@c    And if at first at us, what shall be the end of them that believe not
@c    the gospel of God?

@c    4:18. And if the just man shall scarcely be saved, where shall the
@c    ungodly and the sinner appear?

@c    Scarcely. . .That is, not without much labour and difficulty; and
@c    because of the dangers which constantly surround, the temptations of
@c    the world, of the devil, and of our own corrupt nature.

@c    4:19. Wherefore let them also that suffer according to the will of God
@c    commend their souls in good deeds to the faithful Creator.



@c    1 Peter Chapter 5


@c    He exhorts both priests and laity to their respective duties and
@c    recommends to all humility and watchfulness.

@c    5:1. The ancients therefore that are among you, I beseech who am myself
@c    also an ancient and a witness of the sufferings of Christ, as also a
@c    partaker of that glory which is to be revealed in time to come:

@c    5:2. Feed the flock of God which is among you, taking care of it, not
@c    by constraint but willingly, according to God:  not for filthy lucre's
@c    sake but voluntarily:

@c    5:3. Neither as lording it over the clergy but being made a pattern of
@c    the flock from the heart.

@c    5:4. And when the prince of pastors shall appear, you shall receive a
@c    never fading crown of glory.

@c    5:5. In like manner, ye young men, be subject to the ancients.  And do
@c    you all insinuate humility one to another:  for God resisteth the proud,
@c    but to the humble he giveth grace.

@c    5:6. Be you humbled therefore under the mighty hand of God, that he may
@c    exalt you in the time of visitation:

@c    5:7. Casting all your care upon him, for he hath care of you.

@c    5:8. Be sober and watch:  because your adversary the devil, as a roaring
@c    lion, goeth about seeking whom he may devour.

@c    5:9. Whom resist ye, strong in faith:  knowing that the same affliction
@c    befalls, your brethren who are in the world.

@c    5:10. But the God of all grace, who hath called us unto his eternal
@c    glory in Christ Jesus, after you have suffered a little, will himself
@c    perfect you and confirm you and establish you.

@c    5:11. To him be glory and empire, for ever and ever.  Amen.

@c    5:12. By Sylvanus, a faithful brother unto you, as I think, I have
@c    written briefly:  beseeching and testifying that this is the true grace
@c    of God, wherein you stand.

@c    5:13. The church that is in Babylon, elected together with you,
@c    saluteth you.  And so doth my son, Mark.

@c    5:14. Salute one another with a holy kiss.  Grace be to all you who are
@c    in Christ Jesus.  Amen.
