@c    THE SECOND EPISTLE OF ST. PAUL TO THE THESSALONIANS



@c    In this Epistle St. Paul admonishes the Thessalonians to be constant in
@c    the faith of Christ and not to be terrified by the insinuations of
@c    false teachers telling them that the day of judgment was near at hand,
@c    as there must come many signs and wonders before it.  He bids them to
@c    hold firm the traditions received from him, whether by word, or by
@c    epistle, and shews them how they may be certain of his letters by the
@c    manner he writes.



@c    2 Thessalonians Chapter 1


@c    He gives thanks to God for their faith and constancy and prays for
@c    their advancement in all good.

@c    1:1. Paul and Sylvanus and Timothy, to the church of the Thessalonians.
@c    In God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ,

@c    1:2. Grace unto you:  and peace from God our Father and from the Lord
@c    Jesus Christ.

@c    1:3. We are bound to give thanks always to God for you, brethren, as it
@c    is fitting, because your faith groweth exceedingly and the charity of
@c    every one of you towards each other aboundeth.

@c    1:4. So that we ourselves also glory in you in the churches of God, for
@c    your patience and faith, and in all your persecutions and tribulations:
@c    which you endure

@c    1:5. For an example of the just judgment of God, that you may be
@c    counted worthy of the kingdom of God, for which also you suffer.

@c    1:6. Seeing it is a just thing with God to repay tribulation to them
@c    that trouble you:

@c    1:7. And to you who are troubled, rest with us, when the Lord Jesus
@c    shall be revealed from heaven with the angels of his power:

@c    1:8. In a flame of fire, giving vengeance to them who know not God and
@c    who obey not the gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ.

@c    1:9. Who shall suffer eternal punishment in destruction, from the face
@c    of the Lord and from the glory of his power:

@c    1:10. When he shall come to be glorified in his saints and to be made
@c    wonderful in all them who have believed; because our testimony was
@c    believed upon you in that day.

@c    1:11. Wherefore also we pray always for you:  That our God would make
@c    you worthy of his vocation and fulfil all the good pleasure of his
@c    goodness and the work of faith in power:

@c    1:12. That the name of our Lord Jesus may be glorified in you, and you
@c    in him, according to the grace of our God and of the Lord Jesus Christ.



@c    2 Thessalonians Chapter 2


@c    The day of the Lord is not to come till the man of sin be revealed.  The
@c    apostle's traditions are to be observed.

@c    2:1. And we beseech you, brethren, by the coming of our Lord Jesus
@c    Christ and of our gathering together unto him:

@c    2:2. That you be not easily moved from your sense nor be terrified,
@c    neither by spirit nor by word nor by epistle.  as sent from us, as if
@c    the day of the Lord were at hand.

@c    2:3. Let no man deceive you by any means:  for unless there come a
@c    revolt first, and the man of sin be revealed, the son of perdition

@c    A revolt. . .This revolt, or falling off, is generally understood, by
@c    the ancient fathers, of a revolt from the Roman empire, which was first
@c    to be destroyed, before the coming of Antichrist.  It may, perhaps, be
@c    understood also of a revolt of many nations from the Catholic Church;
@c    which has, in part, happened already, by means of Mahomet, Luther, &c.,
@c    and it may be supposed, will be more general in the days of the
@c    Antichrist.  The man of sin. . .Here must be meant some particular man,
@c    as is evident from the frequent repetition of the Greek article:  o`,
@c    'the' man of sin, 'the' son of perdition, 'the' adversary or opposer.
@c    It agrees to the wicked and great Antichrist, who will come before the
@c    end of the world.

@c    2:4. Who opposeth and is lifted up above all that is called God or that
@c    is worshipped, so that he sitteth in the temple of God, shewing himself
@c    as if he were God.

@c    In the temple. . .Either that of Jerusalem which some think he will
@c    rebuild; or in some Christian church, which he will pervert to his own
@c    worship:  as Mahomet has done by the churches of the east.

@c    2:5. Remember you not that, when I was yet with you, I told you these
@c    things?

@c    2:6. And now you know what withholdeth, that he may be revealed in his
@c    time.

@c    2:7. For the mystery of iniquity already worketh:  only that he who now
@c    holdeth do hold, until he be taken out of the way.

@c    2:8. And then that wicked one shall be revealed:  whom the Lord Jesus
@c    shall kill with the spirit of his mouth and shall destroy with the
@c    brightness of his coming:  him

@c    2:9. Whose coming is according to the working of Satan, in all power
@c    and signs and lying wonders:

@c    2:10. And in all seduction of iniquity to them that perish:  because
@c    they receive not the love of the truth, that they might be saved.
@c    Therefore God shall send them the operation of error, to believe lying:

@c    God shall send. . .That is God shall suffer them to be deceived by lying
@c    wonders, and false miracles, in punishment of their not entertaining
@c    the love of truth.

@c    2:11. That all may be judged who have not believed the truth but have
@c    consented to iniquity.

@c    2:12. But we ought to give thanks to God always for you, brethren,
@c    beloved of God, for that God hath chosen you firstfruits unto
@c    salvation, in sanctification of the spirit and faith of the truth:

@c    2:13. Whereunto also he hath called you by our gospel, unto the
@c    purchasing of the glory of our Lord Jesus Christ.

@c    2:14. Therefore, brethren, stand fast:  and hold the traditions, which
@c    you have learned, whether by word or by our epistle.

@c    Traditions. . .See here that the unwritten traditions are no less to be
@c    received than their epistles.

@c    2:15. Now our Lord Jesus Christ himself, and God and our Father, who
@c    hath loved us and hath given us everlasting consolation and good hope
@c    in grace,

@c    2:16. Exhort your hearts and confirm you in every good work and word.



@c    2 Thessalonians Chapter 3


@c    He begs their prayers and warns them against idleness.

@c    3:1. For the rest, brethren, pray for us that the word of God may run
@c    and may be glorified, even as among you:

@c    May run. . .That is, may spread itself, and have free course.

@c    3:2. And that we may be delivered from importunate and evil men:  for
@c    all men have not faith.

@c    3:3. But God is faithful, who will strengthen and keep you from evil.

@c    3:4. And we have confidence concerning you in the Lord that the things
@c    which we command, you both do and will do.

@c    3:5. And the Lord direct your hearts, in the charity of God and the
@c    patience of Christ.

@c    3:6. And we charge you, brethren, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ,
@c    that you withdraw yourselves from every brother walking disorderly and
@c    not according to the tradition which they have received of us.

@c    3:7. For yourselves know how you ought to imitate us.  For we were not
@c    disorderly among you.

@c    3:8. Neither did we eat any man's bread for nothing:  but in labour and
@c    in toil we worked night and day, lest we should be chargeable to any of
@c    you.

@c    3:9. Not as if we had not power:  but that we might give ourselves a
@c    pattern unto you, to imitate us.

@c    3:10. For also, when we were with you, this we declared to you:  that,
@c    if any man will not work, neither let him eat.

@c    3:11. For we have heard there are some among you who walk disorderly:
@c    working not at all, but curiously meddling.

@c    3:12. Now we charge them that are such and beseech them by the Lord
@c    Jesus Christ that, working with silence, they would eat their own
@c    bread.

@c    3:13. But you, brethren, be not weary in well doing.

@c    3:14. And if any man obey not our word by this epistle, note that man
@c    and do not keep company with him, that he may be ashamed.

@c    3:15. Yet do not esteem him as an enemy but admonish him as a brother.

@c    3:16. Now the Lord of peace himself give you everlasting peace in every
@c    place.  The Lord be with you all.

@c    3:17. The salutation of Paul with my own hand:  which is the sign in
@c    every epistle.  So I write.

@c    3:18. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all.  Amen.
