@c    THE SECOND EPISTLE OF ST. JOHN THE APOSTLE



@c    The Apostle commends Electa and her family for their steadfastness in
@c    the true faith and exhorts them to persevere, lest they lose the reward
@c    of their labours.  He exhorts them to love one another.  But with
@c    heretics to have no society, even not to salute them.  Although this
@c    Epistle is written to a particular person, yet its instructions may
@c    serve as a lesson to others, especially to those who, from their
@c    connections, situation, or condition in life, are in danger of
@c    perversion.



@c    2 John Chapter 1


@c    He recommends walking in truth, loving one another and to beware of
@c    false teachers.

@c    1:1. The Ancient to the lady Elect and her children, whom I love in the
@c    truth:  and not I only, but also all they that have known the truth,

@c    The ancient. . .That is, the ancient bishop St. John, being the only one
@c    of the twelve apostles then living.  To the lady Elect. . .Some
@c    conjecture that Electa might be the name of a family, or of a
@c    particular church; but the general opinion is, that it is the proper
@c    name of a lady, so eminent for her piety and great charity, as to merit
@c    this Epistle from St. John.

@c    1:2. For the sake of the truth which dwelleth in us and shall be with
@c    us for ever.

@c    1:3. Grace be with you, mercy and peace from God the Father and from
@c    Christ Jesus the Son of the Father:  in truth and charity.

@c    1:4. I was exceeding glad that I found of thy children walking in
@c    truth, as we have received a commandment from the Father.

@c    1:5. And now I beseech thee, lady, not as writing a new commandment to
@c    thee, but that which we have had from the beginning, that we love one
@c    another.

@c    1:6. And this is charity:  That we walk according to his commandments.
@c    For this is the commandment that, as you have heard from the beginning,
@c    you should walk in the same:

@c    1:7. For many seducers are gone out into the world who confess not that
@c    Jesus Christ is come in the flesh.  This is a seducer and an antichrist.

@c    1:8. Look to yourselves, that you lose not the things which you have
@c    wrought:  but that you may receive a full reward.

@c    1:9. Whosoever revolteth and continueth not in the doctrine of Christ
@c    hath not God.  He that continueth in the doctrine, the same hath both
@c    the Father and the Son.

@c    1:10. If any man come to you and bring not this doctrine, receive him
@c    not into the house nor say to him:  God speed you.

@c    Nor say to him, God speed you. . .This admonition is in general, to
@c    forewarn the faithful of the dangers which may arise from a familiarity
@c    with those who have prevaricated and gone from the true faith, and with
@c    such as teach false doctrine.  But this is not forbidding a charity for
@c    all men, by which we ought to wish and pray for the eternal salvation
@c    of every one, even of our enemies.

@c    1:11. For he that saith unto him:  God speed you, communicateth with his
@c    wicked works.

@c    1:12. Having more things to write unto you, I would not by paper and
@c    ink:  for I hope that I shall be with you and speak face to face, that
@c    your joy may be full.

@c    1:13. The children of thy sister Elect salute thee.
