@c    THE SECOND EPISTLE OF ST. PAUL TO TIMOTHY



@c    In this Epistle, the Apostle again instructs and admonishes Timothy in
@c    what belonged to his office, as in the former; and also warns him to
@c    shun the conversation of those who had erred from the truth, describing
@c    at the same time their character, He tells him of his approaching death
@c    and desires him to come speedily to him.  It appears from this
@c    circumstance that he wrote this second Epistle in the time of his last
@c    imprisonment at Rome and not long before his martyrdom.



@c    2 Timothy Chapter 1


@c    He admonishes him to stir up the grace he received by his ordination
@c    and not to be discouraged at his sufferings, but to hold firm the sound
@c    doctrine of the gospel.

@c    1:1. Paul, an apostle of Jesus Christ, by the will of God, according to
@c    the promise of life which is in Christ Jesus:

@c    1:2. To Timothy, my dearly beloved son.  Grace, mercy and peace, from
@c    God the Father and from Christ Jesus our Lord.

@c    1:3. I give thanks to God, whom I serve from my forefathers, with a
@c    pure conscience, that without ceasing I have a remembrance of thee in
@c    my prayers, night and day.

@c    1:4. Desiring to see thee, being mindful of thy tears, that I may be
@c    filled with joy:

@c    1:5. Calling to mind that faith which is in thee unfeigned, which also
@c    dwelt first in thy grandmother Lois and in thy mother Eunice, and I am
@c    certain that in thee also.

@c    1:6. For which cause I admonish thee that thou stir up the grace of God
@c    which is in thee by the imposition of my hands.

@c    1:7. For God hath not given us the spirit of fear:  but of power and of
@c    love and of sobriety.

@c    1:8. Be not thou therefore ashamed of the testimony of our Lord, nor of
@c    me his prisoner:  but labour with the gospel, according to the power of
@c    God.

@c    1:9. Who hath delivered us and called us by his holy calling, not
@c    according to our own works, but according to his own purpose and grace,
@c    which was given us in Christ Jesus before the times of the world:

@c    1:10. But is now made manifest by the illumination of our Saviour Jesus
@c    Christ, who hath destroyed death and hath brought to light life and
@c    incorruption by the gospel.

@c    By the illumination. . .That is, by the bright coming and appearing of
@c    our Saviour.

@c    1:11. Wherein I am appointed a preacher and an apostle and teacher of
@c    the Gentiles.

@c    1:12. For which cause, I also suffer these things:  but I am not
@c    ashamed.  For I know whom I have believed and I am certain that he is
@c    able to keep that which I have committed unto him, against that day.

@c    1:13. Hold the form of sound words which thou hast heard of me:  in
@c    faith and in the love which is in Christ Jesus.

@c    1:14. Keep the good thing committed to thy trust by the Holy Ghost who
@c    dwelleth in us.

@c    1:15. Thou knowest this, that all they who are in Asia are turned away
@c    from me:  of whom are Phigellus and Hermogenes.

@c    1:16. The Lord give mercy to the house of Onesiphorus:  because he hath
@c    often refreshed me and hath not been ashamed of my chain:

@c    1:17. But when he was come to Rome, he carefully sought me and found
@c    me.

@c    1:18. The Lord grant unto him to find mercy of the Lord in that day.
@c    And in how many things he ministered unto me at Ephesus, thou very well
@c    knowest.



@c    2 Timothy Chapter 2


@c    He exhorts him to diligence in his office and patience in suffering.
@c    The danger of the delusions of heretics.

@c    2:1. Thou therefore, my son, be strong in Christ Jesus:

@c    2:2. And the things which thou hast heard of me by many witnesses, the
@c    same commend to faithful men who shall be fit to teach others also.

@c    2:3. Labour as a good soldier of Christ Jesus.

@c    2:4. No man, being a soldier to God, entangleth himself with secular
@c    businesses:  that he may please him to whom he hath engaged himself.

@c    2:5. For he also that striveth for the mastery is not crowned, except
@c    he strive lawfully.

@c    2:6. The husbandman that laboureth must first partake of the fruits.

@c    2:7. Understand what I say:  for the Lord will give thee in all things
@c    understanding.

@c    2:8. Be mindful that the Lord Jesus Christ is risen again from the
@c    dead, of the seed of David, according to my gospel:

@c    2:9. Wherein I labour even unto bands, as an evildoer.  But the word of
@c    God is not bound.

@c    2:10. Therefore I endure all things for the sake of the elect, that
@c    they also may obtain the salvation which is in Christ Jesus, with
@c    heavenly glory.

@c    2:11. A faithful saying:  for if we be dead with him, we shall live also
@c    with him.

@c    2:12. If we suffer, we shall also reign with him.  If we deny him, he
@c    will also deny us.

@c    2:13. If we believe not, he continueth faithful, he cannot deny
@c    himself.

@c    2:14. Of these things put them in mind, charging them before the Lord.
@c    Contend not in words:  for it is to no profit, but to the subverting of
@c    the hearers.

@c    2:15. Carefully study to present thyself approved unto God, a workman
@c    that needeth not to be ashamed, rightly handling the word of truth.

@c    2:16. But shun profane and vain babblings:  for they grow much towards
@c    ungodliness.

@c    2:17. And their speech spreadeth like a canker:  of whom are Hymeneus
@c    and Philetus:

@c    2:18. Who have erred from the truth, saying that the resurrection is
@c    past already, and have subverted the faith of some.

@c    2:19. But the sure foundation of God standeth firm, having this seal:
@c    the Lord knoweth who are his; and let every one depart from iniquity
@c    who nameth the name of the Lord.

@c    2:20. But in a great house there are not only vessels of gold and of
@c    silver, but also of wood and of earth:  and some indeed unto honour, but
@c    some unto dishonour.

@c    2:21. If any man therefore shall cleanse himself from these, he shall
@c    be a vessel unto honour, sanctified and profitable to the Lord,
@c    prepared unto every good work.

@c    2:22. But flee thou youthful desires, and pursue justice, faith,
@c    charity and peace with them that call on the Lord out of a pure heart.

@c    2:23. And avoid foolish and unlearned questions, knowing that they
@c    beget strifes.

@c    2:24. But the servant of the Lord must not wrangle:  but be mild toward
@c    all men, apt to teach, patient,

@c    2:25. With modesty admonishing them that resist the truth:  if
@c    peradventure God may give them repentance to know the truth;

@c    2:26. And they may recover themselves from the snares of the devil by
@c    whom they are held captive at his will.



@c    2 Timothy Chapter 3


@c    The character of heretics of latter days.  He exhorts Timothy to
@c    constancy.  Of the great profit of the knowledge of the scriptures.

@c    3:1. Know also this, that in the last days shall come dangerous times.

@c    3:2. Men shall be lovers of themselves, covetous, haughty, proud,
@c    blasphemers, disobedient to parents, ungrateful, wicked,

@c    3:3. Without affection, without peace, slanderers, incontinent,
@c    unmerciful, without kindness,

@c    3:4. Traitors, stubborn, puffed up, and lovers of pleasure more than of
@c    God:

@c    3:5. Having an appearance indeed of godliness but denying the power
@c    thereof.  Now these avoid.

@c    3:6. For of these sort are they who creep into houses and lead captive
@c    silly women laden with sins, who are led away with divers desires:

@c    3:7. Ever learning, and never attaining to the knowledge of the truth.

@c    3:8. Now as Jannes and Mambres resisted Moses, so these also resist the
@c    truth, men corrupted in mind, reprobate concerning the faith.

@c    Jannes and Mambres. . .The magicians of king Pharao.

@c    3:9. But they shall proceed no farther:  for their folly shall be
@c    manifest to all men, as theirs also was.

@c    3:10. But thou hast fully known my doctrine, manner of life, purpose,
@c    faith, longsuffering, love, patience,

@c    3:11. Persecutions, afflictions:  such as came upon me at Antioch, at
@c    Iconium and at Lystra:  what persecutions I endured, and out of them all
@c    the Lord delivered me.

@c    3:12. And all that will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer
@c    persecution.

@c    3:13. But evil men and seducers shall grow worse and worse:  erring, and
@c    driving into error,

@c    3:14. But continue thou in those things which thou hast learned and
@c    which have been committed to thee.  Knowing of whom thou hast learned
@c    them:

@c    3:15. And because from thy infancy thou hast known the holy scriptures
@c    which can instruct thee to salvation by the faith which is in Christ
@c    Jesus.

@c    3:16. All scripture, inspired of God, is profitable to teach, to
@c    reprove, to correct, to instruct in justice:

@c    All scripture,. . .Every part of divine scripture is certainly
@c    profitable for all these ends.  But, if we would have the whole rule of
@c    Christian faith and practice, we must not be content with those
@c    Scriptures, which Timothy knew from his infancy, that is, with the Old
@c    Testament alone:  nor yet with the New Testament, without taking along
@c    with it the traditions of the apostles, and the interpretation of the
@c    church, to which the apostles delivered both the book, and the true
@c    meaning of it.

@c    3:17. That the man of God may be perfect, furnished to every good work.



@c    2 Timothy Chapter 4


@c    His charge to Timothy.  He tells him of his approaching death and
@c    desires him to come to him.

@c    4:1. I charge thee, before God and Jesus Christ, who shall judge the
@c    living and the dead, by his coming and his kingdom:

@c    4:2. Preach the word:  be instant in season, out of season:  reprove,
@c    entreat, rebuke in all patience and doctrine.

@c    4:3. For there shall be a time when they will not endure sound doctrine
@c    but, according to their own desires, they will heap to themselves
@c    teachers having itching ears:

@c    4:4. And will indeed turn away their hearing from the truth, but will
@c    be turned unto fables.

@c    4:5. But be thou vigilant, labour in all things, do the work of an
@c    evangelist, fulfil thy ministry.  Be sober.

@c    An evangelist. . .a diligent preacher of the gospel.

@c    4:6. For I am even now ready to be sacrificed:  and the time of my
@c    dissolution is at hand.

@c    4:7. I have fought a good fight:  I have finished my course:  I have kept
@c    the faith.

@c    4:8. As to the rest, there is laid up for me a crown of justice which
@c    the Lord the just judge will render to me in that day:  and not only to
@c    me, but to them also that love his coming.  Make haste to come to me
@c    quickly.

@c    4:9. For Demas hath left me, loving this world, and is gone to
@c    Thessalonica:

@c    4:10. Crescens into Galatia, Titus into Dalmatia.

@c    4:11. Only Luke is with me.  Take Mark and bring him with thee:  for he
@c    is profitable to me for the ministry.

@c    4:12. But Tychicus I have sent to Ephesus.

@c    4:13. The cloak that I left at Troas, with Carpus, when thou comest,
@c    bring with thee:  and the books, especially the parchments.

@c    4:14. Alexander the coppersmith hath done me much evil:  the Lord will
@c    reward him according to his works:

@c    4:15. Whom do thou also avoid:  for he hath greatly withstood our words.

@c    4:16. At my first answer, no man stood with me:  but all forsook me.  May
@c    it not be laid to their charge!

@c    4:17. But the Lord stood by me and strengthened me, that by me the
@c    preaching may be accomplished and that all the Gentiles may hear.  And I
@c    was delivered out of the mouth of the lion.

@c    4:18. The Lord hath delivered me from every evil work and will preserve
@c    me unto his heavenly kingdom.  To whom be glory for ever and ever.  Amen.

@c    4:19. Salute Prisca, and Aquila and the household of Onesiphorus.

@c    4:20. Erastus remained at Corinth.  And Trophimus I left sick at
@c    Miletus.

@c    4:21. Make haste to come before winter.  Eubulus and Pudens and Linus
@c    and Claudia and all the brethren, salute thee.

@c    4:22. The Lord Jesus Christ be with thy spirit.  Grace be with you.
@c    Amen.
