@c    THE SECOND EPISTLE OF ST. PETER THE APOSTLE



@c    In this Epistle St. Peter says (chap. 3.), Behold this second Epistle I
@c    write to you:  and before (chap. 1. 14,) Being assured that the laying
@c    away of this my tabernacle is at hand.  This shews, that it was written a
@c    very short time before his martyrdom, which was about thirty-five years
@c    after our Lord's Ascension.  In this Epistle he admonishes the faithful
@c    to be mindful of the great gifts they received from God and to join all
@c    other virtues with their faith.  He warns them against false teachers,
@c    by describing their practices and foretelling their punishments.  He
@c    describes the dissolution of this world by fire and the day of
@c    judgment.



@c    2 Peter Chapter 1


@c    He exhorts them to join all other virtues with their faith, in order to
@c    secure their salvation.

@c    1:1. Simon Peter, servant and apostle of Jesus Christ:  to them that
@c    have obtained equal faith with us in the justice of our God and Saviour
@c    Jesus Christ.

@c    1:2. Grace to you and peace be accomplished in the knowledge of God and
@c    of Christ Jesus our Lord.

@c    1:3. As all things of his divine power which appertain to life and
@c    godliness are given us through the knowledge of him who hath called us
@c    by his own proper glory and virtue.

@c    1:4. By whom he hath given us most great and precious promises:  that by
@c    these you may be made partakers of the divine nature:  flying the
@c    corruption of that concupiscence which is in the world.

@c    1:5. And you, employing all care, minister in your faith, virtue:  And
@c    in virtue, knowledge:

@c    1:6. And in knowledge, abstinence:  and in abstinence, patience:  and in
@c    patience, godliness:

@c    1:7. And in godliness, love of brotherhood:  and in love of brotherhood,
@c    charity.

@c    1:8. For if these things be with you and abound, they will make you to
@c    be neither empty nor unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus
@c    Christ.

@c    1:9. For he that hath not these things with him is blind and groping,
@c    having forgotten that he was purged from his old sins.

@c    1:10. Wherefore, brethren, labour the more, that by good works you may
@c    make sure your calling and election.  For doing these things, you shall
@c    not sin at any time.

@c    1:11. For so an entrance shall be ministered to you abundantly into the
@c    ever-lasting kingdom of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ.

@c    1:12. For which cause, I will begin to put you always in remembrance of
@c    these things:  though indeed you know them and are confirmed in the
@c    present truth.

@c    1:13. But I think it meet, as long as I am in this tabernacle, to stir
@c    you up by putting you in remembrance.

@c    1:14. Being assured that the laying away of this my tabernacle is at
@c    hand, according as our Lord Jesus Christ also hath signified to me.

@c    1:15. And I will endeavour that you frequently have after my decease
@c    whereby you may keep a memory of these things.

@c    1:16. For we have not by following artificial fables made known to you
@c    the power and presence of our Lord Jesus Christ:  but we were
@c    eyewitnesses of his greatness.

@c    1:17. For he received from God the Father honour and glory, this voice
@c    coming down to him from the excellent glory:  This is my beloved Son, in
@c    whom I am well pleased.  Hear ye him.

@c    1:18. And this voice, we heard brought from heaven, when we were with
@c    him in the holy mount.

@c    1:19. And we have the more firm prophetical word:  whereunto you do well
@c    to attend, as to a light that shineth in a dark place, until the day
@c    dawn and the day star arise in your hearts.

@c    1:20. Understanding this first:  That no prophecy of scripture is made
@c    by private interpretation.

@c    No prophecy of scripture is made by private interpretation. . .This
@c    shows plainly that the scriptures are not to be expounded by any one's
@c    private judgment or private spirit, because every part of the holy
@c    scriptures were written by men inspired by the Holy Ghost, and declared
@c    as such by the Church; therefore they are not to be interpreted but by
@c    the Spirit of God, which he hath left, and promised to remain with his
@c    Church to guide her in all truth to the end of the world.  Some may tell
@c    us, that many of our divines interpret the scriptures:  they may do so,
@c    but they do it always with a submission to the judgment of the Church,
@c    and not otherwise.

@c    1:21. For prophecy came not by the will of man at any time:  but the
@c    holy men of God spoke, inspired by the Holy Ghost.



@c    2 Peter Chapter 2


@c    He warns them against false teachers and foretells their punishment.

@c    2:1. But there were also false prophets among the people, even as there
@c    shall be among you lying teachers who shall bring in sects of perdition
@c    and deny the Lord who bought them:  bringing upon themselves swift
@c    destruction.

@c    Seeds of perdition. . .That is, heresies destructive of salvation.

@c    2:2. And many shall follow their riotousness, through whom the way of
@c    truth shall be evil spoken of.

@c    2:3. And through covetousness shall they with feigned words make
@c    merchandise of you.  Whose judgment now of a long time lingereth not:
@c    and their perdition slumbereth not.

@c    2:4. For if God spared not the angels that sinned, but delivered them,
@c    drawn down by infernal ropes to the lower hell, unto torments, to be
@c    reserved unto judgment:

@c    2:5. And spared not the original world, but preserved Noe, the eighth
@c    person, the preacher of justice, bringing in the flood upon the world
@c    of the ungodly.

@c    2:6. And reducing the cities of the Sodomites and of the Gomorrhites
@c    into ashes, condemned them to be overthrown, making them an example to
@c    those that should after act wickedly,

@c    2:7. And delivered just Lot, oppressed by the injustice and lewd
@c    conversation of the wicked:

@c    2:8. For in sight and hearing he was just, dwelling among them who from
@c    day to day vexed the just soul with unjust works.

@c    2:9. The Lord knoweth how to deliver the godly from temptation, but to
@c    reserve the unjust unto the day of judgment to be tormented:

@c    2:10. And especially them who walk after the flesh in the lust of
@c    uncleanness and despise government:  audacious, self willed, they fear
@c    not to bring in sects, blaspheming.

@c    2:11. Whereas angels, who are greater in strength and power, bring not
@c    against themselves a railing judgment.

@c    Bring not a railing judgment, etc. . .That is, they use no railing, nor
@c    cursing sentence; not even in their conflicts with the evil angels.  See
@c    St. Jude, ver. 9.

@c    2:12. But these men, as irrational beasts, naturally tending to the
@c    snare and to destruction, blaspheming those things which they know not,
@c    shall perish in their corruption:

@c    2:13. Receiving the reward of their injustice, counting for a pleasure
@c    the delights of a day:  stains and spots, sporting themselves to excess,
@c    rioting in their feasts with you:

@c    The delights of a day:  that is, the short delights of this world, in
@c    which they place all their happiness.

@c    2:14. Having eyes full of adultery and of sin that ceaseth not:
@c    alluring unstable souls:  having their heart exercised with
@c    covetousness:  children of malediction.

@c    2:15. Leaving the right way, they have gone astray, having followed the
@c    way of Balaam of Bosor who loved the wages of iniquity,

@c    2:16. But had a check of his madness, the dumb beast used to the yoke,
@c    which, speaking with man's voice, forbade the folly of the prophet.

@c    2:17. These are fountains without water and clouds tossed with
@c    whirlwinds, to whom the mist of darkness is reserved.

@c    2:18. For, speaking proud words of vanity, they allure by the desires
@c    of fleshly riotousness those who for a little while escape, such as
@c    converse in error:

@c    2:19. Promising them liberty, whereas they themselves are the slaves of
@c    corruption.  For by whom a man is overcome, of the same also he is the
@c    slave.

@c    2:20. For if, flying from the pollutions of the world, through the
@c    knowledge of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, they be again entangled
@c    in them and overcome:  their latter state is become unto them worse than
@c    the former.

@c    2:21. For it had been better for them not to have known the way of
@c    justice than, after they have known it, to turn back from that holy
@c    commandment which was delivered to them.

@c    2:22. For, that of the true proverb has happened to them:  The dog is
@c    returned to his vomit; and:  The sow that was washed to her wallowing in
@c    the mire.



@c    2 Peter Chapter 3


@c    Against scoffers denying the second coming of Christ.  He declares the
@c    sudden dissolution of this world and exhorts to holiness of life.

@c    3:1. Behold this second epistle I write to you, my dearly beloved, in
@c    which, I stir up by way of admonition your sincere mind:

@c    3:2. That you may be mindful of those words which I told you before
@c    from the holy prophet and of your apostles, of the precepts of the Lord
@c    and Saviour.

@c    3:3. Knowing this first:  That in the last days there shall come
@c    deceitful scoffers, walking after their own lusts,

@c    3:4. Saying:  Where is his promise or his coming?  For since the time
@c    that the fathers slept, all things continue as they were from the
@c    beginning of the creation.

@c    3:5. For this they are wilfully ignorant of:  That the heavens were
@c    before, and the earth out of water and through water, consisting by the
@c    word of God:

@c    3:6. Whereby the world that then was, being overflowed with water,
@c    perished.

@c    3:7. But the heavens and the earth which are now, by the same word are
@c    kept in store, reserved unto fire against the day of judgment and
@c    perdition of the ungodly men.

@c    3:8. But of this one thing be not ignorant, my beloved, that one day
@c    with the Lord is as a thousand years, and a thousand years as one day.

@c    3:9. The Lord delayeth not his promise, as some imagine, but dealeth
@c    patiently for your sake, not willing that any should perish, but that
@c    all should return to penance,

@c    3:10. But the day of the Lord shall come as a thief, in which the
@c    heavens shall pass away with great violence and the elements shall be
@c    melted with heat and the earth and the works which are in it shall be
@c    burnt up.

@c    3:11. Seeing then that all these things are to be dissolved, what
@c    manner of people ought you to be in holy conversation and godliness?

@c    3:12. Looking for and hasting unto the coming of the day of the Lord,
@c    by which the heavens being on fire shall be dissolved, and the elements
@c    shall melt with the burning heat?

@c    3:13. But we look for new heavens and a new earth according to his
@c    promises, in which justice dwelleth.

@c    3:14. Wherefore, dearly beloved, waiting for these things, be diligent
@c    that you may be found before him unspotted and blameless in peace.

@c    3:15. And account the longsuffering of our Lord, salvation:  as also our
@c    most dear brother Paul, according to the wisdom given him, hath written
@c    to you:

@c    3:16. As also in all his epistles, speaking in them of these things; in
@c    which are certain things hard to be understood, which the unlearned and
@c    unstable wrest, as they do also the other scriptures, to their own
@c    destruction.

@c    3:17. You therefore, brethren, knowing these things before, take heed,
@c    lest being led aside by the error of the unwise, you fall from your own
@c    steadfastness.

@c    3:18. But grow in grace and in the knowledge of our Lord and Saviour
@c    Jesus Christ.  To him be glory both now and unto the day of eternity,
@c    Amen.
