@c    THE SECOND EPISTLE OF ST. PAUL TO THE CORINTHIANS



@c    In this Epistle St. Paul comforts those who are now reformed by his
@c    admonitions to them in the former and absolves the incestuous man on
@c    doing penance, whom he had before excommunicated for his crime.  Hence
@c    he treats of true penance and of the dignity of the ministers of the
@c    New Testament.  He cautions the faithful against false teachers and the
@c    society of infidels.  He gives an account of his sufferings and also of
@c    the favours and graces which God hath bestowed on him.  This second
@c    Epistle was written in the same year with the first and sent by Titus
@c    from some place in Macedonia.



@c    2 Corinthians Chapter 1


@c    He speaks of his troubles in Asia.  His not coming to them was not out
@c    of levity.  The constancy and sincerity of his doctrine.

@c    1:1. Paul, an apostle of Jesus Christ by the will of God, and Timothy
@c    our brother:  to the church of God that is at Corinth, with all the
@c    saints that are in all Achaia:

@c    1:2. Grace unto you and peace from God our Father and from the Lord
@c    Jesus Christ.

@c    1:3. Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father
@c    of mercies and the God of all comfort:

@c    1:4. Who comforteth us in all our tribulation, that we also may be able
@c    to comfort them who are in all distress, by the exhortation wherewith
@c    we also are exhorted by God.

@c    1:5. For as the sufferings of Christ abound in us:  so also by Christ
@c    doth our comfort abound.

@c    1:6. Now whether we be in tribulation, it is for your exhortation and
@c    salvation:  or whether we be comforted, it is for your consolation:  or
@c    whether we be exhorted, it is for your exhortation and salvation, which
@c    worketh the enduring of the same sufferings which we also suffer.

@c    1:7. That our hope for you may be steadfast:  knowing that as you are
@c    partakers of the sufferings, so shall you be also of the consolation.

@c    1:8. For we would not have you ignorant, brethren, of our tribulation
@c    which came to us in Asia:  that we were pressed out of measure above our
@c    strength, so that we were weary even of life.

@c    1:9. But we had in ourselves the answer of death, that we should not
@c    trust in ourselves, but in God who raiseth the dead.

@c    1:10. Who hath delivered and doth deliver us out of so great dangers:
@c    in whom we trust that he will yet also deliver us,

@c    1:11. You helping withal in prayer for us.  That for this gift obtained
@c    for us, by the means of many persons, thanks may be given by many in
@c    our behalf.

@c    1:12. For our glory is this:  the testimony of our conscience, that in
@c    simplicity of heart and sincerity of God, and not in carnal wisdom, but
@c    in the grace of God, we have conversed in this world:  and more
@c    abundantly towards you.

@c    1:13. For we write no other things to you than what you have read and
@c    known.  And I hope that you shall know unto the end.

@c    1:14. As also you have known us in part, that we are your glory:  as you
@c    also are ours, in the day of our Lord Jesus Christ.

@c    1:15. And in this confidence I had a mind to come to you before, that
@c    you might have a second grace:

@c    1:16. And to pass by you into Macedonia:  and again from Macedonia to
@c    come to you, and by you to be brought on my way towards Judea.

@c    1:17. Whereas then I was thus minded, did I use lightness?  Or, the
@c    things that I purpose, do I purpose according to the flesh, that there
@c    should be with me, It is, and It is not?

@c    1:18. But God is faithful:  for our preaching which was to you, was not,
@c    It is, and It is not.

@c    1:19. For the Son of God, Jesus Christ, who was preached among you by
@c    us, by me and Sylvanus and Timothy, was not:  It is and It is not.  But,
@c    It is, was in him.

@c    It is, was in him. . .There was no inconstancy in the doctrine of the
@c    apostles, sometimes, like modern sectaries, saying, It is, and at other
@c    times saying, It is not.  But their doctrine was ever the same, one
@c    uniform yea, in Jesus Christ, one Amen, that is, one truth in him.

@c    1:20. For all the promises of God are in him, It is.  Therefore also by
@c    him, amen to God, unto our glory.

@c    1:21. Now he that confirmeth us with you in Christ and that hath
@c    anointed us, is God:

@c    1:22. Who also hath sealed us and given the pledge of the Spirit in our
@c    hearts.

@c    1:23. But I call God to witness upon my soul that to spare you, I came
@c    not any more to Corinth:  not because we exercise dominion over your
@c    faith:  but we are helpers of your joy.  For in faith you stand.



@c    2 Corinthians Chapter 2


@c    He grants a pardon to the incestuous man upon his doing penance.

@c    2:1. But I determined this with myself, to come to you again in sorrow.

@c    2:2. For if I make you sorrowful, who is he then that can make me glad,
@c    but the same who is made sorrowful by me?

@c    2:3. And I wrote this same to you:  that I may not, when I come, have
@c    sorrow upon sorrow from them of whom I ought to rejoice:  having
@c    confidence in you all, that my joy is the joy of you all.

@c    2:4. For out of much affliction and anguish of heart, I wrote to you
@c    with many tears:  not that you should be made sorrowful:  but that you
@c    might know the charity I have more abundantly towards you.

@c    2:5. And if any one have caused grief, he hath not grieved me:  but in
@c    part, that I may not burden you all.

@c    2:6. To him who is such a one, this rebuke is sufficient, which is
@c    given by many.

@c    2:7. So that on the contrary, you should rather forgive him and comfort
@c    him, lest perhaps such a one be swallowed up with overmuch sorrow.

@c    2:8. Wherefore, I beseech you that you would confirm your charity
@c    towards him.

@c    2:9. For to this end also did I write, that I may know the experiment
@c    of you, whether you be obedient in all things.

@c    2:10. And to whom you have pardoned any thing, I also.  For, what I have
@c    pardoned, if I have pardoned any thing, for your sakes have I done it
@c    in the person of Christ:

@c    I also. . .The apostle here granted an indulgence, or pardon, in the
@c    person and by the authority of Christ, to the incestuous Corinthian,
@c    whom before he had put under penance, which pardon consisted in a
@c    releasing of part of the temporal punishment due to his sin.

@c    2:11. That we be not overreached by Satan.  For we are not ignorant of
@c    his devices.

@c    2:12. And when I was come to Troas for the gospel of Christ and a door
@c    was opened unto me in the Lord,

@c    2:13. I had no rest in my spirit, because I found not Titus my brother:
@c    but bidding them farewell, I went into Macedonia.

@c    2:14. Now thanks be to God, who always maketh us to triumph in Christ
@c    Jesus and manifesteth the odour of his knowledge by us in every place.

@c    2:15. For we are the good odour of Christ unto God, in them that are
@c    saved and in them that perish.

@c    2:16. To the one indeed the odour of death unto death:  but to the
@c    others the odour of life unto life.  And for these things who is so
@c    sufficient?

@c    The odour of death, etc. . .The preaching of the apostle, which by its
@c    fragrant odour, brought many to life, was to others, through their own
@c    fault, the occasion of death; by their wilfully opposing and resisting
@c    that divine call.

@c    2:17. For we are not as many, adulterating the word of God:  but with
@c    sincerity:  but as from God, before God, in Christ we speak.



@c    2 Corinthians Chapter 3


@c    He needs no commendatory letters.  The glory of the ministry of the New
@c    Testament.

@c    3:1. Do we begin again to commend ourselves?  Or do we need (as some do)
@c    epistles of commendation to you, or from you?

@c    3:2. You are our epistle, written in our hearts, which is known and
@c    read by all men:

@c    3:3. Being manifested, that you are the epistle of Christ, ministered
@c    by us, and written:  not with ink but with the Spirit of the living God:
@c    not in tables of stone but in the fleshly tables of the heart.

@c    3:4. And such confidence we have, through Christ, towards God.

@c    3:5. Not that we are sufficient to think any thing of ourselves, as of
@c    ourselves:  but our sufficiency is from God.

@c    3:6. Who also hath made us fit ministers of the new testament, not in
@c    the letter but in the spirit.  For the letter killeth:  but the spirit
@c    quickeneth.

@c    The letter. . .Not rightly understood, and taken without the spirit.

@c    3:7. Now if the ministration of death, engraven with letters upon
@c    stones, was glorious (so that the children of Israel could not
@c    steadfastly behold the face of Moses, for the glory of his
@c    countenance), which is made void:

@c    3:8. How shall not the ministration of the spirit be rather in glory?

@c    3:9. For if the ministration of condemnation be glory, much more the
@c    ministration of justice aboundeth in glory.

@c    3:10. For even that which was glorious in this part was not glorified
@c    by reason of the glory that excelleth.

@c    3:11. For if that which is done away was glorious, much more that which
@c    remaineth is in glory.

@c    3:12. Having therefore such hope, we use much confidence.

@c    3:13. And not as Moses put a veil upon his face, that the children of
@c    Israel might not steadfastly look on the face of that which is made
@c    void.

@c    3:14. But their senses were made dull.  For, until this present day, the
@c    selfsame veil, in the reading of the old testament, remaineth not taken
@c    away (because in Christ it is made void).

@c    3:15. But even until this day, when Moses is read, the veil is upon
@c    their heart.

@c    3:16. But when they shall be converted to the Lord, the veil shall be
@c    taken away.

@c    3:17. Now the Lord is a Spirit.  And where the Spirit of the Lord is,
@c    there is liberty.

@c    3:18. But we all, beholding the glory of the Lord with open face, are
@c    transformed into the same image from glory to glory, as by the Spirit
@c    of the Lord.



@c    2 Corinthians Chapter 4


@c    The sincerity of his preaching.  His comfort in his afflictions.

@c    4:1. Therefore seeing we have this ministration, according as we have
@c    obtained mercy, we faint not.

@c    4:2. But we renounce the hidden things of dishonesty, not walking in
@c    craftiness nor adulterating the word of God:  but by manifestation of
@c    the truth commending ourselves to every man's conscience, in the sight
@c    of God.

@c    4:3. And if our gospel be also hid, it is hid to them that are lost,

@c    4:4. In whom the god of this world hath blinded the minds of
@c    unbelievers, that the light of the gospel of the glory of Christ, who
@c    is the image of God, should not shine unto them.

@c    4:5. For we preach not ourselves, but Jesus Christ our Lord:  and
@c    ourselves your servants through Jesus.

@c    4:6. For God, who commanded the light to shine out of darkness, hath
@c    shined in our hearts, to give the light of the knowledge of the glory
@c    of God, in the face of Christ Jesus.

@c    4:7. But we have this treasure in earthen vessels, that the excellency
@c    may be of the power of God and not of us.

@c    4:8. In all things we suffer tribulation:  but are not distressed.  We
@c    are straitened:  but are not destitute.

@c    4:9. We suffer persecution:  but are not forsaken.  We are cast down:
@c    but we perish not.

@c    4:10. Always bearing about in our body the mortification of Jesus, that
@c    the life also of Jesus may be made manifest in our bodies.

@c    4:11. For we who live are always delivered unto death for Jesus' sake:
@c    that the life also of Jesus may be made manifest in our mortal flesh.

@c    4:12. So then death worketh in us:  but life in you.

@c    4:13. But having the same spirit of faith, as it is written:  I
@c    believed, for which cause I have spoken; we also believe.  For which
@c    cause we speak also:

@c    4:14. Knowing that he who raised up Jesus will raise us up also with
@c    Jesus and place us with you.

@c    4:15. For all things are for your sakes:  that the grace, abounding
@c    through many, may abound in thanksgiving unto the glory of God.

@c    4:16. For which cause we faint not:  but though our outward man is
@c    corrupted, yet the inward man is renewed day by day.

@c    4:17. For that which is at present momentary and light of our
@c    tribulation worketh for us above measure, exceedingly an eternal weight
@c    of glory.

@c    4:18. While we look not at the things which are seen, but at the things
@c    which are not seen.  For the things which are seen are temporal:  but the
@c    things which are not seen, are eternal.



@c    2 Corinthians Chapter 5


@c    He is willing to leave his earthly mansion to be with the Lord.  His
@c    charity to the Corinthians.

@c    5:1. For we know, if our earthly house of this habitation be dissolved,
@c    that we have a building of God, a house not made with hands, eternal in
@c    heaven.

@c    5:2. For in this also we groan, desiring to be clothed upon with our
@c    habitation that is from heaven.

@c    5:3. Yet so that we be found clothed, not naked.

@c    5:4. For we also, who are in this tabernacle, do groan, being
@c    burthened; because we would not be unclothed, but clothed upon, that
@c    that which is mortal may be swallowed up by life.

@c    5:5. Now he that maketh us for this very thing is God, who hath given
@c    us the pledge of the Spirit,

@c    5:6. Therefore having always confidence, knowing that while we are in
@c    the body we are absent from the Lord.

@c    5:7. (For we walk by faith and not by sight.)

@c    5:8. But we are confident and have a good will to be absent rather from
@c    the body and to be present with the Lord.

@c    5:9. And therefore we labour, whether absent or present, to please him.

@c    5:10. For we must all be manifested before the judgment seat of Christ,
@c    that every one may receive the proper things of the body, according as
@c    he hath done, whether it be good or evil.

@c    The proper things of the body. . .In the particular judgment,
@c    immediately after death, the soul is rewarded or punished according to
@c    what it has done in the body.

@c    5:11. Knowing therefore the fear of the Lord, we use persuasion to men:
@c    but to God we are manifest.  And I trust also that in your consciences
@c    we are manifest.

@c    5:12. We commend not ourselves again to you, but give you occasion to
@c    glory in our behalf:  that you may have somewhat to answer them who
@c    glory in face, and not in heart.

@c    5:13. For whether we be transported in mind, it is to God:  or whether
@c    we be sober, it is for you.

@c    5:14. For the charity of Christ presseth us:  judging this, that if one
@c    died for all, then all were dead.

@c    5:15. And Christ died for all:  that they also who live may not now live
@c    to themselves, but unto him who died for them and rose again.

@c    5:16. Wherefore henceforth, we know no man according to the flesh.  And
@c    if we have known Christ according to the flesh:  but now we know him so
@c    no longer.

@c    We know no man according to the flesh. . .That is, we consider not any
@c    man with regard to his nation, family, kindred, or other natural
@c    qualities or advantages; but only with relation to Christ, and
@c    according to the order of divine charity, in God, and for God.  The
@c    apostle adds, that even with respect to Christ himself, he now no
@c    longer considers him according to the flesh, by taking a satisfaction
@c    in his being his countryman; his affection being now purified from all
@c    such earthly considerations.

@c    5:17. If then any be in Christ a new creature, the old things are
@c    passed away.  Behold all things are made new.

@c    5:18. But all things are of God, who hath reconciled us to himself by
@c    Christ and hath given to us the ministry of reconciliation.

@c    5:19. For God indeed was in Christ, reconciling the world to himself,
@c    not imputing to them their sins.  And he hath placed in us the word of
@c    reconciliation.

@c    5:20. For Christ therefore we are ambassadors, God as it were exhorting
@c    by us, for Christ, we beseech you, be reconciled to God.

@c    5:21. Him, who knew no sin, he hath made sin for us:  that we might be
@c    made the justice of God in him.

@c    Sin for us. . .That is, to be a sin offering, a victim for sin.



@c    2 Corinthians Chapter 6


@c    He exhorts them to a correspondence with God's grace and not to
@c    associate with unbelievers.

@c    6:1. And we helping do exhort you that you receive not the grace of God
@c    in vain.

@c    6:2. For he saith:  In an accepted time have I heard thee and in the day
@c    of salvation have I helped thee.  Behold, now is the acceptable time:
@c    behold, now is the day of salvation.

@c    6:3. Giving no offence to any man, that our ministry be not blamed.

@c    6:4. But in all things let us exhibit ourselves as the ministers of
@c    God, in much patience, in tribulation, in necessities, in distresses,

@c    6:5. In stripes, in prisons, in seditions, in labours, in watchings, in
@c    fastings,

@c    6:6. In chastity, in knowledge, in longsuffering, in sweetness, in the
@c    Holy Ghost, in charity unfeigned,

@c    6:7. In the word of truth, in the power of God:  by the armour of
@c    justice on the right hand and on the left:

@c    6:8. By honour and dishonour:  by evil report and good report:  as
@c    deceivers and yet true:  as unknown and yet known:

@c    6:9. As dying and behold we live:  as chastised and not killed:

@c    6:10. As sorrowful, yet always rejoicing:  as needy, yet enriching many:
@c    as having nothing and possessing all things.

@c    6:11. Our mouth is open to you, O ye Corinthians:  our heart is
@c    enlarged.

@c    6:12. You are not straitened in us:  but in your own bowels you are
@c    straitened.

@c    6:13. But having the same recompense (I speak as to my children):  be
@c    you also enlarged.

@c    6:14. Bear not the yoke with unbelievers.  For what participation hath
@c    justice with injustice?  Or what fellowship hath light with darkness?

@c    6:15. And what concord hath Christ with Belial?  Or what part hath the
@c    faithful with the unbeliever?

@c    6:16. And what agreement hath the temple of God with idols?  For you are
@c    the temple of the living God:  as God saith:  I will dwell in them and
@c    walk among them.  And I will be their God:  and they shall be my people.

@c    6:17. Wherefore:  Go out from among them and be ye separate, saith the
@c    Lord, and touch not the unclean thing:

@c    6:18. And I will receive you.  And will be a Father to you:  and you
@c    shall be my sons and daughters, saith the Lord Almighty.



@c    2 Corinthians Chapter 7


@c    The apostle's affection for the Corinthians.  His comfort and joy on
@c    their account.

@c    7:1. Having therefore these promises, dearly beloved, let us cleanse
@c    ourselves from all defilement of the flesh and of the spirit,
@c    perfecting sanctification in the fear of God.

@c    7:2. Receive us.  We have injured no man:  we have corrupted no man:  we
@c    have overreached no man.

@c    7:3. I speak not this to your condemnation.  For we have said before
@c    that you are in our hearts:  to die together and to live together.

@c    7:4. Great is my confidence for you:  great is my glorying for you.  I am
@c    filled with comfort:  I exceedingly abound with joy in all our
@c    tribulation.

@c    7:5. For also, when we were come into Macedonia, our flesh had no rest:
@c    but we suffered all tribulation.  Combats without:  fears within.

@c    7:6. But God, who comforteth the humble, comforted us by the coming of
@c    Titus.

@c    7:7. And not by his coming only, but also by the consolation wherewith
@c    he was comforted in you, relating to us your desire, your mourning,
@c    your zeal for me:  so that I rejoiced the more.

@c    7:8. For although I made you sorrowful by my epistle, I do not repent.
@c    And if I did repent, seeing that the same epistle (although but for a
@c    time) did make you sorrowful,

@c    7:9. Now I am glad:  not because you were made sorrowful, but because
@c    you were made sorrowful unto penance.  For you were made sorrowful
@c    according to God, that you might suffer damage by us in nothing.

@c    7:10. For the sorrow that is according to God worketh penance,
@c    steadfast unto salvation:  but the sorrow of the world worketh death.

@c    7:11. For behold this selfsame thing, that you were made sorrowful
@c    according to God, how great carefulness it worketh in you:  yea defence,
@c    yea indignation, yea fear, yea desire, yea zeal, yea revenge.  In all
@c    things you have shewed yourselves to be undefiled in the matter.

@c    7:12. Wherefore although I wrote to you, it was not for his sake that
@c    did the wrong, nor for him that suffered it:  but to manifest our
@c    carefulness that we have for you

@c    7:13. Before God:  therefore we were comforted.  But in our consolation
@c    we did the more abundantly rejoice for the joy of Titus, because his
@c    spirit was refreshed by you all.

@c    7:14. And if I have boasted any thing to him of you, I have not been
@c    put to shame:  but as we have spoken all things to you in truth, so also
@c    our boasting that was made to Titus is found a truth.

@c    7:15. And his bowels are more abundantly towards you:  remembering the
@c    obedience of you all, how with fear and trembling you received him.

@c    7:16. I rejoice that in all things I have confidence in you.



@c    2 Corinthians Chapter 8


@c    He exhorts them to contribute bountifully to relieve the poor of
@c    Jerusalem.

@c    8:1. Now we make known unto you, brethren, the grace of God that hath
@c    been given in the churches of Macedonia.

@c    8:2. That in much experience of tribulation, they have had abundance of
@c    joy and their very deep poverty hath abounded unto the riches of their
@c    simplicity.

@c    Simplicity. . .That is, sincere bounty and charity.

@c    8:3. For according to their power (I bear them witness) and beyond
@c    their power, they were willing:

@c    8:4. With much entreaty begging of us the grace and communication of
@c    the ministry that is done toward the saints.

@c    8:5. And not as we hoped:  but they gave their own selves, first to the
@c    Lord, then to us by the will of God;

@c    8:6. Insomuch, that we desired Titus, that, as he had begun, so also he
@c    would finish among you this same grace.

@c    8:7. That as in all things you abound in faith and word and knowledge
@c    and all carefulness, moreover also in your charity towards us:  so in
@c    this grace also you may abound.

@c    8:8. I speak not as commanding:  but by the carefulness of others,
@c    approving also the good disposition of your charity.

@c    8:9. For you know the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, that being rich
@c    he became poor for your sakes:  that through his poverty you might be
@c    rich.

@c    8:10. And herein I give my advice:  for this is profitable for you who
@c    have begun not only to do but also to be willing, a year ago.

@c    8:11. Now therefore perform ye it also in deed:  that as your mind is
@c    forward to be willing, so it may be also to perform, out of that which
@c    you have.

@c    8:12. For if the will be forward, it is accepted according to that
@c    which a man hath:  not according to that which he hath not.

@c    8:13. For I mean not that others should be eased and you burdened, but
@c    by an equality.

@c    8:14. In this present time let your abundance supply their want, that
@c    their abundance also may supply your want:  that there may be an
@c    equality,

@c    8:15. As it is written:  He that had much had nothing over; and he that
@c    had little had no want.

@c    8:16. And thanks be to God, who hath given the same carefulness for you
@c    in the heart of Titus.

@c    8:17. For indeed he accepted the exhortation:  but, being more careful,
@c    of his own will he went unto you.

@c    8:18. We have sent also with him the brother whose praise is in the
@c    gospel through all the churches.

@c    8:19. And not that only:  but he was also ordained by the churches
@c    companion of our travels, for this grace, which is administered by us,
@c    to the glory of the Lord and our determined will:

@c    8:20. Avoiding this, lest any man should blame us in this abundance
@c    which is administered by us.

@c    8:21. For we forecast what may be good, not only before God but also
@c    before men.

@c    8:22. And we have sent with them our brother also, whom we have often
@c    proved diligent in many things, but now much more diligent:  with much
@c    confidence in you,

@c    8:23. Either for Titus, who is my companion and fellow labourer towards
@c    you, or our brethren, the apostles of the churches, the glory of
@c    Christ.

@c    8:24. Wherefore shew ye to them, in the sight of the churches, the
@c    evidence of your charity and of our boasting on your behalf.



@c    2 Corinthians Chapter 9


@c    A further exhortation to almsgiving.  The fruits of it.

@c    9:1. For concerning the ministry that is done towards the saints, it is
@c    superfluous for me to write unto you.

@c    9:2. For I know your forward mind:  for which I boast of you to the
@c    Macedonians, that Achaia also is ready from the year past.  And your
@c    emulation hath provoked very many.

@c    9:3. Now I have sent the brethren, that the thing which we boast of
@c    concerning you be not made void in this behalf, that (as I have said)
@c    you may be ready:

@c    9:4. Lest, when the Macedonians shall come with me and find you
@c    unprepared, we (not to say ye) should be ashamed in this matter.

@c    9:5. Therefore I thought it necessary to desire the brethren that they
@c    would go to you before and prepare this blessing before promised, to be
@c    ready, so as a blessing, not as covetousness.

@c    9:6. Now this I say:  He who soweth sparingly shall also reap sparingly:
@c    and he who soweth in blessings shall also reap blessings.

@c    9:7. Every one as he hath determined in his heart, not with sadness or
@c    of necessity:  for God loveth a cheerful giver.

@c    9:8. And God is able to make all grace abound in you:  that ye always,
@c    having all sufficiently in all things, may abound to every good work,

@c    9:9. As it is written:  He hath dispersed abroad, he hath given to the
@c    poor:  his justice remaineth for ever.

@c    9:10. And he that ministereth seed to the sower will both give you
@c    bread to eat and will multiply your seed and increase the growth of the
@c    fruits of your justice:

@c    9:11. That being enriched in all things, you may abound unto all
@c    simplicity which worketh through us thanksgiving to God.

@c    9:12. Because the administration of this office doth not only supply
@c    the want of the saints, but aboundeth also by many thanksgivings in the
@c    Lord.

@c    9:13. By the proof of this ministry, glorifying God for the obedience
@c    of your confession unto the gospel of Christ and for the simplicity of
@c    your communicating unto them and unto all.

@c    9:14. And in their praying for you, being desirous of you, because of
@c    the excellent grace of God in you.

@c    9:15. Thanks be to God for his unspeakable gift.



@c    2 Corinthians Chapter 10


@c    To stop the calumny and boasting of false apostles, he set forth the
@c    power of his apostleship.

@c    10:1. Now I Paul, myself beseech you, by the mildness and modesty of
@c    Christ:  who in presence indeed am lowly among you, but being absent am
@c    bold toward you.

@c    10:2. But I beseech you, that I may not be bold when I am present with
@c    that confidence wherewith I am thought to be bold, against some who
@c    reckon us as if we walked according to the flesh.

@c    10:3. For though we walk in the flesh, we do not war according to the
@c    flesh.

@c    10:4. For the weapons of our warfare are not carnal but mighty to God,
@c    unto the pulling down of fortifications, destroying counsels,

@c    10:5. And every height that exalteth itself against the knowledge of
@c    God:  and bringing into captivity every understanding unto the obedience
@c    of Christ:

@c    10:6. And having in readiness to revenge all disobedience, when your
@c    obedience shall be fulfilled.

@c    10:7. See the things that are according to outward appearance.  If any
@c    man trust to himself, that he is Christ's let him think this again with
@c    himself, that as he is Christ's, so are we also.

@c    10:8. For if also I should boast somewhat more of our power, which the
@c    Lord hath given us unto edification and not for your destruction, I
@c    should not be ashamed.

@c    10:9. But that I may not be thought as it were to terrify you by
@c    epistles,

@c    10:10. (For his epistles indeed, say they, are weighty and strong; but
@c    his bodily presence is weak and his speech contemptible):

@c    10:11. Let such a one think this, that such as we are in word by
@c    epistles when absent, such also we will be indeed when present.

@c    10:12. For we dare not match or compare ourselves with some that
@c    commend themselves:  but we measure ourselves by ourselves and compare
@c    ourselves with ourselves.

@c    10:13. But we will not glory beyond our measure:  but according to the
@c    measure of the rule which God hath measured to us, a measure to reach
@c    even unto you.

@c    10:14. For we stretch not ourselves beyond our measure, as if we
@c    reached not unto you.  For we are come as far as to you in the Gospel of
@c    Christ.

@c    10:15. Not glorying beyond measure in other men's labours:  but having
@c    hope of your increasing faith, to be magnified in you according to our
@c    rule abundantly.

@c    10:16. Yea, unto those places that are beyond you to preach the gospel:
@c    not to glory in another man's rule, in those things that are made ready
@c    to our hand.

@c    10:17. But he that glorieth, let him glory in the Lord.

@c    10:18. For not he who commendeth himself is approved:  but he, whom God
@c    commendeth.



@c    2 Corinthians Chapter 11


@c    He is forced to commend himself and his labours, lest the Corinthians
@c    should be imposed upon by the false apostles.

@c    11:1. Would to God you could bear with some little of my folly!  But do
@c    bear with me.

@c    My folly. . .So he calls his reciting his own praises, which, commonly
@c    speaking is looked upon as a piece of folly and vanity; though the
@c    apostle was constrained to do it, for the good of the souls committed
@c    to his charge.

@c    11:2. For I am jealous of you with the jealousy of God.  For I have
@c    espoused you to one husband, that I may present you as a chaste virgin
@c    to Christ.

@c    11:3. But I fear lest, as the serpent seduced Eve by his subtilty, so
@c    your minds should be corrupted and fall from the simplicity that is in
@c    Christ.

@c    11:4. For if he that cometh preacheth another Christ, whom we have not
@c    preached; or if you receive another Spirit, whom you have not received;
@c    or another gospel, which you have not received:  you might well bear
@c    with him.

@c    11:5. For I suppose that I have done nothing less than the great
@c    apostles.

@c    11:6. For although I be rude in speech, yet not in knowledge:  but in
@c    all things we have been made manifest to you.

@c    11:7. Or did I commit a fault, humbling myself that you might be
@c    exalted, because I preached unto you the Gospel of God freely?

@c    11:8. I have taken from other churches, receiving wages of them for
@c    your ministry.

@c    11:9. And, when I was present with you and wanted, I was chargeable to
@c    no man:  for that which was wanting to me, the brethren supplied who
@c    came from Macedonia.  And in all things I have kept myself from being
@c    burthensome to you:  and so I will keep myself.

@c    11:10. The truth of Christ is in me, that this glorying shall not be
@c    broken off in me in the regions of Achaia.

@c    11:11. Wherefore?  Because I love you not?  God knoweth it.

@c    11:12. But what I do, that I will do:  that I may cut off the occasion
@c    from them that desire occasion:  that wherein they glory, they may be
@c    found even as we.

@c    11:13. For such false apostles are deceitful workmen, transforming
@c    themselves into the apostles of Christ.

@c    11:14. And no wonder:  for Satan himself transformeth himself into an
@c    angel of light.

@c    11:15. Therefore it is no great thing if his ministers be transformed
@c    as the ministers of justice, whose end shall be according to their
@c    works.

@c    11:16. I say again (Let no man think me to be foolish:  otherwise take
@c    me as one foolish, that I also may glory a little):

@c    11:17. That which I speak, I speak not according to God:  but as it were
@c    in foolishness, in this matter of glorying.

@c    11:18. Seeing that many glory according to the flesh, I will glory
@c    also.

@c    11:19. For you gladly suffer the foolish:  whereas yourselves are wise.

@c    11:20. For you suffer if a man bring you into bondage, if a man devour
@c    you, if a man take from you, if a man be lifted up, if a man strike you
@c    on the face.

@c    11:21. I seek according to dishonour, as if we had been weak in this
@c    part.  Wherein if any man dare (I speak foolishly), I dare also.

@c    11:22. They are Hebrews:  so am I.  They are Israelites:  so am I.  They
@c    are the seed of Abraham:  so am I.

@c    11:23. They are the ministers of Christ (I speak as one less wise):  I
@c    am more; in many more labours, in prisons more frequently, in stripes
@c    above measure, in deaths often.

@c    11:24. Of the Jews five times did I receive forty stripes save one.

@c    11:25. Thrice was I beaten with rods:  once I was stoned:  thrice I
@c    suffered shipwreck:  a night and a day I was in the depth of the sea.

@c    11:26. In journeying often, in perils of waters, in perils of robbers,
@c    in perils from my own nation, in perils from the Gentiles, in perils in
@c    the city, in perils in the wilderness, in perils in the sea, in perils
@c    from false brethren:

@c    11:27. In labour and painfulness, in much watchings, in hunger and
@c    thirst, in fastings often, in cold and nakedness:

@c    11:28. Besides those things which are without:  my daily instance, the
@c    solicitude for all the churches.

@c    My daily instance. . .The labours that come in, and press upon me every
@c    day.

@c    11:29. Who is weak, and I am not weak?  Who is scandalized, and I am not
@c    on fire?

@c    11:30. If I must needs glory, I will glory of the things that concern
@c    my infirmity.

@c    11:31. The God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who is blessed for
@c    ever, knoweth that I lie not.

@c    11:32. At Damascus, the governor of the nation under Aretas the king,
@c    guarded the city of the Damascenes, to apprehend me.

@c    11:33. And through a window in a basket was I let down by the wall:  and
@c    so escaped his hands.



@c    2 Corinthians Chapter 12


@c    His raptures and revelations, His being buffeted by Satan.  His fear for
@c    the Corinthians.

@c    12:1. If I must glory (it is not expedient indeed) but I will come to
@c    visions and revelations of the Lord.

@c    12:2. I know a man in Christ:  above fourteen years ago (whether in the
@c    body, I know not, or out of the body, I know not:  God knoweth), such a
@c    one caught up to the third heaven.

@c    12:3. And I know such a man (whether in the body, or out of the body, I
@c    know not:  God knoweth):

@c    12:4. That he was caught up into paradise and heard secret words which
@c    it is not granted to man to utter.

@c    12:5. For such an one I will glory:  but for myself I will glory nothing
@c    but in my infirmities.

@c    12:6. For though I should have a mind to glory, I shall not be foolish:
@c    for I will say the truth.  But I forbear, lest any man should think of
@c    me above that which he seeth in me, or any thing he heareth from me.

@c    12:7. And lest the greatness of the revelations should exalt me, there
@c    was given me a sting of my flesh, an angel of Satan, to buffet me.

@c    12:8. For which thing, thrice I besought the Lord that it might depart
@c    from me.

@c    12:9. And he said to me:  My grace is sufficient for thee:  for power is
@c    made perfect in infirmity.  Gladly therefore will I glory in my
@c    infirmities, that the power of Christ may dwell in me.

@c    Power is made perfect. . .The strength and power of God more perfectly
@c    shines forth in our weakness and infirmity; as the more weak we are of
@c    ourselves, the more illustrious is his grace in supporting us, and
@c    giving us the victory under all trials and conflicts.

@c    12:10. For which cause I please myself in my infirmities, in
@c    reproaches, in necessities, in persecutions, in distresses, for Christ.
@c    For when I am weak, then am I powerful.

@c    12:11. I am become foolish.  You have compelled me:  for I ought to have
@c    been commended by you.  For I have no way come short of them that are
@c    above measure apostles, although I be nothing.

@c    12:12. Yet the signs of my apostleship have been wrought on you, in all
@c    patience, in signs and wonders and mighty deeds.

@c    12:13. For what is there that you have had less than the other churches
@c    but that I myself was not burthensome to you?  Pardon me this injury.

@c    12:14. Behold now the third time I am ready to come to you and I will
@c    not be burthensome unto you.  For I seek not the things that are yours,
@c    but you.  For neither ought the children to lay up for the parents, but
@c    the parents for the children.

@c    12:15. But I most gladly will spend and be spent myself for your souls:
@c    although loving you more, I be loved less.

@c    12:16. But be it so:  I did not burthen you:  but being crafty, I caught
@c    you by guile.

@c    12:17. Did I overreach you by any of them whom I sent to you?

@c    12:18. I desired Titus:  and I sent with him a brother.  Did Titus
@c    overreach you?  Did we not walk with the same spirit?  Did we not in the
@c    same steps?

@c    12:19. Of old, think you that we excuse ourselves to you?  We speak
@c    before God in Christ:  but all things, my dearly beloved, for your
@c    edification.

@c    12:20. For I fear lest perhaps, when I come, I shall not find you such
@c    as I would, and that I shall be found by you such as you would not.
@c    Lest perhaps contentions, envyings, animosities, dissensions,
@c    detractions, whisperings, swellings, seditions, be among you.

@c    12:21. Lest again, when I come, God humble me among you:  and I mourn
@c    many of them that sinned before and have not done penance for the
@c    uncleanness and fornication and lasciviousness that they have
@c    committed.



@c    2 Corinthians Chapter 13


@c    He threatens the impenitent, to provoke them to penance.

@c    13:1. Behold, this is the third time I am coming to you:  In the mouth
@c    of two or three witnesses shall every word stand.

@c    13:2. I have told before and foretell, as present and now absent, to
@c    them that sinned before and to all the rest, that if I come again, I
@c    will not spare.

@c    13:3. Do you seek a proof of Christ that speaketh in me, who towards
@c    you is not weak, but is mighty in you?

@c    13:4. For although he was crucified through weakness, yet he liveth by
@c    the power of God.  For we also are weak in him:  but we shall live with
@c    him by the power of God towards you.

@c    13:5. Try your own selves if you be in the faith:  prove ye yourselves.
@c    Know you not your own selves, that Christ Jesus is in you, unless
@c    perhaps you be reprobates?

@c    13:6. But I trust that you shall know that we are not reprobates.

@c    13:7. Now we pray God that you may do no evil, not that we may appear
@c    approved, but that you may do that which is good and that we may be as
@c    reprobates.

@c    Reprobates. . .that is, without proof, by having no occasion of shewing
@c    our power in punishing you.

@c    13:8. For we can do nothing against the truth:  but for the truth.

@c    13:9. For we rejoice that we are weak and you are strong.  This also we
@c    pray for, your perfection.

@c    13:10. Therefore I write these things, being absent, that, being
@c    present, I may not deal more severely, according to the power which the
@c    Lord hath given me unto edification and not unto destruction.

@c    13:11. For the rest, brethren, rejoice, be perfect, take exhortation,
@c    be of one mind, have peace.  And the God of grace and of love shall be
@c    with you.

@c    13:12. Salute one another with a holy kiss.  All the saints salute you.

@c    13:13. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ and the charity of God and
@c    the communication of the Holy Ghost be with you all.  Amen.
