@c    THE THIRD EPISTLE OF ST. JOHN THE APOSTLE



@c    St. John praises Gaius for his walking in truth and for his charity,
@c    complains of the bad conduct of Diotrephes and gives a good testimony
@c    to Demetrius.



@c    3 John Chapter 1


@c    1:1. The Ancient, to the dearly beloved Gaius, whom I love in truth.

@c    1:2. Dearly beloved, concerning all things I make it my prayer that
@c    thou mayest proceed prosperously and fare well, as thy soul doth
@c    prosperously.

@c    1:3. I was exceedingly glad when the brethren came and gave testimony
@c    to the truth in thee, even as thou walkest in the truth.

@c    1:4. I have no greater grace than this, to hear that my children walk
@c    in truth.

@c    No greater grace. . .that is nothing that gives me greater joy and
@c    satisfaction.

@c    1:5. Dearly beloved, thou dost faithfully whatever thou dost for the
@c    brethren:  and that for strangers,

@c    1:6. Who have given testimony to thy charity in the sight of the
@c    church.  Whom thou shalt do well to bring forward on their way in a
@c    manner worthy of God:

@c    1:7. Because, for his name they went out, taking nothing of the
@c    Gentiles.

@c    Taking nothing of the Gentiles. . .These ministers of the gospel are
@c    commended by St. John, who took nothing from the Gentiles, lest they
@c    should seem to preach in order to get money by it.

@c    1:8. We therefore ought to receive such:  that we may be fellow helpers
@c    of the truth.

@c    1:9. I had written perhaps to the church:  but Diotrephes, who loveth to
@c    have the preeminence among them, doth not receive us.

@c    Diotrephes who loveth. . .This man seemeth to be in power, but not a
@c    friend to the faithful; therefore this part of the letter might be an
@c    admonition to him from the apostle.

@c    1:11. Dearly beloved, follow not that which is evil:  but that which is
@c    good.  He that doth good is of God:  he that doth evil hath not seen God.

@c    1:12. To Demetrius, testimony is given by all, and by the truth itself:
@c    yea and we also give testimony.  And thou knowest that our testimony is
@c    true.

@c    1:13. I had many things to write unto thee:  but I would not by ink and
@c    pen write to thee.

@c    1:14. But I hope speedily to see thee:  and we will speak mouth to
@c    mouth.  Peace be to thee.  Our friends salute thee.  Salute the friends
@c    by name.
