@c    THE APOCALYPSE OF ST. JOHN THE APOSTLE



@c    In the first, second, and third chapters of this Book are contained
@c    instructions and admonitions which St. John was commanded to write to
@c    the seven bishops of the churches in Asia.  And in the following
@c    chapters, to the end, are contained prophecies of things that are to
@c    come to pass in the Church of Christ, particularly towards the end of
@c    the world, in the time of Antichrist.  It was written in Greek, in the
@c    island of Patmos, where St. John was in banishment by order of the
@c    cruel emperor Domitian, about sixty-four years after our Lord's
@c    Ascension.



@c    Apocalypse Chapter 1


@c    St. John is ordered to write to the seven churches in Asia.  The manner
@c    of Christ's appearing to him.

@c    1:1. The Revelation of Jesus Christ, which God gave unto him, to make
@c    known to his servants the things which must shortly come to pass:  and
@c    signified, sending by his angel to his servant John,

@c    The things which must shortly come;. . .and again it is said, ver. 3,
@c    The time is at hand. . .This can not be meant of all the things
@c    prophesied in the Apocalypse, where mention is made also of the day of
@c    judgment, and of the glory of heaven at the end of the world.  That some
@c    things were to come to pass shortly, is evident, by what is said to the
@c    Seven Churches, chap. 2 and 3, Or that the persecutions foretold should
@c    begin shortly.  Or that these words signified, that all time is short,
@c    and that from the coming of Christ, we are now in the last age or last
@c    hour.  See 1 John 2.18.

@c    1:2. Who hath given testimony to the word of God and the testimony of
@c    Jesus Christ, what things soever he hath seen.

@c    1:3. Blessed is he that readeth and heareth the words of this prophecy:
@c    and keepeth those things which are written in it.  For the time is at
@c    hand.

@c    1:4. John to the seven churches which are in Asia.  Grace be unto you
@c    and peace, from him that is and that was and that is to come:  and from
@c    the seven spirits which are before his throne:

@c    1:5. And from Jesus Christ, who is the faithful witness, the first
@c    begotten of the dead and the prince of the kings of the earth, who hath
@c    loved us and washed us from our sins in his own blood

@c    1:6. And hath made us a kingdom, and priests to God and his Father.  To
@c    him be glory and empire for ever and ever.  Amen.

@c    1:7. Behold, he cometh with the clouds, and every eye shall see him:
@c    and they also that pierced him.  And all the tribes of the earth shall
@c    bewail themselves because of him.  Even so.  Amen.

@c    1:8. I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end, saith the Lord
@c    God, who is and who was and who is to come, the Almighty.

@c    I am Alpha and Omega. . .These are the names of the first and last
@c    letters of the Greek alphabet, and signify the same as what follows:
@c    The beginning and the end:  the first cause and last end of all beings:
@c    who is, and who was, and who is to come, the Almighty. . .These words
@c    signify the true God only, and are here applied to our Lord and Saviour
@c    Jesus Christ, who is to come again to judge the living and the dead.

@c    1:9. I, John, your brother and your partner in tribulation and in the
@c    kingdom and patience in Christ Jesus, was in the island which is called
@c    Patmos, for the word of God and for the testimony of Jesus.

@c    1:10. I was in the spirit on the Lord's day and heard behind me a great
@c    voice, as of a trumpet,

@c    1:11. Saying:  What thou seest, write in a book and send to the seven
@c    churches which are in Asia:  to Ephesus and to Smyrna and to Pergamus
@c    and to Thyatira and to Sardis and to Philadelphia and to Laodicea.

@c    1:12. And I turned to see the voice that spoke with me.  And being
@c    turned, I saw seven golden candlesticks:

@c    1:13. And in the midst of the seven golden candlesticks, one like to
@c    the Son of man, clothed with a garment down to the feet, and girt about
@c    the paps with a golden girdle.

@c    1:14. And his head and his hairs were white as white wool and as snow.
@c    And his eyes were as a flame of fire:

@c    1:15. And his feet like unto fine brass, as in a burning furnace.  And
@c    his voice as the sound of many waters.

@c    1:16. And he had in his right hand seven stars.  And from his mouth came
@c    out a sharp two-edged sword.  And his face was as the sun shineth in his
@c    power.

@c    1:17. And when I had seen him, I fell at his feet as dead.  And he laid
@c    his right hand upon me, saying:  Fear not.  I am the First and the Last,

@c    1:18. And alive, and was dead.  And behold I am living for ever and ever
@c    and have the keys of death and of hell.

@c    1:19. Write therefore the things which thou hast seen:  and which are:
@c    and which must be done hereafter.

@c    1:20. The mystery of the seven stars, which thou sawest in my right
@c    hand and the seven golden candlesticks.  The seven stars are the angels
@c    of the seven churches.  And the seven candlesticks are the seven
@c    churches.



@c    Apocalypse Chapter 2


@c    Directions what to write to the angels or bishops of Ephesus, Smyrna,
@c    Pergamus and Thyatira.

@c    2:1. Unto the angel of the church of Ephesus write:  These things saith
@c    he who holdeth the seven stars in his right hand, who walketh in the
@c    midst of the seven golden candlesticks:

@c    2:2. I know thy works and thy labour and thy patience and how thou
@c    canst not bear them that are evil.  And thou hast tried them who say
@c    they are apostles and are not:  and hast found them liars:

@c    2:3. And thou hast patience and hast endured for my name and hast not
@c    fainted.

@c    2:4. But I have somewhat against thee, because thou hast left thy first
@c    charity.

@c    2:5. Be mindful therefore from whence thou art fallen:  and do penance
@c    and do the first works.  Or else I come to thee and will move thy
@c    candlestick out of its place, except thou do penance.

@c    2:6. But this thou hast, that thou hatest the deeds of the Nicolaites,
@c    which I also hate.

@c    2:7. He that hath an ear let him hear what the Spirit saith to the
@c    churches:  To him that overcometh I will give to eat of the tree of life
@c    which is in the paradise of my God.

@c    2:8. And to the angel of the church of Smyrna write:  These things saith
@c    the First and the Last, who was dead and is alive:

@c    2:9. I know thy tribulation and thy poverty:  but thou art rich.  And
@c    thou art blasphemed by them that say they are Jews and are not, but are
@c    the synagogue of Satan.

@c    2:10. Fear none of those things which thou shalt suffer.  Behold, the
@c    devil will cast some of you into prison, that you may be tried:  and you
@c    shall have tribulation ten days.  Be thou faithful unto death:  and I
@c    will give thee the crown of life.

@c    2:11. He that hath an ear, let him hear what the Spirit saith to the
@c    churches:  He that shall overcome shall not be hurt by the second death.

@c    2:12. And to the angel of the church of Pergamus write:  These things
@c    saith he that hath the sharp two-edged sword:

@c    2:13. I know where thou dwellest, where the seat of Satan is.  And thou
@c    holdest fast my name and hast not denied my faith.  Even in those days
@c    when Antipas was my faithful witness, who was slain among you, where
@c    Satan dwelleth.

@c    2:14. But I have against thee a few things:  because thou hast there
@c    them that hold the doctrine of Balaam who taught Balac to cast a
@c    stumblingblock before the children of Israel, to eat and to commit
@c    fornication.

@c    2:15. So hast thou also them that hold the doctrine of the Nicolaites.

@c    2:16. In like manner do penance.  If not, I will come to thee quickly
@c    and will fight against them with the sword of my mouth.

@c    2:17. He that hath an ear, let him hear what the Spirit saith to the
@c    churches:  To him that overcometh I will give the hidden manna and will
@c    give him a white counter:  and in the counter, a new name written, which
@c    no man knoweth but he that receiveth it.

@c    2:18. And to the angel of the church of Thyatira write:  These things
@c    saith the Son of God, who hath his eyes like to a flame of fire and his
@c    feet like to fine brass.

@c    2:19. I know thy works and thy faith and thy charity and thy ministry
@c    and thy patience and thy last works, which are more than the former.

@c    2:20. But I have against thee a few things:  because thou sufferest the
@c    woman Jezabel, who calleth herself a prophetess, to teach and to seduce
@c    my servants, to commit fornication and to eat of things sacrificed to
@c    idols.

@c    2:21. And I gave her a time that she might do penance:  and she will not
@c    repent of her fornication.

@c    2:22. Behold, I will cast her into a bed:  and they that commit adultery
@c    with her shall be in very great tribulation, except they do penance
@c    from their deeds,

@c    2:23. And I will kill her children with death:  and all the churches
@c    shall know that I am he that searcheth the reins and hearts.  And I will
@c    give to every one of you according to your works.  But to you I say

@c    2:24. And to the rest who are at Thyatira:  Whosoever have not this
@c    doctrine and who have not known the depths of Satan, as they say:  I
@c    will not put upon you any other burthen.

@c    2:25. Yet that which you have, hold fast till I come.

@c    2:26. And he that shall overcome and keep my words unto the end, I will
@c    give him power over the nations.

@c    Power over the nations. . .This shews, that the saints, who are with
@c    Christ our Lord in heaven, receive power from him to preside over
@c    nations and provinces, as patrons; and shall come with him at the end
@c    of the world to execute his will against those who have not kept his
@c    commandments.

@c    2:27. And he shall rule them with a rod of iron:  and as the vessel of a
@c    potter they shall be broken:

@c    2:28. As I also have received of my Father.  And I will give him the
@c    morning star.

@c    2:29. He that hath an ear, let him hear what the Spirit saith to the
@c    churches.



@c    Apocalypse Chapter 3


@c    Directions what to write to Sardis, Philadelphia and Laodicea.

@c    3:1. And to the angel of the church of Sardis write:  These things saith
@c    he that hath the seven spirits of God and the seven stars:  I know thy
@c    works, and that thou hast the name of being alive.  And thou art dead.

@c    3:2. Be watchful and strengthen the things that remain, which are ready
@c    to die.  For I find not thy works full before my God.

@c    3:3. Have in mind therefore in what manner thou hast received and
@c    heard:  and observe and do penance:  If then thou shalt not watch, I will
@c    come to thee as a thief:  and thou shalt not know at what hour I will
@c    come to thee.

@c    3:4. But thou hast a few names in Sardis which have not defiled their
@c    garments:  and they shall walk with me in white, because they are
@c    worthy.

@c    3:5. He that shall overcome shall thus be clothed in white garments:
@c    and I will not blot out his name out of the book of life.  And I will
@c    confess his name before my Father and before his angels.

@c    3:6. He that hath an ear, let him hear what the Spirit saith to the
@c    churches.

@c    3:7. And to the angel of the church of Philadelphia write:  These things
@c    saith the Holy One and the true one, he that hath the key of David, he
@c    that openeth and no man shutteth, shutteth and no man openeth:

@c    3:8. I know thy works.  Behold, I have given before thee a door opened,
@c    which no man can shut:  because thou hast a little strength and hast
@c    kept my word and hast not denied my name.

@c    3:9. Behold, I will bring of the synagogue of Satan, who say they are
@c    Jews and are not, but do lie.  Behold, I will make them to come and
@c    adore before thy feet.  And they shall know that I have loved thee.

@c    3:10. Because thou hast kept the word of my patience, I will also keep
@c    thee from the hour of temptation, which shall come upon the whole world
@c    to try them that dwell upon the earth.

@c    3:11. Behold, I come quickly:  hold fast that which thou hast, that no
@c    man take thy crown.

@c    3:12. He that shall overcome, I will make him a pillar in the temple of
@c    my God:  and he shall go out no more.  And I will write upon him the name
@c    of my God and the name of the city of my God, the new Jerusalem, which
@c    cometh down out of heaven from my God, and my new name.

@c    3:13. He that hath an ear, let him hear what the Spirit saith to the
@c    churches.

@c    3:14. And to the angel of the church of Laodicea write:  These things
@c    saith the Amen, the faithful and true witness, who is the beginning of
@c    the creation of God:

@c    The Amen,. . .that is, the true one, the Truth itself; the Word and Son
@c    of God.  The beginning. . .that is, the principle, the source, and the
@c    efficient cause of the whole creation.

@c    3:15. I know thy works, that thou art neither cold nor hot.  I would
@c    thou wert cold or hot.

@c    3:16. But because thou art lukewarm and neither cold nor hot, I will
@c    begin to vomit thee out of my mouth.

@c    3:17. Because thou sayest:  I am rich and made wealthy and have need of
@c    nothing:  and knowest not that thou art wretched and miserable and poor
@c    and blind and naked.

@c    3:18. I counsel thee to buy of me gold, fire tried, that thou mayest be
@c    made rich and mayest be clothed in white garments:  and that the shame
@c    of thy nakedness may not appear.  And anoint thy eyes with eyesalve,
@c    that thou mayest see.

@c    3:19. Such as I love, I rebuke and chastise.  Be zealous therefore and
@c    do penance.

@c    3:20. Behold, I stand at the gate and knock.  If any man shall hear my
@c    voice and open to me the door, I will come in to him and will sup with
@c    him:  and he with me.

@c    3:21. To him that shall overcome, I will give to sit with me in my
@c    throne:  as I also have overcome and am set down with my Father in his
@c    throne.

@c    3:22. He that hath an ear, let him hear what the Spirit saith to the
@c    churches.



@c    Apocalypse Chapter 4


@c    The vision of the throne of God, the twenty-four ancients and the four
@c    living creatures.

@c    4:1. After these things I looked, and behold a door was opened in
@c    heaven, and the first voice which I heard, as it were, of a trumpet
@c    speaking with me, said:  Come up hither, and I will shew thee the things
@c    which must be done hereafter.

@c    4:2. And immediately I was in the spirit.  And behold, there was a
@c    throne set in heaven, and upon the throne one sitting.

@c    4:3. And he that sat was to the sight like the jasper and the sardine
@c    stone.  And there was a rainbow round about the throne, in sight like
@c    unto an emerald.

@c    4:4. And round about the throne were four and twenty seats:  and upon
@c    the seats, four and twenty ancients sitting, clothed in white garments.
@c    And on their heads were crowns of gold.

@c    4:5. And from the throne proceeded lightnings and voices and thunders.
@c    And there were seven lamps burning before the throne, which are the
@c    seven Spirits of God.

@c    4:6. And in the sight of the throne was, as it were, a sea of glass
@c    like to crystal:  and in the midst of the throne, and round about the
@c    throne, were four living creatures, full of eyes before and behind.

@c    4:7. And the first living creature was like a lion:  and the second
@c    living creature like a calf:  and the third living creature, having the
@c    face, as it were, of a man:  and the fourth living creature was like an
@c    eagle flying.

@c    4:8. And the four living creatures had each of them six wings:  and
@c    round about and within they are full of eyes.  And they rested not day
@c    and night, saying:  Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God Almighty, who was and who
@c    is and who is to come.

@c    4:9. And when those living creatures gave glory and honour and
@c    benediction to him that sitteth on the throne, who liveth for ever and
@c    ever:

@c    4:10. The four and twenty ancients fell down before him that sitteth on
@c    the throne and adored him that liveth for ever and ever and cast their
@c    crowns before the throne, saying:

@c    4:11. Thou art worthy, O Lord our God, to receive glory and honour and
@c    power.  Because thou hast created all things:  and for thy will they were
@c    and have been created.



@c    Apocalypse Chapter 5


@c    The book sealed with seven seals is opened by the Lamb, who thereupon
@c    receives adoration and praise from all.

@c    5:1. And I saw, in the right hand of him that sat on the throne, a
@c    book, written within and without, sealed with seven seals.

@c    5:2. And I saw a strong angel, proclaiming with a loud voice:  Who is
@c    worthy to open the book and to loose the seals thereof?

@c    5:3. And no man was able, neither in heaven nor on earth nor under the
@c    earth, to open the book, nor to look on it.

@c    5:4. And I wept much, because no man was found worthy to open the book,
@c    nor to see it.

@c    5:5. And one of the ancients said to me:  Weep not:  behold the lion of
@c    the tribe of Juda, the root of David, hath prevailed to open the book
@c    and to loose the seven seals thereof.

@c    5:6. And I saw:  and behold in the midst of the throne and of the four
@c    living creatures and in the midst of the ancients, a Lamb standing, as
@c    it were slain, having seven horns and seven eyes:  which are the seven
@c    Spirits of God, sent forth into all the earth.

@c    5:7. And he came and took the book out of the right hand of him that
@c    sat on the throne.

@c    5:8. And when he had opened the book, the four living creatures and the
@c    four and twenty ancients fell down before the Lamb, having every one of
@c    them harps and golden vials full of odours, which are the prayers of
@c    saints.

@c    The prayers of saints. . .Here we see that the saints in heaven offer up
@c    to Christ the prayers of the faithful upon earth.

@c    5:9. And they sung a new canticle, saying:  Thou art worthy, O Lord, to
@c    take the book and to open the seals thereof:  because thou wast slain
@c    and hast redeemed us to God, in thy blood, out of every tribe and
@c    tongue and people and nation:

@c    5:10. And hast made us to our God a kingdom and priests, and we shall
@c    reign on the earth.

@c    5:11. And I beheld, and I heard the voice of many angels round about
@c    the throne and the living creatures and the ancients (and the number of
@c    them was thousands of thousands),

@c    5:12. Saying with a loud voice:  The Lamb that was slain is worthy to
@c    receive power and divinity and wisdom and strength and honour and glory
@c    and benediction.

@c    5:13. And every creature which is in heaven and on the earth and under
@c    the earth, and such as are in the sea, and all that are in them, I
@c    heard all saying:  To him that sitteth on the throne and to the Lamb,
@c    benediction and honour and glory and power, for ever and ever.

@c    5:14. And the four living creatures said:  Amen.  And the four and twenty
@c    ancients fell down on their faces and adored him that liveth for ever
@c    and ever.



@c    Apocalypse Chapter 6


@c    What followed upon opening six of the seals.

@c    6:1. And I saw that the Lamb had opened one of the seven seals:  and I
@c    heard one of the four living creatures, as it were the voice of
@c    thunder, saying:  Come and see.

@c    6:2. And I saw:  and behold a white horse, and he that sat on him had a
@c    bow, and there was a crown given him, and he went forth conquering that
@c    he might conquer.

@c    White horse. . .He that sitteth on the white horse is Christ, going
@c    forth to subdue the world by his gospel.  The other horses that follow
@c    represent the judgments and punishment that were to fall on the enemies
@c    of Christ and his church.  The red horse signifies war; the black horse,
@c    famine; and the pale horse (which has Death for its rider), plagues or
@c    pestilence.

@c    6:3. And when he had opened the second seal, I heard the second living
@c    creature saying:  Come and see.

@c    6:4. And there went out another horse that was red.  And to him that sat
@c    thereon, it was given that he should take peace from the earth:  and
@c    that they should kill one another.  And a great sword was given to him.

@c    6:5. And when he had opened the third seal, I heard the third living
@c    creature saying:  Come and see.  And behold a black horse.  And he that
@c    sat on him had a pair of scales in his hand.

@c    6:6. And I heard, as it were a voice in the midst of the four living
@c    creatures, saying:  Two pounds of wheat for a penny, and thrice two
@c    pounds of barley for a penny:  and see thou hurt not the wine and the
@c    oil.

@c    6:7. And when he had opened the fourth seal, I heard the voice of the
@c    fourth living creature saying:  Come and see.

@c    6:8. And behold a pale horse:  and he that sat upon him, his name was
@c    Death.  And hell followed him.  And power was given to him over the four
@c    parts of the earth, to kill with sword, with famine and with death and
@c    with the beasts of the earth.

@c    6:9. And when he had opened the fifth seal, I saw under the altar the
@c    souls of them that were slain for the word of God and for the testimony
@c    which they held.

@c    Under the altar. . .Christ, as man, is this altar, under which the souls
@c    of the martyrs live in heaven, as their bodies are here deposited under
@c    our altars.

@c    6:10. And they cried with a loud voice, saying:  How long, O Lord (Holy
@c    and True), dost thou not judge and revenge our blood on them that dwell
@c    on the earth?

@c    Revenge our blood. . .They ask not this out of hatred to their enemies,
@c    but out of zeal for the glory of God, and a desire that the Lord would
@c    accelerate the general judgment, and the complete beatitude of all his
@c    elect.

@c    6:11. And white robes were given to every one of them one; And it was
@c    said to them that they should rest for a little time till their fellow
@c    servants and their brethren, who are to be slain even as they, should
@c    be filled up.

@c    6:12. And I saw, when he had opened the sixth seal:  and behold there
@c    was a great earthquake.  And the sun became black as sackcloth of hair:
@c    and the whole moon became as blood.

@c    6:13. And the stars from heaven fell upon the earth, as the fig tree
@c    casteth its green figs when it is shaken by a great wind.

@c    6:14. And the heaven departed as a book folded up.  And every mountain,
@c    and the islands, were moved out of their places.

@c    6:15. And the kings of the earth and the princes and tribunes and the
@c    rich and the strong and every bondman and every freeman hid themselves
@c    in the dens and in the rocks of mountains:

@c    6:16. And they say to the mountains and the rocks:  Fall upon us and
@c    hide us from the face of him that sitteth upon the throne and from the
@c    wrath of the Lamb.

@c    6:17. For the great day of their wrath is come.  And who shall be able
@c    to stand?



@c    Apocalypse Chapter 7


@c    The number of them that were marked with the seal of the living God and
@c    clothed in white robes.

@c    7:1. After these things, I saw four angels standing on the four corners
@c    of the earth, holding the four winds of the earth, that they should not
@c    blow upon the earth nor upon the sea nor on any tree.

@c    7:2. And I saw another angel ascending from the rising of the sun,
@c    having the sign of the living God.  And he cried with a loud voice to
@c    the four angels to whom it was given to hurt the earth and the sea,

@c    7:3. Saying:  Hurt not the earth nor the sea nor the trees, till we sign
@c    the servants of our God in their foreheads.

@c    7:4. And I heard the number of them that were signed.  An hundred
@c    forty-four thousand were signed, of every tribe of the children of
@c    Israel.

@c    7:5. Of the tribe of Juda, twelve thousand signed:  Of the tribe of
@c    Ruben, twelve thousand signed:  Of the tribe of Gad, twelve thousand
@c    signed:

@c    7:6. Of the tribe of Aser, twelve thousand signed:  Of the tribe of
@c    Nephthali, twelve thousand signed:  Of the tribe of Manasses, twelve
@c    thousand signed:

@c    7:7. Of the tribe of Simeon, twelve thousand signed:  Of the tribe of
@c    Levi, twelve thousand signed:  Of the tribe of Issachar, twelve thousand
@c    signed:

@c    7:8. Of the tribe of Zabulon, twelve thousand signed:  Of the tribe of
@c    Joseph, twelve thousand signed:  Of the tribe of Benjamin, twelve
@c    thousand signed.

@c    7:9. After this, I saw a great multitude, which no man could number, of
@c    all nations and tribes and peoples and tongues, standing before the
@c    throne and in sight of the Lamb, clothed with white robes, and palms in
@c    their hands.

@c    7:10. And they cried with a loud voice, saying:  Salvation to our God,
@c    who sitteth upon the throne and to the Lamb.

@c    7:11. And all the angels stood round about the throne and the ancients
@c    and the four living creatures.  And they fell down before the throne
@c    upon their faces and adored God,

@c    7:12. Saying:  Amen.  Benediction and glory and wisdom and thanksgiving,
@c    honour and power and strength, to our God, for ever and ever.  Amen.

@c    7:13. And one of the ancients answered and said to me:  These that are
@c    clothed in white robes, who are they?  And whence came they?

@c    7:14. And I said to him:  My Lord, thou knowest.  And he said to me:
@c    These are they who are come out of great tribulation and have washed
@c    their robes and have made them white in the blood of the Lamb.

@c    7:15. Therefore, they are before the throne of God:  and they serve him
@c    day and night in his temple.  And he that sitteth on the throne shall
@c    dwell over them.

@c    7:16. They shall no more hunger nor thirst:  neither shall the sun fall
@c    on them, nor any heat.

@c    7:17. For the Lamb, which is in the midst of the throne, shall rule
@c    them and shall lead them to the fountains of the waters of life:  and
@c    God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes.



@c    Apocalypse Chapter 8


@c    The seventh seal is opened.  The angels with the seven trumpets.

@c    8:1. And when he had opened the seventh seal, there was silence in
@c    heaven, as it were for half an hour.

@c    8:2. And I saw seven angels standing in the presence of God:  and there
@c    were given to them seven trumpets.

@c    8:3. And another angel came and stood before the altar, having a golden
@c    censer:  and there was given to him much incense, that he should offer
@c    of the prayers of all saints, upon the golden altar which is before the
@c    throne of God.

@c    8:4. And the smoke of the incense of the prayers of the saints ascended
@c    up before God from the hand of the angel.

@c    8:5. And the angel took the censer and filled it with the fire of the
@c    altar and cast it on the earth:  and there were thunders and voices and
@c    lightnings and a great earthquake.

@c    8:6. And the seven angels who had the seven trumpets prepared
@c    themselves to sound the trumpet.

@c    8:7. And the first angel sounded the trumpet:  and there followed hail
@c    and fire, mingled with blood:  and it was cast on the earth.  And the
@c    third part of the earth was burnt up:  and the third part of the trees
@c    was burnt up:  and all green grass was burnt up.

@c    8:8. And the second angel sounded the trumpet:  and, as it were, a great
@c    mountain, burning with fire, was cast into the sea.  And the third part
@c    of the sea became blood.

@c    8:9. And the third part of those creatures died which had life in the
@c    sea:  and the third part of the ships was destroyed.

@c    8:10. And the third angel sounded the trumpet:  and a great star fell
@c    from heaven, burning as it were a torch.  And it fell on the third part
@c    of the rivers and upon the fountains of waters:

@c    8:11. And the name of the star is called Wormwood.  And the third part
@c    of the waters became wormwood.  And many men died of the waters, because
@c    they were made bitter.

@c    8:12. And the fourth angel sounded the trumpet:  and the third part of
@c    the sun was smitten, and the third part of the moon, and the third part
@c    of the stars, so that the third part of them was darkened.  And the day
@c    did not shine for a third part of it:  and the night in like manner.

@c    8:13. And I beheld:  and heard the voice of one eagle flying through the
@c    midst of heaven, saying with a loud voice:  Woe, Woe, Woe to the
@c    inhabitants of the earth, by reason of the rest of the voices of the
@c    three angels, who are yet to sound the trumpet!



@c    Apocalypse Chapter 9


@c    Locusts come forth from the bottomless pit.  The vision of the army of
@c    horsemen.

@c    9:1. And the fifth angel sounded the trumpet:  and I saw a star fall
@c    from heaven upon the earth.  And there was given to him the key of the
@c    bottomless pit.

@c    A star full. . .This may mean the fall and apostasy of great and learned
@c    men from the true faith.  Or a whole nation falling into error and
@c    separating from the church, not having the sign of God in their
@c    foreheads.  And there was given to him the key of the bottomless
@c    pit. . .That is, to the angel, not to the fallen star.  To this angel was
@c    given the power, which is here signified by a key, of opening hell.

@c    9:2. And he opened the bottomless pit:  and the smoke of the pit arose,
@c    as the smoke of a great furnace.  And the sun and the air were darkened
@c    with the smoke of the pit.

@c    9:3. And from the smoke of the pit there came out locusts upon the
@c    earth.  And power was given to them, as the scorpions of the earth have
@c    power.

@c    There came out locusts. . .These may be devils in Antichrist's time,
@c    having the appearance of locusts, but large and monstrous, as here
@c    described.  Or they may be real locusts, but of an extraordinary size
@c    and monstrous shape, such as were never before seen on earth, sent to
@c    torment those who have not the sign (or seal) of God on their
@c    foreheads.  Some commentators by these locusts understand heretics, and
@c    especially those heretics, that sprung from Jews, and with them denied
@c    the divinity of Jesus Christ; as Theodotus, Praxeas, Noetus, Paul of
@c    Samosata, Sabellius, Arius, etc.  These were great enemies of the
@c    Christian religion; they tormented and infected the souls of men,
@c    stinging them like scorpions, with the poison of their heresies.  Others
@c    have explained these locusts, and other animals, mentioned in different
@c    places throughout this sacred and mystical book, in a most absurd,
@c    fanciful, and ridiculous manner; they make Abaddon the Pope, and the
@c    locusts to be friars mendicant, etc.  Here it is thought proper, not to
@c    enter into any controversy upon that subject, as the inventors of these
@c    fancies have been already answered, and fully refuted by many
@c    controvertists:  besides, those who might be inposed on by such
@c    chimerical writers, are in these days much better informed.

@c    9:4. And it was commanded them that they should not hurt the grass of
@c    the earth nor any green thing nor any tree:  but only the men who have
@c    not the sign of God on their foreheads.

@c    9:5. And it was given unto them that they should not kill them:  but
@c    that they should torment them five months.  And their torment was as the
@c    torment of a scorpion when he striketh a man.

@c    9:6. And in those days, men shall seek death and shall not find it.  And
@c    they shall desire to die:  and death shall fly from them.

@c    9:7. And the shapes of the locusts were like unto horses prepared unto
@c    battle.  And on their heads were, as it were, crowns like gold:  and
@c    their faces were as the faces of men.

@c    9:8. And they had hair as the hair of women:  and their teeth were as
@c    lions.

@c    9:9. And they had breastplates as breastplates of iron:  and the noise
@c    of their wings was as the noise of chariots and many horses running to
@c    battle.

@c    9:10. And they had tails like to scorpions:  and there were stings in
@c    their tails.  And their power was to hurt men, five months.  And they had
@c    over them

@c    9:11. A king, the angel of the bottomless pit (whose name in Hebrew is
@c    Abaddon and in Greek Apollyon, in Latin Exterminans).

@c    9:12. One woe is past:  and behold there come yet two woes more
@c    hereafter.

@c    9:13. And the sixth angel sounded the trumpet:  and I heard a voice from
@c    the four horns of the golden altar which is before the eyes of God,

@c    9:14. Saying to the sixth angel who had the trumpet:  Loose the four
@c    angels who are bound in the great river Euphrates.

@c    9:15. And the four angels were loosed, who were prepared for an hour,
@c    and a day, and a month, and a year:  for to kill the third part of men.

@c    9:16. And the number of the army of horsemen was twenty thousand times
@c    ten thousand.  And I heard the number of them.

@c    9:17. And thus I saw the horses in the vision.  And they that sat on
@c    them had breastplates of fire and of hyacinth and of brimstone.  And the
@c    heads of the horses were as the heads of lions:  and from their mouths
@c    proceeded fire and smoke and brimstone.

@c    9:18. And by these three plagues was slain the third part of men, by
@c    the fire and by the smoke and by the brimstone which issued out of
@c    their mouths.

@c    9:19. For the power of the horses is in their mouths and in their
@c    tails.  For, their tails are like to serpents and have heads:  and with
@c    them they hurt.

@c    9:20. And the rest of the men, who were not slain by these plagues, did
@c    not do penance from the works of their hands, that they should not
@c    adore devils and idols of gold and silver and brass and stone and wood,
@c    which neither can see nor hear nor walk:

@c    9:21. Neither did they penance from their murders nor from their
@c    sorceries nor from their fornication nor from their thefts.



@c    Apocalypse Chapter 10


@c    The cry of a mighty angel.  He gives John a book to eat.

@c    10:1. And I saw another mighty angel come down from heaven, clothed
@c    with a cloud.  And a rainbow was on his head:  and his face, as the sun,
@c    and his feet as pillars of fire.

@c    10:2. And he had in his hand a little book, open.  And he set his right
@c    foot upon the sea, and his left foot upon the earth.

@c    10:3. And he cried with a loud voice as when a lion roareth.  And when
@c    he had cried, seven thunders uttered their voices.

@c    10:4. And when the seven thunders had uttered their voices, I was about
@c    to write.  And I heard a voice from heaven saying to me:  Seal up the
@c    things which the seven thunders have spoken.  And write them not.

@c    10:5. And the angel whom I saw standing upon the sea and upon the earth
@c    lifted up his hand to heaven.

@c    10:6. And he swore by him that liveth for ever and ever, who created
@c    heaven and the things which are therein, and the earth and the things
@c    which are in it, and the sea and the things which are therein:  That
@c    time shall be no longer.

@c    10:7. But in the days of the voice of the seventh angel, when he shall
@c    begin to sound the trumpet, the mystery of God shall be finished, as he
@c    hath declared by his servants the prophets.

@c    Declared. . .literally evangelized, to signify the good tidings,
@c    agreeable to the Gospel, of the final victory of Christ, and of that
@c    eternal life, which should be the reward of the temporal sufferings of
@c    the martyrs and faithful servants of God.

@c    10:8. And I heard a voice from heaven, again speaking to me and saying:
@c    Go and take the book that is open, from the hand of the angel who
@c    standeth upon the sea and upon the earth.

@c    10:9. And I went to the angel, saying unto him that he should give me
@c    the book.  And he said to me:  Take the book and eat it up.  And it shall
@c    make thy belly bitter:  but in thy mouth it shall be sweet as honey.

@c    10:10. And I took the book from the hand of the angel and ate it up:
@c    and it was in my mouth, sweet as honey.  And when I had eaten it, my
@c    belly was bitter.

@c    10:11. And he said to me:  Thou must prophesy again to many nations and
@c    peoples and tongues and kings.



@c    Apocalypse Chapter 11


@c    He is ordered to measure the temple.  The two witnesses.

@c    11:1. And there was given me a reed, like unto a rod.  And it was said
@c    to me:  Arise, and measure the temple of God and the altar and them that
@c    adore therein.

@c    11:2. But the court which is without the temple, cast out and measure
@c    it not:  because it is given unto the Gentiles.  And the holy city they
@c    shall tread under foot, two and forty months:

@c    11:3. And I will give unto my two witnesses:  and they shall prophesy, a
@c    thousand two hundred sixty days, clothed in sackcloth.

@c    My two witnesses. . .It is commonly understood of Henoch and Elias.

@c    11:4. These are the two olive trees and the two candlesticks that stand
@c    before the Lord of the earth.

@c    11:5. And if any man will hurt them, fire shall come out of their
@c    mouths and shall devour their enemies.  And if any man will hurt them,
@c    in this manner must he be slain.

@c    11:6. These have power to shut heaven, that it rain not in the days of
@c    their prophecy:  And they have power over waters, to turn them into
@c    blood and to strike the earth with all plagues, as often as they will.

@c    11:7. And when they shall have finished their testimony, the beast that
@c    ascendeth out of the abyss shall make war against them and shall
@c    overcome them and kill them.

@c    11:8. And their bodies shall lie in the streets of the great city which
@c    is called spiritually, Sodom and Egypt:  where their Lord also was
@c    crucified.

@c    11:9. And they of the tribes and peoples and tongues and nations shall
@c    see their bodies for three days and a half:  and they shall not suffer
@c    their bodies to be laid in sepulchres.

@c    11:10. And they that dwell upon the earth shall rejoice over them and
@c    make merry:  and shall send gifts one to another, because these two
@c    prophets tormented them that dwelt upon the earth.

@c    11:11. And after three days and a half, the spirit of life from God
@c    entered into them.  And they stood upon their feet:  and great fear fell
@c    upon them that saw them.

@c    11:12. And they heard a great voice from heaven, saying to them:  Come
@c    up hither.  And they went up to heaven in a cloud:  and their enemies saw
@c    them.

@c    11:13. And at that hour there was made a great earthquake:  and the
@c    tenth part of the city fell.  And there were slain in the earthquake,
@c    names of men, seven thousand:  and the rest were cast into a fear and
@c    gave glory to the God of heaven.

@c    11:14. The second woe is past:  and behold the third woe will come
@c    quickly.

@c    11:15. And the seventh angel sounded the trumpet:  and there were great
@c    voices in heaven, saying:  The kingdom of this world is become our
@c    Lord's and his Christ's, and he shall reign for ever and ever.  Amen.

@c    11:16. And the four and twenty ancients who sit on their seats in the
@c    sight of God, fell on their faces and adored God, saying:

@c    11:17. We give thee thanks, O Lord God Almighty, who art and who wast
@c    and who art to come:  because thou hast taken to thee thy great power,
@c    and thou hast reigned.

@c    11:18. And the nations were angry:  and thy wrath is come.  And the time
@c    of the dead, that they should be judged and that thou shouldest render
@c    reward to thy servants the prophets and the saints, and to them that
@c    fear thy name, little and great:  and shouldest destroy them who have
@c    corrupted the earth.

@c    11:19. And the temple of God was opened in heaven:  and the ark of his
@c    testament was seen in his temple.  And there were lightnings and voices
@c    and an earthquake and great hail.



@c    Apocalypse Chapter 12


@c    The vision of the woman clothed with the sun and of the great dragon
@c    her persecutor.

@c    12:1. And a great sign appeared in heaven:  A woman clothed with the
@c    sun, and the moon under her feet, and on her head a crown of twelve
@c    stars.

@c    A woman. . .The church of God.  It may also, by allusion, be applied to
@c    our blessed Lady.  The church is clothed with the sun, that is, with
@c    Christ:  she hath the moon, that is, the changeable things of the world,
@c    under her feet:  and the twelve stars with which she is crowned, are the
@c    twelve apostles:  she is in labour and pain, whilst she brings forth her
@c    children, and Christ in them, in the midst of afflictions and
@c    persecutions.

@c    12:2. And being with child, she cried travailing in birth:  and was in
@c    pain to be delivered.

@c    12:3. And there was seen another sign in heaven.  And behold a great red
@c    dragon, having seven heads and ten horns and on his heads seven
@c    diadems.

@c    12:4. And his tail drew the third part of the stars of heaven and cast
@c    them to the earth.  And the dragon stood before the woman who was ready
@c    to be delivered:  that, when she should be delivered, he might devour
@c    her son.

@c    12:5. And she brought forth a man child, who was to rule all nations
@c    with an iron rod.  And her son was taken up to God and to his throne.

@c    12:6. And the woman fled into the wilderness, where she had a place
@c    prepared by God, that there they should feed her, a thousand two
@c    hundred sixty days.

@c    12:7. And there was a great battle in heaven:  Michael and his angels
@c    fought with the dragon, and the dragon fought, and his angels.

@c    12:8. And they prevailed not:  neither was their place found any more in
@c    heaven.

@c    12:9. And that great dragon was cast out, that old serpent, who is
@c    called the devil and Satan, who seduceth the whole world.  And he was
@c    cast unto the earth:  and his angels were thrown down with him.

@c    12:10. And I heard a loud voice in heaven, saying:  Now is come
@c    salvation and strength and the kingdom of our God and the power of his
@c    Christ:  because the accuser of our brethren is cast forth, who accused
@c    them before our God day and night.

@c    12:11. And they overcame him by the blood of the Lamb and by the word
@c    of the testimony:  and they loved not their lives unto death.

@c    12:12. Therefore, rejoice, O heavens, and you that dwell therein.  Woe
@c    to the earth and to the sea, because the devil is come down unto you,
@c    having great wrath, knowing that he hath but a short time.

@c    12:13. And when the dragon saw that he was cast unto the earth, he
@c    persecuted the woman who brought forth the man child.

@c    12:14. And there were given to the woman two wings of a great eagle,
@c    that she might fly into the desert, unto her place, where she is
@c    nourished for a time and times, and half a time, from the face of the
@c    serpent.

@c    12:15. And the serpent cast out of his mouth, after the woman, water,
@c    as it were a river:  that he might cause her to be carried away by the
@c    river.

@c    12:16. And the earth helped the woman:  and the earth opened her mouth
@c    and swallowed up the river which the dragon cast out of his mouth.

@c    12:17. And the dragon was angry against the woman:  and went to make war
@c    with the rest of her seed, who keep the commandments of God and have
@c    the testimony of Jesus Christ.

@c    12:18. And he stood upon the sand of the sea.



@c    Apocalypse Chapter 13


@c    Of the beast with seven heads and of a second beast.

@c    13:1. And I saw a beast coming up out the sea, having seven heads and
@c    ten horns:  and upon his horns, ten diadems:  and upon his heads, names
@c    of blasphemy.

@c    A beast. . .This first beast with seven heads and ten horns, is probably
@c    the whole company of infidels, enemies and persecutors of the people of
@c    God, from the beginning to the end of the world.  The seven heads are
@c    seven kings, that is, seven principal kingdoms or empires, which have
@c    exercised, or shall exercise, tyrannical power over the people of God;
@c    of these, five were then fallen, viz.:  the Egyptian, Assyrian,
@c    Chaldean, Persian, and Grecian monarchies:  one was present, viz., the
@c    empire of Rome:  and the seventh and chiefest was to come, viz., the
@c    great Antichrist and his empire.  The ten horns may be understood of ten
@c    lesser persecutors.

@c    13:2. And the beast which I saw was like to a leopard:  and his feet
@c    were as the feet of a bear, and his mouth as the mouth of a lion.  And
@c    the dragon gave him his own strength and great power.

@c    13:3. And I saw one of his heads as it were slain to death:  and his
@c    death's wound was healed.  And all the earth was in admiration after the
@c    beast.

@c    One of his heads, etc. . .Some understand this of the mortal wound,
@c    which the idolatry of the Roman empire (signified by the sixth head)
@c    received from Constantine; which was, as it were, healed again by
@c    Julian the Apostate.

@c    13:4. And they adored the dragon which gave power to the beast.  And
@c    they adored the beast, saying:  Who is like to the beast?  And who shall
@c    be able to fight with him?

@c    13:5. And there was given to him a mouth speaking great things and
@c    blasphemies:  and power was given to him to do, two and forty months.

@c    13:6. And he opened his mouth unto blasphemies against God, to
@c    blaspheme his name and his tabernacle and them that dwell in heaven.

@c    His tabernacle, etc. . .That is, his church and his saints.

@c    13:7. And it was given unto him to make war with the saints and to
@c    overcome them.  And power was given him over every tribe and people and
@c    tongue and nation.

@c    13:8. And all that dwell upon the earth adored him, whose names are not
@c    written in the book of life of the Lamb which was slain from the
@c    beginning of the world.

@c    Slain from the beginning, etc. . .In the foreknowledge of God; and
@c    inasmuch as all mercy and grace, from the beginning, was given in view
@c    of his death and passion.

@c    13:9. If any man have an ear, let him hear.

@c    13:10. He that shall lead into captivity shall go into captivity:  he
@c    that shall kill by the sword must be killed by the sword.  Here is the
@c    patience and the faith of the saints.

@c    13:11. And I saw another beast coming up out of the earth:  and he had
@c    two horns, like a lamb:  and he spoke as a dragon.

@c    Another beast. . .This second beast with two horns, may be understood of
@c    the heathenish priests and magicians; the principal promoters both of
@c    idolatry and persecution.

@c    13:12. And he executed all the power of the former beast in his sight.
@c    And he caused the earth and them that dwell therein to adore the first
@c    beast, whose wound to death was healed.

@c    13:13. And he did great signs, so that he made also fire to come down
@c    from heaven unto the earth, in the sight of men.

@c    13:14. And he seduced them that dwell on the earth, for the signs which
@c    were given him to do in the sight of the beast:  saying to them that
@c    dwell on the earth that they should make the image of the beast which
@c    had the wound by the sword and lived.

@c    13:15. And it was given him to give life to the image of the beast:  and
@c    that the image of the beast should speak:  and should cause that
@c    whosoever will not adore the image of the beast should be slain.

@c    13:16. And he shall make all, both little and great, rich and poor,
@c    freemen and bondmen, to have a character in their right hand or on
@c    their foreheads:

@c    13:17. And that no man might buy or sell, but he that hath the
@c    character, or the name of the beast, or the number of his name.

@c    13:18. Here is wisdom.  He that hath understanding, let him count the
@c    number of the beast.  For it is the number of a man:  and the number of
@c    him is six hundred sixty-six.

@c    Six hundred sixty-six. . .The numeral letters of his name shall make up
@c    this number.



@c    Apocalypse Chapter 14


@c    Of the Lamb and of the virgins that follow him.  Of the judgments that
@c    shall fall upon the wicked.

@c    14:1. And I beheld:  and lo a Lamb stood upon mount Sion, and with him
@c    an hundred forty-four thousand, having his name and the name of his
@c    Father written on their foreheads.

@c    14:2. And I heard a voice from heaven, as the noise of many waters and
@c    as the voice of great thunder.  And the voice which I heard was as the
@c    voice of harpers, harping on their harps.

@c    14:3. And they sung as it were a new canticle, before the throne and
@c    before the four living creatures and the ancients:  and no man could say
@c    the canticle, but those hundred forty-four thousand who were purchased
@c    from the earth.

@c    14:4. These are they who were not defiled with women:  for they are
@c    virgins.  These follow the Lamb whithersoever he goeth.  These were
@c    purchased from among men, the firstfruits to God and to the Lamb.

@c    14:5. And in their mouth there was found no lie:  for they are without
@c    spot before the throne of God.

@c    14:6. And I saw another angel flying through the midst of heaven,
@c    having the eternal gospel, to preach unto them that sit upon the earth
@c    and over every nation and tribe and tongue and people:

@c    14:7. Saying with a loud voice:  Fear the Lord and give him honour,
@c    because the hour of his judgment is come.  And adore ye him that made
@c    heaven and earth, the sea and the fountains of waters.

@c    14:8. And another angel followed, saying:  That great Babylon is fallen,
@c    is fallen; which made all nations to drink of the wine of the wrath of
@c    her fornication.

@c    Babylon. . .By Babylon may be very probably signified all the wicked
@c    world in general, which God will punish, and destroy after the short
@c    time of this mortal life:  or it may signify every great city wherein
@c    enormous sins and abominations are daily committed; and that when the
@c    measure of its iniquities is full, the punishments due to its crimes
@c    are poured on it.  It may also be some city of the description in the
@c    text, that will exist, and be destroyed, as here described, towards the
@c    end of the world.

@c    14:9. And the third angel followed them, saying with a loud voice:  If
@c    any man shall adore the beast and his image and receive his character
@c    in his forehead or in his hand,

@c    14:10. He also shall drink of the wine of the wrath of God, which is
@c    mingled with pure wine in the cup of his wrath:  and shall be tormented
@c    with fire and brimstone in the sight of the holy angels and in the
@c    sight of the Lamb.

@c    14:11. And the smoke of their torments, shall ascend up for ever and
@c    ever:  neither have they rest day nor night, who have adored the beast
@c    and his image and whoever receiveth the character of his name.

@c    14:12. Here is the patience of the saints, who keep the commandments of
@c    God and the faith of Jesus.

@c    14:13. And I heard a voice from heaven, saying to me:  Write:  Blessed
@c    are the dead who die in the Lord.  From henceforth now, saith the
@c    Spirit, that they may rest from their labours.  For their works follow
@c    them.

@c    Die in the Lord. . .It is understood of the martyrs who die for the
@c    Lord.

@c    14:14. And I saw:  and behold a white cloud and upon the cloud one
@c    sitting like to the Son of man, having on his head a crown of gold and
@c    in his hand a sharp sickle.

@c    14:15. And another angel came out from the temple, crying with a loud
@c    voice to him that sat upon the cloud:  Thrust in thy sickle and reap,
@c    because the hour is come to reap.  For the harvest of the earth is ripe.

@c    14:16. And he that sat on the cloud thrust his sickle into the earth:
@c    and the earth was reaped.

@c    14:17. And another angel came out of the temple which is in heaven, he
@c    also having a sharp sickle.

@c    14:18. And another angel came out from the altar, who had power over
@c    fire.  And he cried with a loud voice to him that had the sharp sickle,
@c    saying:  Thrust in thy sharp sickle and gather the clusters of the
@c    vineyard of the earth, because the grapes thereof are ripe.

@c    14:19. And the angel thrust in his sharp sickle into the earth and
@c    gathered the vineyard of the earth and cast it into the great press of
@c    the wrath of God:

@c    14:20. And the press was trodden without the city, and blood came out
@c    of the press, up to the horses' bridles, for a thousand and six hundred
@c    furlongs.



@c    Apocalypse Chapter 15


@c    They that have overcome the beast glorify God.  Of the seven angels with
@c    the seven vials.

@c    15:1. And I saw another sign in heaven, great and wonderful:  seven
@c    angels having the seven last plagues.  For in them is filled up the
@c    wrath of God.

@c    15:2. And I saw as it were a sea of glass mingled with fire:  and them
@c    that had overcome the beast and his image and the number of his name,
@c    standing on the sea of glass, having the harps of God:

@c    15:3. And singing the canticle of Moses, the servant of God, and the
@c    canticle of the Lamb, saying:  Great and wonderful are thy works, O Lord
@c    God Almighty.  Just and true are thy ways, O King of ages.

@c    15:4. Who shall not fear thee, O Lord, and magnify thy name?  For thou
@c    only art holy.  For all nations shall come and shall adore in thy sight,
@c    because thy judgments are manifest.

@c    15:5. And after these things, I looked:  and behold, the temple of the
@c    tabernacle of the testimony in heaven was opened.

@c    15:6. And the seven angels came out of the temple, having the seven
@c    plagues, clothed with clean and white linen and girt about the breasts
@c    with golden girdles.

@c    15:7. And one of the four living creatures gave to the seven angels
@c    seven golden vials, full of the wrath of God, who liveth for ever and
@c    ever.

@c    15:8. And the temple was filled with smoke from the majesty of God and
@c    from his power.  And no man was able to enter into the temple, till the
@c    seven plagues of the seven angels were fulfilled.



@c    Apocalypse Chapter 16


@c    The seven vials are poured out.  The plagues that ensue.

@c    16:1. And I heard a great voice out of the temple, saying to the seven
@c    angels:  Go and pour out the seven vials of the wrath of God upon the
@c    earth.

@c    16:2. And the first went and poured out his vial upon the earth.  And
@c    there fell a sore and grievous wound upon men who had the character of
@c    the beast:  and upon them that adored the image thereof.

@c    16:3. And the second angel poured out his vial upon the sea.  And there
@c    came blood as it were of a dead man:  and every living soul died in the
@c    sea.

@c    16:4. And the third poured out his vial upon the rivers and the
@c    fountains of waters.  And there was made blood.

@c    16:5. And I heard the angel of the waters saying:  Thou art just, O
@c    Lord, who art and who wast, the Holy One, because thou hast judged
@c    these things.

@c    16:6. For they have shed the blood of saints and prophets:  and thou
@c    hast given them blood to drink.  For they are worthy.

@c    16:7. And I heard another, from the altar, saying:  Yea, O Lord God
@c    Almighty, true and just are thy judgments.

@c    16:8. And the fourth angel poured out his vial upon the sun.  And it was
@c    given unto him to afflict men with heat and fire.

@c    16:9. And men were scorched with great heat:  and they blasphemed the
@c    name of God, who hath power over these plagues.  Neither did they
@c    penance to give him glory.

@c    16:10. And the fifth angel poured out his vial upon the seat of the
@c    beast.  And his kingdom became dark:  and they gnawed their tongues for
@c    pain.

@c    16:11. And they blasphemed the God of heaven, because of their pains
@c    and wounds:  and did not penance for their works.

@c    16:12. And the sixth angel poured out his vial upon that great river
@c    Euphrates and dried up the water thereof, that a way might be prepared
@c    for the kings from the rising of the sun.

@c    16:13. And I saw from the mouth of the dragon and from the mouth of the
@c    beast and from the mouth of the false prophet, three unclean spirits
@c    like frogs.

@c    16:14. For they are the spirits of devils, working signs:  and they go
@c    forth unto the kings of the whole earth, to gather them to battle
@c    against the great day of the Almighty God.

@c    16:15. Behold, I come as a thief.  Blessed is he that watcheth and
@c    keepeth his garments, lest he walk naked, and they see his shame.

@c    16:16. And he shall gather them together into a place which in Hebrew
@c    is called Armagedon.

@c    Armagedon. . .That is, the hill of robbers.

@c    16:17. And the seventh angel poured out his vial upon the air.  And
@c    there came a great voice out of the temple from the throne, saying:  It
@c    is done.

@c    16:18. And there were lightnings and voices and thunders:  and there was
@c    a great earthquake, such an one as never had been since men were upon
@c    the earth, such an earthquake, so great.

@c    16:19. And the great city was divided into three parts:  and the cities
@c    of the Gentiles fell.  And great Babylon came in remembrance before God,
@c    to give her the cup of the wine of the indignation of his wrath.

@c    16:20. And every island fled away:  and the mountains were not found.

@c    16:21. And great hail, like a talent, came down from heaven upon men:
@c    and men blasphemed God, for the plague of the hail:  because it was
@c    exceeding great.



@c    Apocalypse Chapter 17


@c    The description of the great harlot and of the beast upon which she
@c    sits.

@c    17:1. And there came one of the seven angels who had the seven vials
@c    and spoke with me, saying:  Come, I will shew thee the condemnation of
@c    the great harlot, who sitteth upon many waters:

@c    17:2. With whom the kings of the earth have committed fornication.  And
@c    they who inhabit the earth have been made drunk with the wine of her
@c    whoredom.

@c    17:3. And he took me away in spirit into the desert.  And I saw a woman
@c    sitting upon a scarlet coloured beast, full of names of blasphemy,
@c    having seven heads and ten horns.

@c    17:4. And the woman was clothed round about with purple and scarlet,
@c    and gilt with gold and precious stones and pearls, having a golden cup
@c    in her hand, full of the abomination and filthiness of her fornication.

@c    17:5. And on her forehead a name was written:  A mystery:  Babylon the
@c    great, the mother of the fornications and the abominations of the
@c    earth.

@c    A mystery. . .That is, a secret; because what follows of the name and
@c    title of the great harlot is to be taken in a mystical sense.
@c    Babylon. . .Either the city of the devil in general; or, if this place
@c    be to be understood of any particular city, pagan Rome, which then and
@c    for three hundred years persecuted the church; and was the principal
@c    seat both of empire and idolatry.

@c    17:6. And I saw the woman drunk with the blood of the saints and with
@c    the blood of the martyrs of Jesus.  And I wondered, when I had seen her,
@c    with great admiration.

@c    17:7. And the angel said to me:  Why dost thou wonder?  I will tell thee
@c    the mystery of the woman and of the beast which carrieth her, which
@c    hath the seven heads and ten horns.

@c    17:8. The beast which thou sawest, was, and is not, and shall come up
@c    out of the bottomless pit and go into destruction.  And the inhabitants
@c    on the earth (whose names are not written in the book of life from the
@c    foundation of the world) shall wonder, seeing the beast that was and is
@c    not.

@c    The beast which thou sawest. . .This beast which supports Babylon, may
@c    signify the power of the devil:  which was and is not, being much
@c    limited by the coming of Christ, but shall again exert itself under
@c    Antichrist.  The seven heads of this beast are seven mountains or
@c    empires, instruments of his tyranny; of which five were then fallen.
@c    (See chap. 13.1, and below, ver. 10.)  The beast itself is said to be
@c    the eighth, and is of the seven; because they all act under the devil,
@c    and by his instigation, so that his power is in them all, yet so as to
@c    make up, as it were, an eighth empire, distinct from them all.

@c    17:9. And here is the understanding that hath wisdom.  The seven heads
@c    are seven mountains, upon which the woman sitteth:  and they are seven
@c    kings.

@c    17:10. Five are fallen, one is, and the other is not yet come:  and when
@c    he is come, he must remain a short time.

@c    17:11. And the beast which was and is not:  the same also is the eighth,
@c    and is of the seven, and goeth into destruction.

@c    17:12. And the ten horns which thou sawest are ten kings, who have not
@c    yet received a kingdom:  but shall receive power as kings, one hour
@c    after the beast.

@c    Ten kings. . .Ten lesser kingdoms, enemies also of the church of Christ:
@c    which, nevertheless, shall be made instruments of the justice of God
@c    for the punishment of Babylon.  Some understand this of the Goths,
@c    Vandals, Huns, and other barbarous nations, that destroyed the empire
@c    of Rome.

@c    17:13. These have one design:  and their strength and power they shall
@c    deliver to the beast.

@c    17:14. These shall fight with the Lamb.  And the Lamb shall overcome
@c    them because he is Lord of lords and King of kings:  and they that are
@c    with him are called and elect and faithful.

@c    17:15. And he said to me:  The waters which thou sawest, where the
@c    harlot sitteth, are peoples and nations and tongues.

@c    17:16. And the ten horns which thou sawest in the beast:  These shall
@c    hate the harlot and shall make her desolate and naked and shall eat her
@c    flesh and shall burn her with fire.

@c    17:17. For God hath given into their hearts to do that which pleaseth
@c    him:  that they give their kingdom to the beast, till the words of God
@c    be fulfilled.

@c    17:18. And the woman which thou sawest is the great city which hath
@c    kingdom over the kings of the earth.



@c    Apocalypse Chapter 18


@c    The fall of Babylon.  Kings and merchants lament over her.

@c    18:1. And after these things, I saw another angel come down from
@c    heaven, having great power:  and the earth was enlightened with his
@c    glory.

@c    18:2. And he cried out with a strong voice, saying:  Babylon the great
@c    is fallen, is fallen:  and is become the habitation of devils and the
@c    hold of every unclean spirit and the hold of every unclean and hateful
@c    bird:

@c    18:3. Because all nations have drunk of the wine of the wrath of her
@c    fornication:  and the kings of the earth have committed fornication with
@c    her; And the merchants of the earth have been made rich by the power of
@c    her delicacies.

@c    18:4. And I heard another voice from heaven, saying:  Go out from her,
@c    my people; that you be not partakers of her sins and that you receive
@c    not of her plagues.

@c    18:5. For her sins have reached unto heaven:  and the Lord hath
@c    remembered her iniquities.

@c    18:6. Render to her as she also hath rendered to you:  and double unto
@c    her double, according to her works.  In the cup wherein she hath
@c    mingled, mingle ye double unto her.

@c    18:7. As much as she hath glorified herself and lived in delicacies, so
@c    much torment and sorrow give ye to her.  Because she saith in her heart:
@c    I sit a queen and am no widow:  and sorrow I shall not see.

@c    18:8. Therefore, shall her plagues come in one day, death and mourning
@c    and famine.  And she shall be burnt with the fire:  because God is
@c    strong, who shall judge her.

@c    18:9. And the kings of the earth, who have committed fornication and
@c    lived in delicacies with her, shall weep and bewail themselves over
@c    her, when they shall see the smoke of her burning:

@c    18:10. Standing afar off for fear of her torments, saying:  Alas!  alas!
@c    that great city, Babylon, that mighty city:  for in one hour is thy
@c    judgment come.

@c    18:11. And the merchants of the earth shall weep and mourn over her:
@c    for no man shall buy their merchandise any more.

@c    18:12. Merchandise of gold and silver and precious stones:  and of
@c    pearls and fine linen and purple and silk and scarlet:  and all thyine
@c    wood:  and all manner of vessels of ivory:  and all manner of vessels of
@c    precious stone and of brass and of iron and of marble:

@c    18:13. And cinnamon and odours and ointment and frankincense and wine
@c    and oil and fine flour and wheat and beasts and sheep and horses and
@c    chariots:  and slaves and souls of men.

@c    18:14. And the fruits of the desire of thy soul are departed from thee:
@c    and all fat and goodly things are perished from thee.  And they shall
@c    find them no more at all.

@c    18:15. The merchants of these things, who were made rich, shall stand
@c    afar off from her, for fear of her torments, weeping and mourning,

@c    18:16. And saying:  Alas!  alas!  that great city, which was clothed with
@c    fine linen and purple and scarlet and was gilt with gold and precious
@c    stones and pearls.

@c    18:17. For in one hour are so great riches come to nought.  And every
@c    shipmaster and all that sail into the lake, and mariners, and as many
@c    as work in the sea, stood afar off,

@c    18:18. And cried, seeing the place of her burning, saying:  What city is
@c    like to this great city?

@c    18:19. And they cast dust upon their heads and cried, weeping and
@c    mourning, saying:  Alas!  alas!  that great city, wherein all were made
@c    rich, that had ships at sea, by reason of her prices.  For, in one hour
@c    she is made desolate.

@c    18:20. Rejoice over her, thou heaven and ye holy apostles and prophets.
@c    For God hath judged your judgment on her.

@c    18:21. And a mighty angel took up a stone, as it were a great
@c    millstone, and cast it into the sea, saying:  With such violence as
@c    this, shall Babylon, that great city, be thrown down and shall be found
@c    no more at all.

@c    18:22. And the voice of harpers and of musicians and of them that play
@c    on the pipe and on the trumpet shall no more be heard at all in thee:
@c    and no craftsman of any art whatsoever shall be found any more at all
@c    in thee:  and the sound of the mill shall be heard no more at all in
@c    thee:

@c    18:23. And the light of the lamp shall shine no more at all in thee:
@c    and the voice of the bridegroom and the bride shall be heard no more at
@c    all in thee.  For thy merchants were the great men of the earth:  for all
@c    nations have been deceived by thy enchantments.

@c    18:24. And in her was found the blood of prophets and of saints and of
@c    all that were slain upon the earth.



@c    Apocalypse Chapter 19


@c    The saints glorify God for his judgments on the great harlot.  Christ's
@c    victory over the beast and the kings of the earth.

@c    19:1. After these things, I heard as it were the voice of much people
@c    in heaven, saying:  Alleluia.  Salvation and glory and power is to our
@c    God.

@c    19:2. For true and just are his judgments, who hath judged the great
@c    harlot which corrupted the earth with her fornication and hath revenged
@c    the blood of his servants, at her hands.

@c    19:3. And again they said:  Alleluia.  And her smoke ascendeth for ever
@c    and ever.

@c    19:4. And the four and twenty ancients and the four living creatures
@c    fell down and adored God that sitteth upon the throne, saying:  Amen.
@c    Alleluia.

@c    19:5. And a voice came out from the throne, saying:  Give praise to our
@c    God, all ye his servants:  and you that fear him, little and great.

@c    19:6. And I heard as it were the voice of a great multitude, and as the
@c    voice of many waters, and as the voice of great thunders, saying:
@c    Alleluia:  for the Lord our God, the Almighty, hath reigned.

@c    19:7. Let us be glad and rejoice and give glory to him.  For the
@c    marriage of the Lamb is come:  and his wife hath prepared herself.

@c    19:8. And it is granted to her that she should clothe herself with fine
@c    linen, glittering and white.  For the fine linen are the justifications
@c    of saints.

@c    19:9. And he said to me:  Write:  Blessed are they that are called to the
@c    marriage supper of the Lamb.  And he saith to me:  These words of God are
@c    true.

@c    19:10. And I fell down before his feet, to adore him.  And he saith to
@c    me:  See thou do it not.  I am thy fellow servant and of thy brethren who
@c    have the testimony of Jesus.  Adore God.  For the testimony of Jesus is
@c    the spirit of prophecy.

@c    I fell down before, etc. . .St. Augustine (lib. 20, contra Faust, c. 21)
@c    is of opinion, that this angel appeared in so glorious a manner, that
@c    St. John took him to be God; and therefore would have given him divine
@c    honour had not the angel stopped him, by telling him he was but his
@c    fellow servant.  St. Gregory (Hom. 8, in Evang.) rather thinks that the
@c    veneration offered by St. John, was not divine honour, or indeed any
@c    other than what might lawfully be given; but was nevertheless refused
@c    by the angel, in consideration of the dignity to which our human nature
@c    had been raised, by the incarnation of the Son of God, and the dignity
@c    of St. John, an apostle, prophet, and martyr.

@c    19:11. And I saw heaven opened:  and behold a white horse.  And he that
@c    sat upon him was called faithful and true:  and with justice doth he
@c    judge and fight.

@c    19:12. And his eyes were as a flame of fire:  and on his head were many
@c    diadems.  And he had a name written, which no man knoweth but himself.

@c    19:13. And he was clothed with a garment sprinkled with blood.  And his
@c    name is called:  THE WORD OF GOD.

@c    19:14. And the armies that are in heaven followed him on white horses,
@c    clothed in fine linen, white and clean.

@c    19:15. And out of his mouth proceedeth a sharp two-edged sword, that
@c    with it he may strike the nations.  And he shall rule them with a rod of
@c    iron:  and he treadeth the winepress of the fierceness of the wrath of
@c    God the Almighty.

@c    19:16. And he hath on his garment and on his thigh written:  KING OF
@c    KINGS AND LORD OF LORDS.

@c    19:17. And I saw an angel standing in the sun:  and he cried with a loud
@c    voice, saying to all the birds that did fly through the midst of
@c    heaven:  Come, gather yourselves together to the great supper of God:

@c    19:18. That you may eat the flesh of kings and the flesh of tribunes
@c    and the flesh of mighty men and the flesh of horses and of them that
@c    sit on them:  and the flesh of all freemen and bondmen and of little and
@c    of great.

@c    19:19. And I saw the beast and the kings of the earth and their armies,
@c    gathered together to make war with him that sat upon the horse and with
@c    his army.

@c    19:20. And the beast was taken, and with him the false prophet who
@c    wrought signs before him, wherewith he seduced them who received the
@c    character of the beast and who adored his image.  These two were cast
@c    alive into the pool of fire burning with brimstone.

@c    19:21. And the rest were slain by the sword of him that sitteth upon
@c    the horse, which proceedeth out of his mouth:  and all the birds were
@c    filled with their flesh.



@c    Apocalypse Chapter 20


@c    Satan is bound for a thousand years.  The souls of the martyrs reign
@c    with Christ in the first resurrection.  The last attempts of Satan
@c    against the church.  The last judgment.

@c    20:1. And I saw an angel coming down from heaven, having the key of the
@c    bottomless pit and a great chain in his hand.

@c    20:2. And he laid hold on the dragon, the old serpent, which is the
@c    devil and Satan, and bound him for a thousand years.

@c    Bound him, etc. . .The power of Satan has been very much limited by the
@c    passion of Christ:  for a thousand years; that is, for the whole time of
@c    the New Testament; but especially from the time of the destruction of
@c    Babylon or pagan Rome, till the new efforts of Gog and Magog against
@c    the church, towards the end of the world.  During which time the souls
@c    of the martyrs and saints live and reign with Christ in heaven, in the
@c    first resurrection, which is that of the soul to the life of glory; as
@c    the second resurrection will be that of the body, at the day of the
@c    general judgment.

@c    20:3. And he cast him into the bottomless pit and shut him up and set a
@c    seal upon him, that he should no more seduce the nations till the
@c    thousand years be finished.  And after that, he must be loosed a little
@c    time.

@c    20:4. And I saw seats.  And they sat upon them:  and judgment was given
@c    unto them.  And the souls of them that were beheaded for the testimony
@c    of Jesus and for the word of God and who had not adored the beast nor
@c    his image nor received his character on their foreheads or in their
@c    hands.  And they lived and reigned with Christ a thousand years.

@c    20:5. The rest of the dead lived not, till the thousand years were
@c    finished.  This is the first resurrection.

@c    20:6. Blessed and holy is he that hath part in the first resurrection.
@c    In these the second death hath no power.  But they shall be priests of
@c    God and of Christ:  and shall reign with him a thousand years.

@c    20:7. And when the thousand years shall be finished, Satan shall be
@c    loosed out of his prison and shall go forth and seduce the nations
@c    which are over the four quarters of the earth, Gog and Magog:  and shall
@c    gather them together to battle, the number of whom is as the sand of
@c    the sea.

@c    20:8. And they came upon the breadth of the earth and encompassed the
@c    camp of the saints and the beloved city.

@c    20:9. And there came down fire from God out of heaven and devoured
@c    them:  and the devil, who seduced them, was cast into the pool of fire
@c    and brimstone, where both the beast

@c    20:10. And the false prophet shall be tormented day and night for ever
@c    and ever.

@c    20:11. And I saw a great white throne and one sitting upon it, from
@c    whose face the earth and heaven fled away:  and there was no place found
@c    for them

@c    20:12. And I saw the dead, great and small, standing in the presence of
@c    the throne.  And the books were opened:  and another book was opened,
@c    which was the book of life.  And the dead were judged by those things
@c    which were written in the books, according to their works.

@c    20:13. And the sea gave up the dead that were in it:  and death and hell
@c    gave up their dead that were in them.  And they were judged, every one
@c    according to their works.

@c    20:14. And hell and death were cast into the pool of fire.  This is the
@c    second death.

@c    20:15. And whosoever was not found written in the book of life was cast
@c    into the pool of fire.



@c    Apocalypse Chapter 21


@c    The new Jerusalem described.

@c    21:1. I saw a new heaven and a new earth.  For the first heaven and the
@c    first earth was gone:  and the sea is now no more.

@c    The first heaven and the first earth was gone. . .being changed, not as
@c    to their substance, but in their qualities.

@c    21:2. And I, John, saw the holy city, the new Jerusalem, coming down
@c    out of heaven from God, prepared as a bride adorned for her husband.

@c    21:3. And I heard a great voice from the throne, saying:  Behold the
@c    tabernacle of God with men:  and he will dwell with them.  And they shall
@c    be his people:  and God himself with them shall be their God.

@c    21:4. And God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes:  and death
@c    shall be no more.  Nor mourning, nor crying, nor sorrow shall be any
@c    more, for the former things are passed away.

@c    21:5. And he that sat on the throne, said:  Behold, I make all things
@c    new.  And he said to me:  Write.  For these words are most faithful and
@c    true.

@c    21:6. And he said to me:  It is done.  I am Alpha and Omega:  the
@c    Beginning and the End.  To him that thirsteth, I will give of the
@c    fountain of the water of life, freely.

@c    21:7. He that shall overcome shall possess these things.  And I will be
@c    his God:  and he shall be my son.

@c    21:8. But the fearful and unbelieving and the abominable and murderers
@c    and whoremongers and sorcerers and idolaters and all liars, they shall
@c    have their portion in the pool burning with fire and brimstone, which
@c    is the second death.

@c    21:9. And there came one of the seven angels, who had the vials full of
@c    the seven last plagues, and spoke with me, saying:  Come and I will shew
@c    thee the bride, the wife of the Lamb.

@c    21:10. And he took me up in spirit to a great and high mountain:  and he
@c    shewed me the holy city Jerusalem, coming down out of heaven from God,

@c    21:11. Having the glory of God, and the light thereof was like to a
@c    precious stone, as to the jasper stone even as crystal.

@c    21:12. And it had a wall great and high, having twelve gates, and in
@c    the gates twelve angels, and names written thereon, which are the names
@c    of the twelve tribes of the children of Israel.

@c    21:13. On the east, three gates:  and on the north, three gates:  and on
@c    the south, three gates:  and on the west, three gates.

@c    21:14. And the wall of the city had twelve foundations:  And in them,
@c    the twelve names of the twelve apostles of the Lamb,

@c    21:15. And he that spoke with me had a measure of a reed of gold, to
@c    measure the city and the gates thereof and the wall.

@c    21:16. And the city lieth in a four-square:  and the length thereof is
@c    as great as the breadth.  And he measured the city with the golden reed
@c    for twelve thousand furlongs:  and the length and the height and the
@c    breadth thereof are equal.

@c    21:17. And he measured the wall thereof an hundred forty-four cubits,
@c    the measure of a man, which is of an angel.

@c    The measure of a man, i.e., According to the measure of men, and used
@c    by the angel. . .This seems to be the true meaning of these words.

@c    21:18. And the building of the wall thereof was of jasper stone:  but
@c    the city itself pure gold like to clear glass.

@c    21:19. And the foundations of the wall of the city were adorned with
@c    all manner of precious stones.  The first foundation was jasper:  the
@c    second, sapphire:  the third; a chalcedony:  the fourth, an emerald:

@c    21:20. The fifth, sardonyx:  the sixth, sardius:  the seventh,
@c    chrysolite:  the eighth, beryl:  the ninth, a topaz:  the tenth, a
@c    chrysoprasus:  the eleventh, a jacinth:  the twelfth, an amethyst.

@c    21:21. And the twelve gates are twelve pearls, one to each:  and every
@c    several gate was of one several pearl.  And the street of the city was
@c    pure gold, as it were, transparent glass.

@c    21:22. And I saw no temple therein.  For the Lord God Almighty is the
@c    temple thereof, and the Lamb.

@c    21:23. And the city hath no need of the sun, nor of the moon, to shine
@c    in it.  For the glory of God hath enlightened it:  and the Lamb is the
@c    lamp thereof.

@c    21:24. And the nations shall walk in the light of it:  and the kings of
@c    the earth shall bring their glory and honour into it.

@c    21:25. And the gates thereof shall not be shut by day:  for there shall
@c    be no night there.

@c    21:26. And they shall bring the glory and honour of the nations into
@c    it.

@c    21:27. There shall not enter into it any thing defiled or that worketh
@c    abomination or maketh a lie:  but they that are written in the book of
@c    life of the Lamb.



@c    Apocalypse Chapter 22


@c    The water and tree of life.  The conclusion.

@c    22:1. And he shewed me a river of water of life, clear as crystal,
@c    proceeding from the throne of God and of the Lamb.

@c    22:2. In the midst of the street thereof, and on both sides of the
@c    river, was the tree of life, bearing twelve fruits, yielding its fruits
@c    every month:  the leaves of the tree for the healing of the nations.

@c    22:3. And there shall be no curse any more:  but the throne of God and
@c    of the Lamb shall be in it.  And his servants shall serve him.

@c    22:4. And they shall see his face:  and his name shall be on their
@c    foreheads.

@c    22:5. And night shall be no more.  And they shall not need the light of
@c    the lamp, nor the light of the sun, because the Lord God shall
@c    enlighten then.  And they shall reign for ever and ever.

@c    22:6. And he said to me:  These words are most faithful and true.  And
@c    the Lord God of the spirits of the prophets sent his angel to shew his
@c    servant the things which must be done shortly.

@c    22:7. And:  Behold I come quickly.  Blessed is he that keepeth the words
@c    of the prophecy of this book.

@c    22:8. And I, John, who have heard and seen these things.  And, after I
@c    had heard and seen, I fell down to adore before the feet of the angel
@c    who shewed me the things.

@c    22:9. And he said to me:  See thou do it not.  For I am thy fellow
@c    servant, and of thy brethren the prophets and of them that keep the
@c    words of the prophecy of this book.  Adore God.

@c    22:10. And he saith to me:  Seal not the words of the prophecy of this
@c    book.  For the time is at hand.

@c    For the time is at hand. . .That is, when compared to eternity, all time
@c    and temporal things vanish, and are but of short duration.  As to the
@c    time when the chief predictions should come to pass, we have no
@c    certainty, as appears by the different opinions, both of the ancient
@c    fathers and late interpreters.  Many think that most things set down
@c    from the 4th chapter to the end, will not be fulfilled till a little
@c    time before the end of the world.  Others are of opinion, that a great
@c    part of them, and particularly the fall of the wicked Babylon, happened
@c    at the destruction of paganism, by the destruction of heathen Rome, and
@c    its persecuting heathen emperors.  Of these interpretations, see
@c    Aleazar, in his long commentary; see the learned Bossnet, bishop of
@c    Meaux, in his treatise on this Book; and P. Alleman, in his notes on
@c    the same Apocalypse, tom. 12, who in his Preface says, that this, in a
@c    great measure, may be now looked upon as the opinion followed by the
@c    learned men.  In fine, others think that St. John's design was in a
@c    mystical way, by metaphors and allegories, to represent the attempts
@c    and persecutions of the wicked against the servants of God, the
@c    punishments that should in a short time fall upon Babylon, that is,
@c    upon all the wicked in general:  the eternal happiness and reward, which
@c    God had reserved for the pious inhabitants of Jerusalem, that is, for
@c    his faithful servants, after their short trials and the tribulations of
@c    this mortal life.  In the mean time we meet with many profitable
@c    instructions and admonitions, which we may easily enough understand:
@c    but we have no certainty when we apply these predictions to particular
@c    events:  for as St. Jerome takes notice, the Apocalypse has as many
@c    mysteries as words, or rather mysteries in every word.  Apocalypsis
@c    Joannis tot habet Sacramenta quot verba--parum dixi, in verbis
@c    singulis multiplices latent intelligentiae.  Ep. ad Paulin, t. 4. p.
@c    574.  Edit.  Benedict.

@c    22:11. He that hurteth, let him hurt still:  and he that is filthy, let
@c    him be filthy still:  and he that is just, let him be justified still:
@c    and he that is holy, let him be sanctified still.

@c    Let him hurt still. . .It is not an exhortation, or license to go on in
@c    sin; but an intimation, that how far soever the wicked may proceed,
@c    their progress shall quickly end, and then they must expect to meet
@c    with proportionable punishments.

@c    22:12. Behold, I come quickly:  and my reward is with me, to render to
@c    every, man according to his works.

@c    22:13. I am Alpha and Omega, the First and the Last, the Beginning and
@c    the End.

@c    22:14. Blessed are they that wash their robes in the blood of the Lamb:
@c    that they may have a right to the tree of life and may enter in by the
@c    gates into the city.

@c    22:15. Without are dogs and sorcerers and unchaste and murderers and
@c    servers of idols and every one that loveth and maketh a lie.

@c    22:16. I, Jesus, have sent my angel, to testify to you these things in
@c    the churches.  I am the root and stock of David, the bright and morning
@c    star.

@c    22:17. And the spirit and the bride say:  Come.  And he that heareth, let
@c    him say:  Come.  And he that thirsteth, let him come.  And he that will,
@c    let him take the water of life, freely.

@c    22:18. For I testify to every one that heareth the words of the
@c    prophecy of this book:  If any man shall add to these things, God shall
@c    add unto him the plagues written in this book.

@c    22:19. And if any man shall take away from the words of the book of
@c    this prophecy, God shall take away his part out of the book of life,
@c    and out of the holy city, and from these things that are written in
@c    this book.

@c    22:20. He that giveth testimony of these things, saith:  Surely, I come
@c    quickly:  Amen.  Come, Lord Jesus.

@c    22:21. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all.  Amen.
