@c    THE EPISTLE OF ST. PAUL TO THE COLOSSIANS



@c    Colossa was a city of Phrygia, near Laodicea.  It does not appear that
@c    St. Paul had preached there himself, but that the Colossians were
@c    converted by Epaphras, a disciple of the Apostles.  However, as St. Paul
@c    was the great Apostle of the Gentiles, he wrote this Epistle to the
@c    Colossians when he was in prison, and about the same time that he wrote
@c    to the Ephesians and Philippians.  The exhortations and doctrine it
@c    contains are similar to that which is set forth in his Epistle to the
@c    Ephesians.



@c    Colossians Chapter 1


@c    He gives thanks for the grace bestowed upon the Colossians and prays
@c    for them.  Christ is the head of the church and the peacemaker through
@c    his blood.  Paul is his minister.

@c    1:1. Paul, an apostle of Jesus Christ, by the will of God, and Timothy,
@c    a brother:

@c    1:2. To the saints and faithful brethren in Christ Jesus who are at
@c    Colossa.

@c    1:3. Grace be to you and peace, from God our Father and from the Lord
@c    Jesus Christ.  We give thanks to God and the Father of our Lord Jesus
@c    Christ, praying always for you.

@c    1:4. Hearing your faith in Christ Jesus and the love which you have
@c    towards all the saints.

@c    1:5. For the hope that is laid up for you in heaven, which you have
@c    heard in the word of the truth of the gospel,

@c    1:6. Which is come unto you, as also it is in the whole world and
@c    bringeth forth fruit and groweth, even as it doth in you, since the day
@c    you heard and knew the grace of God in truth.

@c    1:7. As you learned of Epaphras, our most beloved fellow servant, who
@c    is for you a faithful minister of Christ Jesus;

@c    1:8. Who also hath manifested your love in the spirit.

@c    1:9. Therefore we also, from the day that we heard it, cease not to
@c    pray for you and to beg that you may be filled with the knowledge of
@c    his will, in all wisdom and spiritual understanding:

@c    1:10. That you may walk worthy of God, in all things pleasing; being
@c    fruitful in every good work and increasing in the knowledge of God:

@c    1:11. Strengthened with all might according to the power of his glory,
@c    in all patience and longsuffering with joy,

@c    1:12. Giving thanks to God the Father, who hath made us worthy to be
@c    partakers of the lot of the saints in light:

@c    1:13. Who hath delivered us from the power of darkness and hath
@c    translated us into the kingdom of the Son of his love,

@c    1:14. In whom we have redemption through his blood, the remission of
@c    sins:

@c    1:15. Who is the image of the invisible God, the firstborn of every
@c    creature:

@c    The firstborn. . .That is, first begotten; as the Evangelist declares,
@c    the only begotten of his Father:  hence, St. Chrisostom explains
@c    firstborn, not first created, as he was not created at all, but born of
@c    his Father before all ages; that is, coeval with the Father and with
@c    the Holy Ghost.

@c    1:16. For in him were all things created in heaven and on earth,
@c    visible and invisible, whether thrones, or dominations, or
@c    principalities, or powers.  All things were created by him and in him.

@c    1:17. And he is before all:  and by him all things consist.

@c    1:18. And he is the head of the body, the church:  who is the beginning,
@c    the firstborn from the dead, that in all things he may hold the
@c    primacy:

@c    1:19. Because in him, it hath well pleased the Father that all fulness
@c    should dwell:

@c    1:20. And through him to reconcile all things unto himself, making
@c    peace through the blood of his cross, both as to the things that are on
@c    earth and the things that are in heaven.

@c    1:21. And you, whereas you were some time alienated and enemies in mind
@c    in evil works:

@c    1:22. Yet now he hath reconciled in the body of his flesh through
@c    death, to present you holy and unspotted and blameless before him:

@c    1:23. If so ye continue in the faith, grounded and settled, and
@c    immoveable from the hope of the gospel which you have heard, which is
@c    preached in all the creation that is under heaven:  whereof I Paul am
@c    made a minister.

@c    1:24. Who now rejoice in my sufferings for you and fill up those things
@c    that are wanting of the sufferings of Christ, in my flesh, for his
@c    body, which is the church:

@c    Wanting. . .There is no want in the sufferings of Christ in himself as
@c    head:  but many sufferings are still wanting, or are still to come, in
@c    his body the church, and his members the faithful.

@c    1:25. Whereof I am made a minister according to the dispensation of
@c    God, which is given me towards you, that I may fulfil the word of God:

@c    1:26. The mystery which hath been hidden from ages and generations, but
@c    now is manifested to his saints,

@c    1:27. To whom God would make known the riches of the glory of this
@c    mystery among the Gentiles, which is Christ, in you the hope of glory.

@c    1:28. Whom we preach, admonishing every man and teaching every man in
@c    all wisdom, that we may present every man perfect in Christ Jesus.

@c    1:29. Wherein also I labour, striving according to his working which he
@c    worketh in me in power.



@c    Colossians Chapter 2


@c    He warns them against the impostures of the philosophers and the Jewish
@c    teachers, that would withdraw them from Christ.

@c    2:1. For I would have you know what manner of care I have for you and
@c    for them that are at Laodicea and whosoever have not seen my face in
@c    the flesh:

@c    2:2. That their hearts may be comforted, being instructed in charity
@c    and unto all riches of fulness of understanding, unto the knowledge of
@c    the mystery of God the Father and of Christ Jesus:

@c    2:3. In whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge.

@c    2:4. Now this I say, that no man may deceive you by loftiness of words.

@c    2:5. For though I be absent in body, yet in spirit I am with you,
@c    rejoicing, and beholding your order and the steadfastness of your faith
@c    which is in Christ.

@c    2:6. As therefore you have received Jesus Christ the Lord, walk ye in
@c    him:

@c    2:7. Rooted and built up in him and confirmed in the faith, as also you
@c    have learned:  abounding in him in thanksgiving.

@c    2:8. Beware lest any man cheat you by philosophy and vain deceit:
@c    according to the tradition of men according to the elements of the
@c    world and not according to Christ.

@c    2:9. For in him dwelleth all the fulness of the Godhead corporeally.

@c    2:10. And you are filled in him, who is the head of all principality
@c    and power.

@c    2:11. In whom also you are circumcised with circumcision not made by
@c    hand in despoiling of the body of the flesh:  but in the circumcision of
@c    Christ.

@c    2:12. Buried with him in baptism:  in whom also you are risen again by
@c    the faith of the operation of God who hath raised him up from the dead.

@c    2:13. And you, when you were dead in your sins and the uncircumcision
@c    of your flesh, he hath quickened together with him, forgiving you all
@c    offences:

@c    2:14. Blotting out the handwriting of the decree that was against us,
@c    which was contrary to us.  And he hath taken the same out of the way,
@c    fastening it to the cross.

@c    2:15. And despoiling the principalities and powers, he hath exposed
@c    them confidently in open shew, triumphing over them in himself.

@c    2:16. Let no man therefore judge you in meat or in drink or in respect
@c    of a festival day or of the new moon or of the sabbaths,

@c    In meat, etc. . .He means with regard to the Jewish observations of the
@c    distinction of clean and unclean meats; and of their festivals, new
@c    moons, and sabbaths, as being no longer obligatory.

@c    2:17. Which are a shadow of things to come:  but the body is of Christ.

@c    2:18. Let no man seduce you, willing in humility and religion of
@c    angels, walking in the things which he hath not seen, in vain puffed up
@c    by the sense of his flesh:

@c    Willing, etc. . .That is, by a self willed, self invented, superstitious
@c    worship, falsely pretending humility, but really proceeding from pride.
@c    Such was the worship, that many of the philosophers (against whom St.
@c    Paul speaks, ver. 8) paid to angels or demons, by sacrificing to them,
@c    as carriers of intelligence betwixt God and men; pretending humility in
@c    so doing, as if God was too great to be addressed by men; and setting
@c    aside the mediatorship of Jesus Christ, who is the head both of angels
@c    and men.  Such also was the worship paid by the ancient heretics,
@c    disciples of Simon and Menander, to the angels, whom they believed to
@c    be makers and lords of this lower world.  This is certain, that they
@c    whom the apostle here condemns, did not hold the head, (ver. 19,) that
@c    is, Jesus Christ, and his mediatorship; and therefore what he writes
@c    here no way touches the Catholic doctrine and practice, of desiring our
@c    good angels to pray to God for us, through Jesus Christ.  St. Jerome
@c    [Epist. ad Algas.] understands by the religion or service of angels,
@c    the Jewish teachers, who sought to subject the new Christians to the
@c    observance of the Mosaic law.

@c    2:19. And not holding the head, from which the whole body, by joints
@c    and bands, being supplied with nourishment and compacted, groweth into
@c    the increase of God.

@c    2:20. If then you be dead with Christ from the elements of this world,
@c    why do you yet decree as though living in the world?

@c    2:21. Touch not:  taste not:  handle not.

@c    Touch not, etc. . .The meaning is, that Christians should not subject
@c    themselves, either to the ordinances of the old law, forbidding
@c    touching or tasting things unclean; or to the superstitious invention
@c    of heretics, imposing such restraints, under pretence of wisdom,
@c    humility, or mortification.

@c    2:22. Which all are unto destruction by the very use, according to the
@c    precepts and doctrines of men.

@c    2:23. Which things have indeed a shew of wisdom in superstition and
@c    humility, and not sparing the body; not in any honour to the filling of
@c    the flesh.



@c    Colossians Chapter 3


@c    He exhorts them to put off the old man, and to put on the new.  The
@c    duties of wives and husbands, children and servants.

@c    3:1. Therefore if you be risen with Christ, seek the things that are
@c    above, where Christ is sitting at the right hand of God.

@c    3:2. Mind the things that are above, not the things that are upon the
@c    earth.

@c    3:3. For you are dead:  and your life is hid with Christ in God.

@c    3:4. When Christ shall appear, who is your life, then you also shall
@c    appear with him in glory.

@c    3:5. Mortify therefore your members which are upon the earth:
@c    fornication, uncleanness, lust, evil concupiscence and covetousness,
@c    which is the service of idols.

@c    3:6. For which things the wrath of God cometh upon the children of
@c    unbelief.

@c    3:7. In which you also walked some time, when you lived in them.

@c    3:8. But now put you also all away:  anger, indignation, malice,
@c    blasphemy, filthy speech out of your mouth.

@c    3:9. Lie not one to another:  stripping yourselves of the old man with
@c    his deeds,

@c    3:10. And putting on the new, him who is renewed unto knowledge,
@c    according to the image of him that created him.

@c    3:11. Where there is neither Gentile nor Jew, circumcision nor
@c    uncircumcision, Barbarian nor Scythian, bond nor free.  But Christ is
@c    all and in all.

@c    3:12. Put ye on therefore, as the elect of God, holy and beloved, the
@c    bowels of mercy, benignity, humility, modesty, patience:

@c    3:13. Bearing with one another and forgiving one another, if any have a
@c    complaint against another.  Even as the Lord hath forgiven you, so do
@c    you also.

@c    3:14. But above all these things have charity, which is the bond of
@c    perfection.

@c    3:15. And let the peace of Christ rejoice in your hearts, wherein also
@c    you are called in one body:  and be ye thankful.

@c    3:16. Let the word of Christ dwell in you abundantly:  in all wisdom,
@c    teaching and admonishing one another in psalms, hymns and spiritual
@c    canticles, singing in grace in your hearts to God.

@c    3:17. All whatsoever you do in word or in work, do all in the name of
@c    the Lord Jesus Christ, giving thanks to God and the Father by him.

@c    3:18. Wives, be subject to your husbands, as it behoveth in the Lord.

@c    3:19. Husbands, love your wives and be not bitter towards them.

@c    3:20. Children, obey your parents in all things:  for this is well
@c    pleasing to the Lord.

@c    3:21. Fathers, provoke not your children to indignation, lest they be
@c    discouraged.

@c    3:22. Servants, obey in all things your masters according to the flesh:
@c    not serving to the eye, as pleasing men:  but in simplicity of heart,
@c    fearing God.

@c    3:23. Whatsoever you do, do it from the heart, as to the Lord, and not
@c    to men:

@c    3:24. Knowing that you shall receive of the Lord the reward of
@c    inheritance.  Serve ye the Lord Christ.

@c    3:25. For he that doth wrong shall receive for that which he hath done
@c    wrongfully.  And there is no respect of persons with God.



@c    Colossians Chapter 4


@c    He recommends constant prayer and wisdom.  Various salutations.

@c    4:1. Masters, do to your servants that which is just and equal:  knowing
@c    that you also have a master in heaven.

@c    4:2. Be instant in prayer:  watching in it with thanksgiving.

@c    4:3. Praying withal for us also, that God may open unto us a door of
@c    speech to speak the mystery of Christ (for which also I am bound):

@c    4:4. That I may make it manifest as I ought to speak.

@c    4:5. Walk with wisdom towards them that are without, redeeming the
@c    time.

@c    4:6. Let your speech be always in grace seasoned with salt:  that you
@c    may know how you ought to answer every man.

@c    4:7. All the things that concern me, Tychicus, our dearest brother and
@c    faithful minister and fellow servant in the Lord, will make known to
@c    you.

@c    4:8. What I have sent to you for this same purpose, that he may know
@c    the things that concern you and comfort your hearts:

@c    4:9. With Onesimus, a most beloved and faithful brother, who is one of
@c    you.  All things that are done here, they shall make known to you.

@c    4:10. Aristarchus, my fellow prisoner, saluteth you:  and Mark, the
@c    cousin german of Barnabas, touching whom you have received
@c    commandments.  If he come unto you, receive him.

@c    4:11. And Jesus that is called Justus:  who are of the circumcision.
@c    These only are my helpers, in the kingdom of God:  who have been a
@c    comfort to me.

@c    4:12. Epaphras saluteth you, who is one of you, a servant of Christ
@c    Jesus, who is always solicitous for you in prayers, that you may stand
@c    perfect and full in all the will of God.

@c    4:13. For I bear him testimony that he hath much labour for you and for
@c    them that are at Laodicea and them at Hierapolis.

@c    4:14. Luke, the most dear physician, saluteth you:  and Demas.

@c    4:15. Salute the brethren who are at Laodicea:  and Nymphas and the
@c    church that is in his house.

@c    4:16. And when this epistle shall have been read with you, cause that
@c    it be read also in the church of the Laodiceans:  and that you read that
@c    which is of the Laodiceans.

@c    And that you read that which is of the Laodiceans. . .What this epistle
@c    was is uncertain, and annotators have given different opinions
@c    concerning it.  Some expound these words of an epistle which St. Paul
@c    wrote to the Laodiceans, and is since lost, for that now extant is no
@c    more than a collection of sentences out of the other epistles of St.
@c    Paul; therefore it cannot be considered even as a part of that epistle.
@c    Others explain that the text means a letter sent to St. Paul by the
@c    Laodiceans, which he sends to the Colossians to be read by them.
@c    However, this opinion does not seem well founded.  Hence it is more
@c    probable that St. Paul wrote an epistle from Rome to the Laodiceans,
@c    about the same time that he wrote to the Colossians, as he had them
@c    both equally at heart, and that he ordered that epistle to be read by
@c    the Colossians for their instructions; and being neighbouring cities,
@c    they might communicate to each other what they had received from him;
@c    as one epistle might contain some matters not related in the other, and
@c    would be equally useful for their concern; and more particularly as
@c    they were equally disturbed by intruders and false teachers, against
@c    which the apostle was anxious to warn them, lest they should be
@c    infected by their pernicious doctrine.

@c    4:17. And say to Archippus:  Take heed to the ministry which thou hast
@c    received in the Lord, that thou fulfil it.

@c    4:18. The salutation of Paul with my own hand.  Be mindful of my bands.
@c    Grace be with you.  Amen.
