@c    THE EPISTLE OF ST. PAUL TO THE EPHESIANS



@c    Ephesus was the capital of Lesser Asia, and celebrated for the temple
@c    of Diana, to which the most part of the people of the East went
@c    frequently to worship.  But St. Paul having preached the Gospel there,
@c    for two years the first time and afterwards for about a year, converted
@c    many.  He wrote this Epistle to them when he was a prisoner in Rome; and
@c    sent it by Tychicus.  He admonishes them to hold firmly the faith which
@c    they had received and warns them, and also those of the neighbouring
@c    cities, against the sophistry of philosophers and doctrine of false
@c    teachers who were come among them.  The matters of faith contained in
@c    this Epistle are exceedingly sublime, and consequently very difficult
@c    to be understood.  It was written about twenty-nine years after our
@c    Lord's Ascension.



@c    Ephesians Chapter 1


@c    The great blessings we have received through Christ.  He is the head of
@c    all the church.

@c    1:1. Paul, an apostle of Jesus Christ, by the will of God, to all the
@c    saints who are at Ephesus and to the faithful in Christ Jesus.

@c    1:2. Grace be to you and peace, from God the Father and from the Lord
@c    Jesus Christ.

@c    1:3. Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who hath
@c    blessed us with spiritual blessings in heavenly places, in Christ:

@c    In heavenly places. . .or, in heavenly things.  In coelestibus.

@c    1:4. As he chose us in him before the foundation of the world, that we
@c    should be holy and unspotted in his sight in charity.

@c    1:5. Who hath predestinated us unto the adoption of children through
@c    Jesus Christ unto himself:  according to the purpose of his will:

@c    1:6. Unto the praise of the glory of his grace, in which he hath graced
@c    us, in his beloved son.

@c    1:7. In whom we have redemption through his blood, the remission of
@c    sins, according to the riches of his, grace,

@c    1:8. Which hath superabounded in us, in all wisdom and prudence,

@c    1:9. That he might make known unto us the mystery of his will,
@c    according to his good pleasure, which he hath purposed in him,

@c    1:10. In the dispensation of the fulness of times, to re-establish all
@c    things in Christ, that are in heaven and on earth, in him.

@c    1:11. In whom we also are called by lot, being predestinated according
@c    to the purpose of him who worketh all things according to the counsel
@c    of his will.

@c    1:12. That we may be unto the praise of his glory:  we who before hoped
@c    in Christ:

@c    1:13. In whom you also, after you had heard the word of truth (the
@c    gospel of your salvation), in whom also believing, you were signed with
@c    the holy Spirit of promise.

@c    1:14. Who is the pledge of our inheritance, unto the redemption of
@c    acquisition, unto the praise of his glory.

@c    Acquisition. . .that is, a purchased possession.

@c    1:15. Wherefore, I also, hearing of your faith that is in the Lord
@c    Jesus and of your love towards all the saints,

@c    1:16. Cease not to give thanks for you, making commemoration of you in
@c    my prayers,

@c    1:17. That the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of glory, may
@c    give unto you the spirit of wisdom and of revelation, in the knowledge
@c    of him:

@c    1:18. The eyes of your heart enlightened that you may know what the
@c    hope is of his calling and what are the riches of the glory of his
@c    inheritance in the saints.

@c    1:19. And what is the exceeding greatness of his power towards us, who
@c    believe according to the operation of the might of his power,

@c    1:20. Which he wrought in Christ, raising him up from the dead and
@c    setting him on his right hand in the heavenly places.

@c    1:21. Above all principality and power and virtue and dominion and
@c    every name that is named, not only in this world, but also in that
@c    which is to come.

@c    1:22. And he hath subjected all things under his feet and hath made him
@c    head over all the church,

@c    1:23. Which is his body and the fulness of him who is filled all in
@c    all.



@c    Ephesians Chapter 2


@c    All our good comes through Christ.  He is our peace.

@c    2:1. And you, when you were dead in your offences and sins,

@c    2:2. Wherein in time past you walked according to the course of this
@c    world, according to the prince of the power of this air, of the spirit
@c    that now worketh on the children of unbelief:

@c    2:3. In which also we all conversed in time past, in the desires of our
@c    flesh, fulfilling the will of the flesh and of our thoughts, and were
@c    by nature children of wrath, even as the rest:

@c    2:4. But God (who is rich in mercy) for his exceeding charity wherewith
@c    he loved us

@c    2:5. Even when we were dead in sins, hath quickened us together in
@c    Christ (by whose grace you are saved)

@c    2:6. And hath raised us up together and hath made us sit together in
@c    the heavenly places, through Christ Jesus.

@c    2:7. That he might shew in the ages to come the abundant riches of his
@c    grace, in his bounty towards us in Christ Jesus.

@c    2:8. For by grace you are saved through faith:  and that not of
@c    yourselves, for it is the gift of God.

@c    2:9. Not of works, that no man may glory.

@c    Not of works. . .as of our own growth, or from ourselves; but as from
@c    the grace of God.

@c    2:10. For we are his workmanship, created in Christ Jesus in good
@c    works, which God hath prepared that we should walk in them.

@c    2:11. For which cause be mindful that you, being heretofore gentiles is
@c    the flesh, who are called uncircumcision by that which is called
@c    circumcision in the flesh, made by hands:

@c    2:12. That you were at that time without Christ, being aliens from the
@c    conversation of Israel and strangers to the testament, having no hope
@c    of the promise and without God in this world.

@c    2:13. But now in Christ Jesus, you, who some time were afar off, are
@c    made nigh by the blood of Christ.

@c    2:14. For he is our peace, who hath made both one, and breaking down
@c    the middle wall of partition, the enmities in his flesh:

@c    2:15. Making void the law of commandments contained in decrees:  that he
@c    might make the two in himself into one new man, making peace

@c    2:16. And might reconcile both to God in one body by the cross, killing
@c    the enmities in himself.

@c    2:17. And coming, he preached peace to you that were afar off:  and
@c    peace to them that were nigh.

@c    2:18. For by him we have access both in one Spirit to the Father.

@c    2:19. Now therefore you are no more strangers and foreigners:  but you
@c    are fellow citizens with the saints and the domestics of God,

@c    2:20. Built upon the foundation of the apostles and prophets, Jesus
@c    Christ himself being the chief corner stone:

@c    2:21. In whom all the building, being framed together, groweth up into
@c    an holy temple in the Lord.

@c    2:22. In whom you also are built together into an habitation of God in
@c    the Spirit.



@c    Ephesians Chapter 3


@c    The mystery hidden from former ages was discovered to the apostle, to
@c    be imparted to the Gentiles.  He prays that they may be strengthened in
@c    God.

@c    3:1. For this cause, I Paul, the prisoner of Jesus Christ, for you
@c    Gentiles:

@c    3:2. If yet you have heard of the dispensation of the grace of God
@c    which is given me towards you:

@c    3:3. How that, according to revelation, the mystery has been made known
@c    to me, as I have written above in a few words:

@c    3:4. As you reading, may understand my knowledge in the mystery of
@c    Christ,

@c    3:5. Which in other generations was not known to the sons of men, as it
@c    is now revealed to his holy apostles and prophets in the Spirit:

@c    3:6. That the Gentiles should be fellow heirs and of the same body:  and
@c    copartners of his promise in Christ Jesus, by the gospel

@c    3:7. Of which I am made a minister, according to the gift of the grace
@c    of God, which is given to me according to the operation of his power.

@c    3:8. To me, the least of all the saints, is given this grace, to preach
@c    among the Gentiles the unsearchable riches of Christ:

@c    3:9. And to enlighten all men, that they may see what is the
@c    dispensation of the mystery which hath been hidden from eternity in God
@c    who created all things:

@c    3:10. That the manifold wisdom of God may be made known to the
@c    principalities and powers in heavenly places through the church,

@c    3:11. According to the eternal purpose which he made in Christ Jesus
@c    our Lord:

@c    3:12. In whom we have boldness and access with confidence by the faith
@c    of him.

@c    3:13. Wherefore I pray you not to faint at my tribulations for you,
@c    which is your glory.

@c    3:14. For this cause I bow my knees to the Father of our Lord Jesus
@c    Christ,

@c    3:15. Of whom all paternity in heaven and earth is named:

@c    All paternity. . .Or, the whole family.  God is the Father, both of
@c    angels and men; whosoever besides is named father, is so named with
@c    subordination to him.

@c    3:16. That he would grant you, according to the riches of his glory, to
@c    be strengthened by his Spirit with might unto the inward man:

@c    3:17. That Christ may dwell by faith in your hearts:  that, being rooted
@c    and founded in charity,

@c    3:18. You may be able to comprehend, with all the saints, what is the
@c    breadth and length and height and depth,

@c    3:19. To know also the charity of Christ, which surpasseth all
@c    knowledge:  that you may be filled unto all the fulness of God.

@c    3:20. Now to him who is able to do all things more abundantly than we
@c    desire or understand, according to the power that worketh in us:

@c    3:21. To him be glory in the church and in Christ Jesus, unto all
@c    generations, world without end.  Amen.



@c    Ephesians Chapter 4


@c    He exhorts them to unity, to put on the new man, and to fly sin.

@c    4:1. I therefore, a prisoner in the Lord, beseech you that you walk
@c    worthy of the vocation in which you are called:

@c    4:2. With all humility and mildness, with patience, supporting one
@c    another in charity.

@c    4:3. Careful to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace.

@c    4:4. One body and one Spirit:  as you are called in one hope of your
@c    calling.

@c    4:5. One Lord, one faith, one baptism.

@c    4:6. One God and Father of all, who is above all, and through all, and
@c    in us all.

@c    4:7. But to every one of us is given grace, according to the measure of
@c    the giving of Christ.

@c    4:8. Wherefore he saith:  Ascending on high, he led captivity captive:
@c    he gave gifts to men.

@c    4:9. Now that he ascended, what is it, but because he also descended
@c    first into the lower parts of the earth?

@c    4:10. He that descended is the same also that ascended above all the
@c    heavens:  that he might fill all things.

@c    4:11. And he gave some apostles, and some prophets, and other some
@c    evangelists, and other some pastors and doctors:

@c    Gave some apostles--Until we all meet, etc. . .Here it is plainly
@c    expressed, that Christ has left in his church a perpetual succession of
@c    orthodox pastors and teachers, to preserve the faithful in unity and
@c    truth.

@c    4:12. For the perfecting of the saints, for the word of the ministry,
@c    for the edifying of the body of Christ:

@c    4:13. Until we all meet into the unity of faith and of the knowledge of
@c    the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the age of the
@c    fulness of Christ:

@c    4:14. That henceforth we be no more children tossed to and fro and
@c    carried about with every wind of doctrine, by the wickedness of men, by
@c    cunning craftiness by which they lie in wait to deceive.

@c    4:15. But doing the truth in charity, we may in all things grow up in
@c    him who is the head, even Christ:

@c    4:16. From whom the whole body, being compacted and fitly joined
@c    together, by what every joint supplieth, according to the operation in
@c    the measure of every part, maketh increase of the body, unto the
@c    edifying of itself in charity.

@c    4:17. This then I say and testify in the Lord:  That henceforward you
@c    walk not as also the Gentiles walk in the vanity of their mind:

@c    4:18. Having their understanding darkened:  being alienated from the
@c    life of God through the ignorance that is in them, because of the
@c    blindness of their hearts.

@c    4:19. Who despairing have given themselves up to lasciviousness, unto
@c    the working of all uncleanness, unto covetousness.

@c    4:20. But you have not so learned Christ:

@c    4:21. If so be that you have heard him and have been taught in him, as
@c    the truth is in Jesus:

@c    4:22. To put off, according to former conversation, the old man, who is
@c    corrupted according to the desire of error.

@c    4:23. And be renewed in spirit of your mind:

@c    4:24. And put on the new man, who according to God is created in
@c    justice and holiness of truth.

@c    4:25. Wherefore, putting away lying, speak ye the truth, every man with
@c    his neighbour.  For we are members one of another.

@c    4:26. Be angry:  and sin not.  Let not the sun go down upon your anger.

@c    4:27. Give not place to the devil.

@c    4:28. He that stole, let him now steal no more:  but rather let him
@c    labour, working with his hands the thing which is good, that he may
@c    have something to give to him that suffereth need.

@c    4:29. Let no evil speech proceed from your mouth:  but that which is
@c    good, to the edification of faith:  that it may administer grace to the
@c    hearers.

@c    4:30. And grieve not the holy Spirit of God:  whereby you are sealed
@c    unto the day of redemption.

@c    4:31. Let all bitterness and anger and indignation and clamour and
@c    blasphemy be put away from you, with all malice.

@c    4:32. And be ye kind one to another:  merciful, forgiving one another,
@c    even as God hath forgiven you in Christ.



@c    Ephesians Chapter 5


@c    Exhortations to a virtuous life.  The mutual duties of man and wife, by
@c    the example of Christ and of the Church.

@c    5:1. Be ye therefore followers of God, as most dear children:

@c    5:2. And walk in love, as Christ also hath loved us and hath delivered
@c    himself for us, an oblation and a sacrifice to God for an odour of
@c    sweetness.

@c    5:3. But fornication and all uncleanness or covetousness, let it not so
@c    much as be named among you, as becometh saints:

@c    5:4. Or obscenity or foolish talking or scurrility, which is to no
@c    purpose:  but rather giving of thanks.

@c    5:5. For know you this and understand:  That no fornicator or unclean or
@c    covetous person (which is a serving of idols) hath inheritance in the
@c    kingdom of Christ and of God.

@c    5:6. Let no man deceive you with vain words.  For because of these
@c    things cometh the anger of God upon the children of unbelief.

@c    5:7. Be ye not therefore partakers with them.

@c    5:8. For you were heretofore darkness, but now light in the Lord.  Walk
@c    then as children of the light.

@c    5:9. For the fruit of the light is in all goodness and justice and
@c    truth:

@c    5:10. Proving what is well pleasing to God.

@c    5:11. And have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness:  but
@c    rather reprove them.

@c    5:12. For the things that are done by them in secret, it is a shame
@c    even to speak of.

@c    5:13. But all things that are reproved are made manifest by the light:
@c    for all that is made manifest is light.

@c    5:14. Wherefore he saith:  Rise, thou that sleepest, and arise from the
@c    dead:  and Christ shall enlighten thee.

@c    5:15. See therefore, brethren, how you walk circumspectly:  not as
@c    unwise,

@c    5:16. But as wise:  redeeming the time, because the days are evil.

@c    5:17. Wherefore, become not unwise:  but understanding what is the will
@c    of God.

@c    5:18. And be not drunk with wine, wherein is luxury:  but be ye filled
@c    with the Holy Spirit,

@c    5:19. Speaking to yourselves in psalms and hymns and spiritual
@c    canticles, singing and making melody in your hearts to the Lord:

@c    5:20. Giving thanks always for all things, in the name of our Lord
@c    Jesus Christ, to God and the Father:

@c    5:21. Being subject one to another, in the fear of Christ.

@c    5:22. Let women be subject to their husbands, as to the Lord:

@c    5:23. Because the husband is the head of the wife, as Christ is the
@c    head of the church.  He is the saviour of his body.

@c    5:24. Therefore as the church is subject to Christ:  so also let the
@c    wives be to their husbands in all things.

@c    As the church is subject to Christ. . .The church then, according to St.
@c    Paul, is ever obedient to Christ, and can never fall from him, but
@c    remain faithful to him, unspotted and unchanged to the end of the
@c    world.

@c    5:25. Husbands, love your wives, as Christ also loved the church and
@c    delivered himself up for it:

@c    5:26. That he might sanctify it, cleansing it by the laver of water in
@c    the word of life:

@c    5:27. That he might present it to himself, a glorious church, not
@c    having spot or wrinkle or any such thing; but that it should be holy
@c    and without blemish.

@c    5:28. So also ought men to love their wives as their own bodies.  He
@c    that loveth his wife loveth himself.

@c    5:29. For no man ever hated his own flesh, but nourisheth and
@c    cherisheth it, as also Christ doth the church:

@c    5:30. Because we are members of him, body, of his flesh and of his
@c    bones.

@c    5:31. For this cause shall a man leave his father and mother:  and shall
@c    cleave to his wife.  And they shall be two in one flesh.

@c    5:32. This is a great sacrament:  but I speak in Christ and in the
@c    church.

@c    5:33. Nevertheless, let every one of you in particular love for his
@c    wife as himself:  And let the wife fear her husband.



@c    Ephesians Chapter 6


@c    Duties of children and servants.  The Christian's armour.

@c    6:1. Children, obey your parents in the Lord:  for this is just.

@c    6:2. Honour thy father and thy mother, which is the first commandment
@c    with a promise:

@c    6:3. That it may be well with thee, and thou mayest be long lived upon
@c    earth.

@c    6:4. And you, fathers, provoke not your children to anger:  but bring
@c    them up in the discipline and correction of the Lord.

@c    6:5. Servants, be obedient to them that are your lords according to the
@c    flesh, with fear and trembling, in the simplicity of your heart, as to
@c    Christ.

@c    6:6. Not serving to the eye, as it were pleasing men:  but, as the
@c    servants of Christ, doing the will of God from the heart.

@c    6:7. With a good will serving, as to the Lord, and not to men.

@c    6:8. Knowing that whatsoever good thing any man shall do, the same
@c    shall he receive from the Lord, whether he be bond or free.

@c    6:9. And you, masters, do the same things to them, forbearing
@c    threatenings:  knowing that the Lord both of them and you is in heaven.
@c    And there is no respect of persons with him.

@c    6:10. Finally, brethren, be strengthened in the Lord and in the might
@c    of his power.

@c    6:11. Put you on the armour of God, that you may be able to stand
@c    against the deceits of the devil.

@c    6:12. For our wrestling is not against flesh and blood; but against
@c    principalities and powers, against the rulers of the world of this
@c    darkness, against the spirits of wickedness in the high places.

@c    High places, or heavenly places. . .That is to say, in the air, the
@c    lowest of the celestial regions; in which God permits these wicked
@c    spirits or fallen angels to wander.

@c    6:13. Therefore, take unto you the armour of God, that you may be able
@c    to resist in the evil day and to stand in all things perfect.

@c    6:14. Stand therefore, having your loins girt about with truth and
@c    having on the breastplate of justice:

@c    6:15. And your feet shod with the preparation of the gospel of peace.

@c    6:16. In all things taking the shield of faith, wherewith you may be
@c    able to extinguish all the fiery darts of the most wicked one.

@c    6:17. And take unto you the helmet of salvation and the sword of the
@c    Spirit (which is the word of God).

@c    6:18. By all prayer and supplication praying at all times in the
@c    spirit:  and in the same watching with all instance and supplication for
@c    all the saints:

@c    6:19. And for me, that speech may be given me, that I may open my mouth
@c    with confidence, to make known the mystery of the gospel,

@c    6:20. For which I am an ambassador in a chain:  so that therein I may be
@c    bold to speak according as I ought.

@c    6:21. But that you also may know the things that concern me and what I
@c    am doing, Tychicus, my dearest brother and faithful minister in the
@c    Lord, will make known to you all things:

@c    6:22. Whom I have sent to you for this same purpose:  that you may know
@c    the things concerning us, and that he may comfort your hearts.

@c    6:23. Peace be to the brethren and charity with faith, from God the
@c    Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.

@c    6:24. Grace be with all them that love our Lord Jesus Christ in
@c    incorruption.  Amen.

@c    In incorruption. . .That is, with a pure and perfect love.
