@c    THE EPISTLE OF ST. PAUL TO THE GALATIANS



@c    The Galatians, soon after St. Paul had preached the Gospel to them,
@c    were seduced by some false teachers, who had been Jews and who were for
@c    obliging all Christians, even those who had been Gentiles, to observe
@c    circumcision and the other ceremonies of the Mosaical law.  In this
@c    Epistle, he refutes the pernicious doctrine of those teachers and also
@c    their calumny against his mission and apostleship.  The subject matter
@c    of this Epistle is much the same as that to the Romans.  It was written
@c    at Ephesus, about twenty-three years after our Lord's Ascension.



@c    Galatians Chapter 1


@c    He blames the Galatians for suffering themselves to be imposed upon by
@c    new teachers.  The apostle's calling.

@c    1:1. Paul, an apostle, not of men, neither by man, but by Jesus Christ
@c    and God the Father, who raised him from the dead:

@c    1:2. And all the brethren who are with me:  to the churches of Galatia.

@c    1:3. Grace be to you, and peace from God the Father and from our Lord
@c    Jesus Christ,

@c    1:4. Who gave himself for our sins, that he might deliver us from this
@c    present wicked world, according to the will of God and our Father:

@c    1:5. To whom is glory for ever and ever.  Amen.

@c    1:6. I wonder that you are so soon removed from him that called you
@c    into the grace of Christ, unto another gospel.

@c    1:7. Which is not another:  only there are some that trouble you and
@c    would pervert the gospel of Christ.

@c    1:8. But though we, or an angel from heaven, preach a gospel to you
@c    besides that which we have preached to you, let him be anathema.

@c    1:9. As we said before, so now I say again:  If any one preach to you a
@c    gospel, besides that which you have received, let him be anathema.

@c    1:10. For do I now persuade men, or God?  Or do I seek to please men?  If
@c    I yet pleased men, I should not be the servant of Christ.

@c    1:11. For I give you to understand, brethren, that the gospel which was
@c    preached by me is not according to man.

@c    1:12. For neither did I receive it of man:  nor did I learn it but by
@c    the revelation of Jesus Christ.

@c    1:13. For you have heard of my conversation in time past in the Jews'
@c    religion:  how that, beyond measure, I persecuted the church of God and
@c    wasted it.

@c    1:14. And I made progress in the Jew's religion above many of my equals
@c    in my own nation, being more abundantly zealous for the traditions of
@c    my fathers.

@c    1:15. But when it pleased him who separated me from my mother's womb
@c    and called me by his grace,

@c    1:16. To reveal his Son in me, that I might preach him among the
@c    Gentiles:  immediately I condescended not to flesh and blood.

@c    1:17. Neither went I to Jerusalem, to the apostles who were before me:
@c    but I went into Arabia, and again I returned to Damascus.

@c    1:18. Then, after three years, I went to Jerusalem to see Peter:  and I
@c    tarried with him fifteen days.

@c    1:19. But other of the apostles I saw none, saving James the brother of
@c    the Lord.

@c    1:20. Now the things which I write to you, behold, before God, I lie
@c    not.

@c    1:21. Afterwards, I came into the regions of Syria and Cilicia.

@c    1:22. And I was unknown by face to the churches of Judea, which were in
@c    Christ:

@c    1:23. But they had heard only:  He, who persecuted us in times past doth
@c    now preach the faith which once he impugned.

@c    1:24. And they glorified God in me.



@c    Galatians Chapter 2


@c    The apostle's preaching was approved of by the other apostles.  The
@c    Gentiles were not to be constrained to the observance of the law.

@c    2:1. Then, after fourteen years, I went up again to Jerusalem with
@c    Barnabas, taking Titus also with me.

@c    2:2. And I went up according to revelation and communicated to them the
@c    gospel which I preach among the Gentiles:  but apart to them who seemed
@c    to be some thing:  lest perhaps I should run or had run in vain.

@c    2:3. But neither Titus, who was with me, being a Gentile, was compelled
@c    to be circumcised.

@c    2:4. But because of false brethren unawares brought in, who came in
@c    privately to spy our liberty which we have in Christ Jesus, that they
@c    might bring us into servitude.

@c    2:5. To whom we yielded not by subjection:  no, not for an hour:  that
@c    the truth of the gospel might continue with you.

@c    2:6. But of them who seemed to be some thing, (what they were some time
@c    it is nothing to me, God accepteth not the person of man):  for to me
@c    they that seemed to be some thing added nothing.

@c    2:7. But contrariwise, when they had seen that to me was committed the
@c    gospel of the uncircumcision, as to Peter was that of the circumcision.

@c    The gospel of the uncircumcision. . .The preaching of the gospel to the
@c    uncircumcised, that is, to the Gentiles.  St. Paul was called in an
@c    extraordinary manner to be the apostle of the Gentiles; St. Peter,
@c    besides his general commission over the whole flock, (John 21. 15,
@c    etc.,) had a peculiar charge of the people of the circumcision, that
@c    is, of the Jews.

@c    2:8. (For he who wrought in Peter to the apostleship of the
@c    circumcision wrought in me also among the Gentiles.)

@c    2:9. And when they had known the grace that was given to me, James and
@c    Cephas and John, who seemed to be pillars, gave to me and Barnabas the
@c    right hands of fellowship:  that we should go unto the Gentiles, and
@c    they unto the circumcision:

@c    2:10. Only that we should be mindful of the poor:  which same thing also
@c    I was careful to do.

@c    2:11. But when Cephas was come to Antioch, I withstood him to the face,
@c    because he was to be blamed.

@c    I withstood, etc. . .The fault that is here noted in the conduct of St.
@c    Peter, was only a certain imprudence, in withdrawing himself from the
@c    table of the Gentiles, for fear of giving offence to the Jewish
@c    converts; but this, in such circumstances, when his so doing might be
@c    of ill consequence to the Gentiles, who might be induced thereby to
@c    think themselves obliged to conform to the Jewish way of living, to the
@c    prejudice of their Christian liberty.  Neither was St. Paul's
@c    reprehending him any argument against his supremacy; for in such cases
@c    an inferior may, and sometimes ought, with respect, to admonish his
@c    superior.

@c    2:12. For before that some came from James, he did eat with the
@c    Gentiles:  but when they were come, he withdrew and separated himself,
@c    fearing them who were of the circumcision.

@c    2:13. And to his dissimulation the rest of the Jews consented:  so that
@c    Barnabas also was led by them into that dissimulation.

@c    2:14. But when I saw that they walked not uprightly unto the truth of
@c    the gospel, I said to Cephas before them all:  If thou, being a Jew,
@c    livest after the manner of the Gentiles and not as the Jews do, how
@c    dost thou compel the Gentiles to live as do the Jews?

@c    2:15. We by nature are Jews:  and not of the Gentiles, sinners.

@c    2:16. But knowing that man is not justified by the works of the law,
@c    but by the faith of Jesus Christ, we also believe in Christ Jesus, that
@c    we may be justified by the faith of Christ and not by the works of the
@c    law:  because by the works of the law no flesh shall be justified.

@c    2:17. But if, while we seek to be justified in Christ, we ourselves
@c    also are found sinners, is Christ then the minister of sin?  God forbid!

@c    2:18. For if I build up again the things which I have destroyed, I make
@c    myself a prevaricator.

@c    2:19. For I, through the law, am dead to the law, that I may live to
@c    God; with Christ I am nailed to the cross.

@c    2:20. And I live, now not I:  but Christ liveth in me.  And that I live
@c    now in the flesh:  I live in the faith of the Son of God, who loved me
@c    and delivered himself for me.

@c    2:21. I cast not away the grace of God.  For if justice be by the law,
@c    then Christ died in vain.



@c    Galatians Chapter 3


@c    The Spirit, and the blessing promised to Abraham cometh not by the law,
@c    but by faith.

@c    3:1. O senseless Galatians, who hath bewitched you that you should not
@c    obey the truth:  before whose eyes Jesus Christ hath been set forth,
@c    crucified among you?

@c    3:2. This only would I learn of you:  Did you receive the Spirit by the
@c    works of the law or by the hearing of faith?

@c    3:3. Are you so foolish that, whereas you began in the Spirit, you
@c    would now be made perfect by the flesh?

@c    3:4. Have you suffered so great things in vain?  If it be yet in vain.

@c    3:5. He therefore who giveth to you the Spirit and worketh miracles
@c    among you:  doth he do it by the works of the law or by the hearing of
@c    the faith?

@c    3:6. As it is written:  Abraham believed God:  and it was reputed to him
@c    unto justice.

@c    3:7. Know ye, therefore, that they who are of faith, the same are the
@c    children of Abraham.

@c    3:8. And the scripture, foreseeing that God justifieth the Gentiles by
@c    faith, told unto Abraham before:  In thee shall all nations be blessed.

@c    3:9. Therefore, they that are of faith shall be blessed with faithful
@c    Abraham.

@c    3:10. For as many as are of the works of the law are under a curse.  For
@c    it is written:  Cursed is every one that abideth, not in all things
@c    which are written in the book of the law to do them.

@c    3:11. But that in the law no man is justified with God, it is manifest:
@c    because the just man liveth by faith.

@c    3:12. But the law is not of faith:  but he that doth those things shall
@c    live in them.

@c    3:13. Christ hath redeemed us from the curse of the law, being made a
@c    curse for us (for it is written:  Cursed is every one that hangeth on a
@c    tree).

@c    3:14. That the blessing of Abraham might come on the Gentiles through
@c    Christ Jesus:  that we may receive the promise of the Spirit by faith.

@c    3:15. Brethren (I speak after the manner of man), yet a man's
@c    testament, if it be confirmed, no man despiseth nor addeth to it.

@c    3:16. To Abraham were the promises made and to his seed.  He saith not:
@c    And to his seeds as of many.  But as of one:  And to thy seed, which is
@c    Christ.

@c    3:17. Now this I say:  that the testament which was confirmed by God,
@c    the law which was made after four hundred and thirty years doth not
@c    disannul, to make the promise of no effect.

@c    3:18. For if the inheritance be of the law, it is no more of promise.
@c    But God gave it to Abraham by promise.

@c    3:19. Why then was the law?  It was set because of transgressions, until
@c    the seed should come to whom he made the promise, being ordained by
@c    angels in the hand of a mediator.

@c    Because of transgressions. . .To restrain them from sin, by fear and
@c    threats.  Ordained by angels. . .The law was delivered by angels,
@c    speaking in the name and person of God to Moses, who was the mediator,
@c    on this occasion, between God and the people.

@c    3:20. Now a mediator is not of one:  but God is one.

@c    3:21. Was the law then against the promises of God:  God forbid!  For if
@c    there had been a law given which could give life, verily justice should
@c    have been by the law.

@c    3:22. But the scripture hath concluded all under sin, that the promise,
@c    by the faith of Jesus Christ, might be given to them that believe.

@c    Hath concluded all under sin. . .that is, hath declared all to be under
@c    sin, from which they could not be delivered but by faith in Jesus
@c    Christ, the promised seed.

@c    3:23. But before the faith came, we were kept under the law shut up,
@c    unto that faith which was to be revealed.

@c    3:24. Wherefore the law was our pedagogue in Christ:  that we might be
@c    justified by faith.

@c    Pedagogue. . .That is, schoolmaster, conductor, or instructor.

@c    3:25. But after the faith is come, we are no longer under a pedagogue.

@c    3:26. For you are all the children of God, by faith in Christ Jesus.

@c    3:27. For as many of you as have been baptized in Christ have put on
@c    Christ.

@c    3:28. There is neither Jew nor Greek:  there is neither bond nor free:
@c    there is neither male nor female.  For you are all one in Christ Jesus.

@c    Neither Jew, etc. . .That is, no distinction of Jew, etc.

@c    3:29. And if you be Christ's, then are you the seed of Abraham, heirs
@c    according to the promise.



@c    Galatians Chapter 4


@c    Christ has freed us from the servitude of the law.  We are the freeborn
@c    sons of Abraham.

@c    4:1. As long as the heir is a child, he differeth nothing from a
@c    servant, though he be lord of all,

@c    4:2. But is under tutors and governors until the time appointed by the
@c    father.

@c    4:3. So we also, when we were children, were serving under the elements
@c    of the world.

@c    Under the elements, etc. . .That is, under the first rudiments of
@c    religion, in which the carnal Jews were trained up; or under those
@c    corporeal creatures, used in their manifold rites, sacrifices, and
@c    sacraments.

@c    4:4. But when the fulness of the time was come, God sent his Son, made
@c    of a woman, made under the law:

@c    4:5. That he might redeem them who were under the law:  that we might
@c    receive the adoption of sons.

@c    4:6. And because you are sons, God hath sent the Spirit of his Son into
@c    your hearts, crying:  Abba, Father.

@c    4:7. Therefore, now he is not a servant, but a son.  And if a son, an
@c    heir also through God.

@c    4:8. But then indeed, not knowing God, you served them who, by nature,
@c    are not gods.

@c    4:9. But now, after that you have known God, or rather are known by
@c    God:  how turn you again to the weak and needy elements which you desire
@c    to serve again?

@c    4:10. You observe days and months and times, and years.

@c    You observe days, etc. . .He speaks not of the observation of the Lord's
@c    day, or other Christian festivals; but either of the superstitious
@c    observation of days lucky and unlucky; or else of the Jewish festivals,
@c    to the observance of which, certain Jewish teachers sought to induce
@c    the Galatians.

@c    4:11. I am afraid of you, lest perhaps I have laboured in vain among
@c    you.

@c    4:12. Be ye as I, because I also am as you brethren, I beseech you.  You
@c    have not injured me at all.

@c    4:13. And you know how, through infirmity of the flesh, I preached the
@c    gospel to you heretofore:  and your temptation in my flesh

@c    4:14. You despised not, nor rejected:  but received me as an angel of
@c    God, even as Christ Jesus.

@c    4:15. Where is then your blessedness?  For I bear you witness that, if
@c    it could be done, you would have plucked out your own eyes and would
@c    have given them to me.

@c    4:16. Am I then become your enemy, because I tell you the truth?

@c    4:17. They are zealous in your regard not well:  but they would exclude
@c    you, that you might be zealous for them.

@c    4:18. But be zealous for that which is good in a good thing always:  and
@c    not only when I am present with you.

@c    4:19. My little children, of whom I am in labour again, until Christ be
@c    formed in you.

@c    4:20. And I would willingly be present with you now and change my
@c    voice:  because I am ashamed for you.

@c    4:21. Tell me, you that desire to be under the law, have you not read
@c    the law?

@c    4:22. For it is written that Abraham had two sons:  the one by a
@c    bondwoman and the other by a free woman.

@c    4:23. But he who was of the bondwoman was born according to the flesh:
@c    but he of the free woman was by promise.

@c    4:24. Which things are said by an allegory.  For these are the two
@c    testaments.  The one from Mount Sina, engendering unto bondage, which is
@c    Agar.

@c    4:25. For Sina is a mountain in Arabia, which hath affinity to that
@c    Jerusalem which now is:  and is in bondage with her children.

@c    4:26. But that Jerusalem which is above is free:  which is our mother.

@c    4:27. For it is written:  Rejoice, thou barren, that bearest not:  break
@c    forth and cry thou that travailest not:  for many are the children of
@c    the desolate, more than of her that hath a husband.

@c    4:28. Now we, brethren, as Isaac was, are the children of promise.

@c    4:29. But as then he that was born according to the flesh persecuted
@c    him that was after the spirit:  so also it is now.

@c    4:30. But what saith the scripture?  Cast out the bondwoman and her son:
@c    for the son of the bondwoman shall not be heir with the son of the free
@c    woman.

@c    4:31. So then, brethren, we are not the children of the bondwoman but
@c    of the free:  by the freedom wherewith Christ has made us free.



@c    Galatians Chapter 5


@c    He exhorts them to stand to their Christian liberty.  Of the fruits of
@c    the flesh and of the spirit.

@c    5:1. Stand fast and be not held again under the yoke of bondage.

@c    5:2. Behold, I Paul tell you, that if you be circumcised, Christ shall
@c    profit you nothing.

@c    5:3. And I testify again to every man circumcising himself that he is a
@c    debtor to do the whole law.

@c    5:4. You are made void of Christ, you who are justified in the law:  you
@c    are fallen from grace.

@c    5:5. For we in spirit, by faith, wait for the hope of justice.

@c    5:6. For in Christ Jesus neither circumcision availeth any thing nor
@c    uncircumcision:  but faith that worketh by Charity.

@c    5:7. You did run well.  What hath hindered you, that you should not obey
@c    the truth?

@c    5:8. This persuasion is not from him that calleth you.

@c    5:9. A little leaven corrupteth the whole lump.

@c    5:10. I have confidence in you in the Lord that you will not be of
@c    another mind:  but he that troubleth you shall bear the judgment,
@c    whosoever he be.

@c    5:11. And I, brethren, if I yet preach circumcision, why do I yet
@c    suffer persecution?  Then is the scandal of the cross made void.

@c    5:12. I would they were even cut off, who trouble you.

@c    5:13. For you, brethren, have been called unto liberty.  Only make not
@c    liberty an occasion to the flesh:  but by charity of the spirit serve
@c    one another.

@c    5:14. For all the law is fulfilled in one word:  Thou shalt love thy
@c    neighbour as thyself.

@c    5:15. But if you bite and devour one another:  take heed you be not
@c    consumed one of another.

@c    5:16. I say then:  Walk in the spirit:  and you shall not fulfill the
@c    lusts of the flesh.

@c    5:17. For the flesh lusteth against the spirit:  and the spirit against
@c    the flesh:  For these are contrary one to another:  so that you do not
@c    the things that you would.

@c    5:18. But if you are led by the spirit, you are not under the law.

@c    5:19. Now the works of the flesh are manifest:  which are fornication,
@c    uncleanness, immodesty, luxury,

@c    5:20. Idolatry, witchcrafts, enmities, contentions, emulations, wraths,
@c    quarrels, dissensions, sects,

@c    5:21. Envies, murders, drunkenness, revellings, and such like.  Of the
@c    which I foretell you, as I have foretold to you, that they who do such
@c    things shall not obtain the kingdom of God.

@c    5:22. But the fruit of the Spirit is, charity, joy, peace, patience,
@c    benignity, goodness, longanimity,

@c    5:23. Mildness, faith, modesty, continency, chastity.  Against such
@c    there is no law.

@c    5:24. And they that are Christ's have crucified their flesh, with the
@c    vices and concupiscences.

@c    5:25. If we live in the Spirit, let us also walk in the Spirit.

@c    5:26. Let us not be made desirous of vain glory, provoking one another,
@c    envying one another.



@c    Galatians Chapter 6


@c    He exhorts to charity, humility and all virtue.  He glories in nothing
@c    but in the cross of Christ.

@c    6:1. Brethren, and if a man be overtaken in any fault, you, who are
@c    spiritual, instruct such a one in the spirit of meekness, considering
@c    thyself, lest thou also be tempted.

@c    6:2. Bear ye one another's burdens:  and so you shall fulfil the law of
@c    Christ.

@c    6:3. For if any man think himself to be some thing, whereas he is
@c    nothing, he deceiveth himself.

@c    6:4. But let every one prove his own work:  and so he shall have glory
@c    in himself only and not in another.

@c    6:5. For every one shall bear his own burden.

@c    6:6. And let him that is instructed in the word communicate to him that
@c    instructeth him, in all good things.

@c    6:7. Be not deceived:  God is not mocked.

@c    6:8. For what things a man shall sow, those also shall he reap.  For he
@c    that soweth in his flesh of the flesh also shall reap corruption.  But
@c    he that soweth in the spirit of the spirit shall reap life everlasting.

@c    6:9. And in doing good, let us not fail.  For in due time we shall reap,
@c    not failing.

@c    6:10. Therefore, whilst we have time, let us work good to all men, but
@c    especially to those who are of the household of the faith.

@c    6:11. See what a letter I have written to you with my own hand.

@c    6:12. For as many as desire to please in the flesh, they constrain you
@c    to be circumcised, only that they may not suffer the persecution of the
@c    cross of Christ.

@c    6:13. For neither they themselves who are circumcised keep the law:  but
@c    they will have you to be circumcised, that they may glory in your
@c    flesh.

@c    6:14. But God forbid that I should glory, save in the cross of our Lord
@c    Jesus Christ:  by whom the world is crucified to me, and I to the world.

@c    6:15. For in Christ Jesus neither circumcision availeth any thing, nor
@c    uncircumcision:  but a new creature.

@c    6:16. And whosoever shall follow this rule, peace on them and mercy:
@c    and upon the Israel of God.

@c    6:17. From henceforth let no man be troublesome to me:  for I bear the
@c    marks of the Lord Jesus in my body.

@c    6:18. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with your spirit, brethren.
@c    Amen.
