@c    THE HOLY GOSPEL OF JESUS CHRIST ACCORDING TO ST. JOHN



@c    St. John the Apostle and Evangelist was the son of Zebedee and Salome,
@c    brother to James the Greater.  He was called the Beloved disciple of
@c    Christ and stood by at his Crucifixion.  He wrote the Gospel after the
@c    other Evangelists, about sixty-three years after our Lord's Ascension.
@c    Many things that they had omitted were supplied by him.  The original
@c    was written in Greek; and by the Greeks he is titled:  The Divine.  St.
@c    Jerome relates that, when he was earnestly requested by the brethren to
@c    write the Gospel, he answered he would do it, if by ordering a common
@c    fast, they would all put up their prayers together to the Almighty God;
@c    which being ended replenished with the clearest and fullest revelation
@c    coming from Heaven, he burst forth into that preface:  IN THE BEGINNING
@c    WAS THE WORD.



@c    John Chapter 1


@c    The divinity and incarnation of Christ.  John bears witness of him.  He
@c    begins to call his disciples.

@c    1:1. In the beginning was the Word:  and the Word was with God:  and the
@c    Word was God.

@c    1:2. The same was in the beginning with God.

@c    1:3. All things were made by him:  and without him was made nothing that
@c    was made.

@c    1:4. In him was life:  and the life was the light of men.

@c    1:5. And the light shineth in darkness:  and the darkness did not
@c    comprehend it.

@c    1:6. There was a man sent from God, whose name was John.

@c    1:7. This man came for a witness, to give testimony of the light, that
@c    all men might believe through him.

@c    1:8. He was not the light, but was to give testimony of the light.

@c    1:9. That was the true light, which enlighteneth every man that cometh
@c    into this world.

@c    1:10. He was in the world:  and the world was made by him:  and the world
@c    knew him not.

@c    1:11. He came unto his own:  and his own received him not.

@c    1:12. But as many as received him, he gave them power to be made the
@c    sons of God, to them that believe in his name.

@c    1:13. Who are born, not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of
@c    the will of man, but of God.

@c    1:14. And the Word was made flesh and dwelt among us (and we saw his
@c    glory, the glory as it were of the only begotten of the Father), full
@c    of grace and truth.

@c    1:15. John beareth witness of him and crieth out, saying:  This was he
@c    of whom I spoke:  He that shall come after me is preferred before me:
@c    because he was before me.

@c    1:16. And of his fulness we all have received:  and grace for grace.

@c    1:17. For the law was given by Moses:  grace and truth came by Jesus
@c    Christ.

@c    1:18. No man hath seen God at any time:  the only begotten Son who is in
@c    the Bosom of the Father, he hath declared him.

@c    1:19. And this is the testimony of John, when the Jews sent from
@c    Jerusalem priests and Levites to him, to ask him:  Who art thou?

@c    1:20. And he confessed and did not deny:  and he confessed:  I am not the
@c    Christ.

@c    1:21. And they asked him:  What then?  Art thou Elias?  And he said:  I
@c    am not.  Art thou the prophet?  And he answered:  No.

@c    1:22. They said therefore unto him:  Who art thou, that we may give an
@c    answer to them that sent us?  What sayest thou of thyself?

@c    1:23. He said:  I am the voice of one crying in the wilderness, make
@c    straight the way of the Lord, as said the prophet Isaias.

@c    1:24. And they that were sent were of the Pharisees.

@c    1:25. And they asked him and said to him:  Why then dost thou baptize,
@c    if thou be not Christ, nor Elias, nor the prophet?

@c    1:26. John answered them, saying:  I baptize with water:  but there hath
@c    stood one in the midst of you, whom you know not.

@c    1:27. The same is he that shall come after me, who is preferred before
@c    me:  the latchet of whose shoe I am not worthy to loose.

@c    1:28. These things were done in Bethania, beyond the Jordan, where John
@c    was baptizing.

@c    1:29. The next day, John saw Jesus coming to him; and he saith:  Behold
@c    the Lamb of God.  Behold him who taketh away the sin of the world.

@c    1:30. This is he of whom I said:  After me there cometh a man, who is
@c    preferred before me:  because he was before me.

@c    1:31. And I knew him not:  but that he may be made manifest in Israel,
@c    therefore am I come baptizing with water.

@c    1:32. And John gave testimony, saying:  I saw the Spirit coming down, as
@c    a dove from heaven; and he remained upon him.

@c    1:33. And I knew him not:  but he who sent me to baptize with water said
@c    to me:  He upon whom thou shalt see the Spirit descending and remaining
@c    upon him, he it is that baptizeth with the Holy Ghost.

@c    1:34. And I saw:  and I gave testimony that this is the Son of God.

@c    1:35. The next day again John stood and two of his disciples.

@c    1:36. And beholding Jesus walking, he saith:  Behold the Lamb of God.

@c    1:37. And the two disciples heard him speak:  and they followed Jesus.

@c    1:38. And Jesus turning and seeing them following him, saith to them:
@c    What seek you?  Who said to him:  Rabbi (which is to say, being
@c    interpreted, Master), where dwellest thou?

@c    1:39. He saith to them:  Come and see.  They came and saw where he abode:
@c    and they stayed with him that day.  Now it was about the tenth hour.

@c    1:40. And Andrew, the brother of Simon Peter, was one of the two who
@c    had heard of John and followed him.

@c    1:41. He findeth first his brother Simon and saith to him:  We have
@c    found the Messias, which is, being interpreted, the Christ.

@c    1:42. And he brought him to Jesus.  And Jesus looking upon him, said:
@c    Thou art Simon the son of Jona.  Thou shalt be called Cephas, which is
@c    interpreted Peter.

@c    1:43. On the following day, he would go forth into Galilee:  and he
@c    findeth Philip, And Jesus saith to him:  follow me.

@c    1:44. Now Philip was of Bethsaida, the city of Andrew and Peter.

@c    1:45. Philip findeth Nathanael and saith to him:  We have found him of
@c    whom Moses, in the law and the prophets did write, Jesus the son of
@c    Joseph of Nazareth.

@c    1:46. And Nathanael said to him:  Can any thing of good come from
@c    Nazareth?  Philip saith to him:  Come and see.

@c    1:47. Jesus saw Nathanael coming to him and he saith of him:  Behold an
@c    Israelite indeed, in whom there is no guile.

@c    1:48. Nathanael saith to him:  Whence knowest thou me?  Jesus answered
@c    and said to him:  Before that Philip called thee, when thou wast under
@c    the fig tree, I saw thee.

@c    1:49. Nathanael answered him and said:  Rabbi:  Thou art the Son of God.
@c    Thou art the King of Israel.

@c    1:50. Jesus answered and said to him:  Because I said unto thee, I saw
@c    thee under the fig tree, thou believest:  greater things than these
@c    shalt thou see.

@c    1:51. And he saith to him:  Amen, amen, I say to you, you shall see the
@c    heaven opened and the angels of God ascending and descending upon the
@c    Son of man.



@c    John Chapter 2


@c    Christ changes water into wine.  He casts the sellers out of the temple.

@c    2:1. And the third day, there was a marriage in Cana of Galilee:  and
@c    the mother of Jesus was there.

@c    2:2. And Jesus also was invited, and his disciples, to the marriage.

@c    2:3. And the wine failing, the mother of Jesus saith to him:  They have
@c    no wine.

@c    2:4. And Jesus saith to her:  Woman, what is that to me and to thee?  My
@c    hour is not yet come.

@c    What is that to me, etc. . .These words of our Saviour, spoken to his
@c    mother, have been understood by some commentators as harsh, they not
@c    considering the next following verse:  Whatsoever he shall say to you,
@c    do ye, which plainly shows that his mother knew of the miracle that he
@c    was to perform, and that it was at her request he wrought it; besides
@c    the manner of speaking the words as to the tone, and the countenance
@c    shown at the same time, which could only be known to those who were
@c    present, or from what had followed:  for words indicating anger in one
@c    tone of voice, would be understood quite the reverse in another.

@c    2:5. His mother saith to the waiters:  Whatsoever he shall say to you,
@c    do ye.

@c    2:6. Now there were set there six waterpots of stone, according to the
@c    manner of the purifying of the Jews, containing two or three measures
@c    apiece.

@c    2:7. Jesus saith to them:  Fill the waterpots with water.  And they
@c    filled them up to the brim.

@c    2:8. And Jesus saith to them:  Draw out now and carry to the chief
@c    steward of the feast.  And they carried it.

@c    2:9. And when the chief steward had tasted the water made wine and knew
@c    not whence it was, but the waiters knew who had drawn the water:  the
@c    chief steward calleth the bridegroom,

@c    2:10. And saith to him:  Every man at first setteth forth good wine, and
@c    when men have well drunk, then that which is worse.  But thou hast kept
@c    the good wine until now.

@c    2:11. This beginning of miracles did Jesus in Cana of Galilee and
@c    manifested his glory.  And his disciples believed in him.

@c    2:12. After this, he went down to Capharnaum, he and his mother and his
@c    brethren and his disciples:  and they remained there not many days.

@c    2:13. And the pasch of the Jews was at hand:  and Jesus went up to
@c    Jerusalem.

@c    2:14. And he found in the temple them that sold oxen and sheep and
@c    doves, and the changers of money sitting.

@c    2:15. And when he had made, as it were, a scourge of little cords, he
@c    drove them all out of the temple, the sheep also and the oxen:  and the
@c    money of the changers he poured out, and the tables he overthrew.

@c    2:16. And to them that sold doves he said:  Take these things hence, and
@c    make not the house of my Father a house of traffic.

@c    2:17. And his disciples remembered, that it was written:  The zeal of
@c    thy house hath eaten me up.

@c    2:18. The Jews, therefore, answered, and said to him:  What sign dost
@c    thou shew unto us, seeing thou dost these things?

@c    2:19. Jesus answered and said to them:  Destroy this temple; and in
@c    three days I will raise it up.

@c    2:20. The Jews then said:  Six and forty years was this temple in
@c    building; and wilt thou raise it up in three days?

@c    2:21. But he spoke of the temple of his body.

@c    2:22. When therefore he was risen again from the dead, his disciples
@c    remembered that he had said this:  and they believed the scripture and
@c    the word that Jesus had said.

@c    2:23. Now when he was at Jerusalem, at the pasch, upon the festival
@c    day, many believed in his name, seeing his signs which he did.

@c    2:24. But Jesus did not trust himself unto them:  for that he knew all
@c    men,

@c    2:25. And because he needed not that any should give testimony of man:
@c    for he knew what was in man.



@c    John Chapter 3


@c    Christ's discourse with Nicodemus.  John's testimony.

@c    3:1. And there was a man of the Pharisees, named Nicodemus, a ruler of
@c    the Jews.

@c    3:2. This man came to Jesus by night and said to him:  Rabbi, we know
@c    that thou art come a teacher from God; for no man can do these signs
@c    which thou dost, unless God be with him.

@c    3:3. Jesus answered and said to him:  Amen, amen, I say to thee, unless
@c    a man be born again, he cannot see the kingdom of God.

@c    3:4. Nicodemus saith to him:  How can a man be born when he is old?  Can
@c    he enter a second time into his mother's womb and be born again?

@c    3:5. Jesus answered:  Amen, amen, I say to thee, unless a man be born
@c    again of water and the Holy Ghost, he cannot enter into the kingdom of
@c    God.

@c    Unless a man be born again, etc. . .By these words our Saviour hath
@c    declared the necessity of baptism; and by the word water it is evident
@c    that the application of it is necessary with the words.  Matt. 28. 19.

@c    3:6. That which is born of the flesh is flesh:  and that which is born
@c    of the Spirit is spirit.

@c    3:7. Wonder not that I said to thee:  You must be born again.

@c    3:8. The Spirit breatheth where he will and thou hearest his voice:  but
@c    thou knowest not whence he cometh and whither he goeth.  So is every one
@c    that is born of the Spirit.

@c    3:9. Nicodemus answered and said to him:  How can these things be done?

@c    3:10. Jesus answered and said to him:  Art thou a master in Israel, and
@c    knowest not these things?

@c    3:11. Amen, amen, I say to thee that we speak what we know and we
@c    testify what we have seen:  and you receive not our testimony.

@c    3:12. If I have spoken to you earthly things, and you believe not:  how
@c    will you believe, if I shall speak to you heavenly things?

@c    3:13. And no man hath ascended into heaven, but he that descended from
@c    heaven, the Son of man who is in heaven.

@c    3:14. And as Moses lifted up the serpent in the desert, so must the Son
@c    of man be lifted up:

@c    3:15. That whosoever believeth in him may not perish, but may have life
@c    everlasting.

@c    3:16. For God so loved the world, as to give his only begotten Son:
@c    that whosoever believeth in him may not perish, but may have life
@c    everlasting.

@c    3:17. For God sent not his Son into the world, to judge the world:  but
@c    that the world may be saved by him.

@c    3:18. He that believeth in him is not judged.  But he that doth not
@c    believe is already judged:  because he believeth not in the name of the
@c    only begotten Son of God.

@c    Is not judged. . .He that believeth, viz., by a faith working through
@c    charity, is not judged, that is, is not condemned; but the obstinate
@c    unbeliever is judged, that is, condemned already, by retrenching
@c    himself from the society of Christ and his church.

@c    3:19. And this is the judgment:  Because the light is come into the
@c    world and men loved darkness rather than the light:  for their works
@c    were evil.

@c    The judgment. . .That is, the cause of his comdemnation.

@c    3:20. For every one that doth evil hateth the light and cometh not to
@c    the light, that his works may not be reproved.

@c    3:21. But he that doth truth cometh to the light, that his works may be
@c    made manifest:  because they are done in God.

@c    He that doth truth. . .that is, he that acteth according to truth, which
@c    here signifies the Law of God.  Thy law is truth.  Psa. 118. 142.

@c    3:22. After these things, Jesus and his disciples came into the land of
@c    Judea:  and there he abode with them and baptized.

@c    3:23. And John also was baptizing in Ennon near Salim:  because there
@c    was much water there.  And they came and were baptized.

@c    3:24. For John was not yet cast into prison.

@c    3:25. And there arose a question between some of John's disciples and
@c    the Jews, concerning purification.

@c    3:26. And they came to John and said to him:  Rabbi, he that was with
@c    thee beyond the Jordan, to whom thou gavest testimony:  behold, he
@c    baptizeth and all men come to him.

@c    3:27. John answered and said:  A man cannot receive any thing, unless it
@c    be given him from heaven.

@c    3:28. You yourselves do bear me witness that I said that I am not
@c    Christ, but that I am sent before him.

@c    3:29. He that hath the bride is the bridegroom:  but the friend of the
@c    bridegroom, who standeth and heareth Him, rejoiceth with joy because of
@c    the bridegroom's voice.  This my joy therefore is fulfilled.

@c    3:30. He must increase:  but I must decrease.

@c    3:31. He that cometh from above is above all.  He that is of the earth,
@c    of the earth he is, and of the earth he speaketh.  He that cometh from
@c    heaven is above all.

@c    3:32. And what he hath seen and heard, that he testifieth:  and no man
@c    receiveth his testimony.

@c    3:33. He that hath received his testimony hath set to his seal that God
@c    is true.

@c    3:34. For he whom God hath sent speaketh the words of God:  for God doth
@c    not give the Spirit by measure.

@c    3:35. The Father loveth the Son:  and he hath given all things into his
@c    hand.

@c    3:36. He that believeth in the Son hath life everlasting:  but he that
@c    believeth not the Son shall not see life:  but the wrath of God abideth
@c    on him.



@c    John Chapter 4


@c    Christ talks with the Samaritan woman.  He heals the ruler's son.

@c    4:1. When Jesus therefore understood the Pharisees had heard that Jesus
@c    maketh more disciples and baptizeth more than John

@c    4:2. (Though Jesus himself did not baptize, but his disciples),

@c    4:3. He left Judea and went again into Galilee.

@c    4:4. And he was of necessity to pass through Samaria.

@c    4:5. He cometh therefore to a city of Samaria, which is called Sichar,
@c    near the land which Jacob gave to his son Joseph.

@c    4:6. Now Jacob's well was there.  Jesus therefore, being wearied with
@c    his journey, sat thus on the well.  It was about the sixth hour.

@c    4:7. There cometh a woman of Samaria, to draw water.  Jesus saith to
@c    her:  Give me to drink.

@c    4:8. For his disciples were gone into the city to buy meats.

@c    4:9. Then that Samaritan woman saith to him:  How dost thou, being a
@c    Jew; ask of me to drink, who am a Samaritan woman?  For the Jews do not
@c    communicate with the Samaritans.

@c    4:10. Jesus answered and said to her:  If thou didst know the gift of
@c    God and who he is that saith to thee:  Give me to drink; thou perhaps
@c    wouldst have asked of him, and he would have given thee living water.

@c    4:11. The woman saith to him:  Sir, thou hast nothing wherein to draw,
@c    and the well is deep.  From whence then hast thou living water?

@c    4:12. Art thou greater than our father Jacob, who gave us the well and
@c    drank thereof, himself and his children and his cattle?

@c    4:13. Jesus answered and said to her:  Whosoever drinketh of this water
@c    shall thirst again:  but he that shall drink of the water that I will
@c    give him shall not thirst for ever.

@c    4:14. But the water that I will give him shall become in him a fountain
@c    of water, springing up into life everlasting.

@c    4:15. The woman said to him:  Sir, give me this water, that I may not
@c    thirst, nor come hither to draw.

@c    4:16. Jesus saith to her:  Go, call thy husband, and come hither.

@c    4:17. The woman answered and said:  I have no husband.  Jesus said to
@c    her:  Thou hast said well:  I have no husband.

@c    4:18. For thou hast had five husbands:  and he whom thou now hast is not
@c    thy husband.  This, thou hast said truly.

@c    4:19. The woman saith to him:  Sir, I perceive that thou art a prophet.

@c    4:20. Our fathers adored on this mountain:  and you say that at
@c    Jerusalem is the place where men must adore.

@c    This mountain. . .Garizim, where the Samaritans had their schismatical
@c    temple.

@c    4:21. Jesus saith to her:  Woman, believe me that the hour cometh, when
@c    you shall neither on this mountain, nor in Jerusalem, adore the Father.

@c    4:22. You adore that which you know not:  we adore that which we know.
@c    For salvation is of the Jews.

@c    4:23. But the hour cometh and now is, when the true adorers shall adore
@c    the Father in spirit and in truth.  For the Father also seeketh such to
@c    adore him.

@c    4:24. God is a spirit:  and they that adore him must adore him in spirit
@c    and in truth.

@c    4:25. The woman saith to him:  I know that the Messias cometh (who is
@c    called Christ):  therefore, when he is come, he will tell us all things.

@c    4:26. Jesus saith to her:  I am he, who am speaking with thee.

@c    4:27. And immediately his disciples came.  And they wondered that he
@c    talked with the woman.  Yet no man said:  What seekest thou?  Or:  Why
@c    talkest thou with her?

@c    4:28. The woman therefore left her waterpot and went her way into the
@c    city and saith to the men there:

@c    4:29. Come, and see a man who has told me all things whatsoever I have
@c    done.  Is not he the Christ?

@c    4:30. They went therefore out of the city and came unto him.

@c    4:31. In the mean time, the disciples prayed him, saying:  Rabbi, eat.

@c    4:32. But he said to them:  I have meat to eat which you know not.

@c    4:33. The disciples therefore said one to another:  Hath any man brought
@c    him to eat?

@c    4:34. Jesus saith to them:  My meat is to do the will of him that sent
@c    me, that I may perfect his work.

@c    4:35. Do not you say:  There are yet four months, and then the harvest
@c    cometh?  Behold, I say to you, lift up your eyes, and see the countries.
@c    For they are white already to harvest.

@c    4:36. And he that reapeth receiveth wages and gathereth fruit unto life
@c    everlasting:  that both he that soweth and he that reapeth may rejoice
@c    together.

@c    4:37. For in this is the saying true:  That it is one man that soweth,
@c    and it is another that reapeth.

@c    4:38. I have sent you to reap that in which you did not labour.  Others
@c    have laboured:  and you have entered into their labours.

@c    4:39. Now of that city many of the Samaritans believed in him, for the
@c    word of the woman giving testimony:  He told me all things whatsoever I
@c    have done.

@c    4:40. So when the Samaritans were come to him, they desired that he
@c    would tarry there.  And he abode there two days.

@c    4:41. And many more believed in him, because of his own word.

@c    4:42. And they said to the woman:  We now believe, not for thy saying:
@c    for we ourselves have heard him and know that this is indeed the
@c    Saviour of the world.

@c    4:43. Now after two days, he departed thence and went into Galilee.

@c    4:44. For Jesus himself gave testimony that a prophet hath no honour in
@c    his own country.

@c    4:45. And when he was come into Galilee, the Galileans received him,
@c    having seen all the things he had done at Jerusalem on the festival
@c    day:  for they also went to the festival day.

@c    4:46. He came again therefore into Cana of Galilee, where he made the
@c    water wine.  And there was a certain ruler, whose son was sick at
@c    Capharnaum.

@c    4:47. He having heard that Jesus was come from Judea into Galilee, sent
@c    to him and prayed him to come down and heal his son:  for he was at the
@c    point of death.

@c    4:48. Jesus therefore said to him:  Unless you see signs and wonders,
@c    you believe not.

@c    4:49. The ruler saith to him:  Lord, come down before that my son die.

@c    4:50. Jesus saith to him:  Go thy way.  Thy son liveth.  The man believed
@c    the word which Jesus said to him and went his way.

@c    4:51. And as he was going down, his servants met him:  and they brought
@c    word, saying, that his son lived.

@c    4:52. He asked therefore of them the hour wherein he grew better.  And
@c    they said to him:  Yesterday at the seventh hour, the fever left him.

@c    4:53. The father therefore knew that it was at the same hour that Jesus
@c    said to him:  Thy son liveth.  And himself believed, and his whole house.

@c    4:54. This is again the second miracle that Jesus did, when he was come
@c    out of Judea.  into Galilee.



@c    John Chapter 5


@c    Christ heals on the sabbath the man languishing thirty-eight years.  His
@c    discourse upon this occasion.

@c    5:1. After these things was a festival day of the Jews:  and Jesus went
@c    up to Jerusalem.

@c    5:2. Now there is at Jerusalem a pond, called Probatica, which in
@c    Hebrew is named Bethsaida, having five porches.

@c    Probatica. . .That is, the sheep pond; either so called, because the
@c    sheep were washed therein, that were to be offered up in sacrifice in
@c    the temple, or because it was near the sheep gate.  That this was a pond
@c    where miracles were wrought is evident from the sacred text; and also
@c    that the water had no natural virtue to heal, as one only of those put
@c    in after the motion of the water was restored to health; for if the
@c    water had the healing quality, the others would have the like benefit,
@c    being put into it about the same time.

@c    5:3. In these lay a great multitude of sick, of blind, of lame, of
@c    withered:  waiting for the moving of the water.

@c    5:4. And an angel of the Lord descended at certain times into the pond
@c    and the water was moved.  And he that went down first into the pond
@c    after the motion of the water was made whole of whatsoever infirmity he
@c    lay under.

@c    5:5. And there was a certain man there that had been eight and thirty
@c    years under his infirmity.

@c    5:6. Him when Jesus had seen lying, and knew that he had been now a
@c    long time, he saith to him:  Wilt thou be made whole?

@c    5:7. The infirm man answered him:  Sir, I have no man, when the water is
@c    troubled, to put me into the pond.  For whilst I am coming, another
@c    goeth down before me.

@c    5:8. Jesus saith to him:  Arise, take up thy bed and walk.

@c    5:9. And immediately the man was made whole:  and he took up his bed and
@c    walked.  And it was the sabbath that day.

@c    5:10. The Jews therefore said to him that was healed:  It is the
@c    sabbath.  It is not lawful for thee to take up thy bed.

@c    5:11. He answered them:  He that made me whole, he said to me:  Take up
@c    thy bed and walk.

@c    5:12. They asked him therefore:  Who is that man who said to thee:  Take
@c    up thy bed and walk?

@c    5:13. But he who was healed knew not who it was:  for Jesus went aside
@c    from the multitude standing in the place.

@c    5:14. Afterwards, Jesus findeth him in the temple and saith to him:
@c    Behold thou art made whole:  sin no more, lest some worse thing happen
@c    to thee.

@c    5:15. The man went his way and told the Jews that it was Jesus who had
@c    made him whole.

@c    5:16. Therefore did the Jews persecute Jesus, because he did these
@c    things on the sabbath.

@c    5:17. But Jesus answered them:  My Father worketh until now; and I work.

@c    5:18. Hereupon therefore the Jews sought the more to kill him, because
@c    he did not only break the sabbath but also said God was his Father,
@c    making himself equal to God.

@c    5:19. Then Jesus answered and said to them:  Amen, amen, I say unto you,
@c    the Son cannot do any thing of himself, but what he seeth the Father
@c    doing:  for what things soever he doth, these the Son also doth in like
@c    manner.

@c    5:20. For the Father loveth the Son and sheweth him all things which
@c    himself doth:  and greater works than these will he shew him, that you
@c    may wonder.

@c    5:21. For as the Father raiseth up the dead and giveth life:  so the Son
@c    also giveth life to whom he will.

@c    5:22. For neither does the Father judge any man:  but hath given all
@c    judgment to the Son.

@c    5:23. That all men may honour the Son, as they honour the Father.  He
@c    who honoureth not the Son honoureth not the Father who hath sent him.

@c    5:24. Amen, amen, I say unto you that he who heareth my word and
@c    believeth him that sent me hath life everlasting:  and cometh not into
@c    judgment, but is passed from death to life.

@c    5:25. Amen, amen, I say unto you, that the hour cometh, and now is,
@c    when the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God:  and they that
@c    hear shall live.

@c    5:26. For as the Father hath life in himself, so he hath given to the
@c    Son also to have life in himself.

@c    5:27. And he hath given him power to do judgment, because he is the Son
@c    of man.

@c    5:28. Wonder not at this:  for the hour cometh wherein all that are in
@c    the graves shall hear the voice of the Son of God.

@c    5:29. And they that have done good things shall come forth unto the
@c    resurrection of life:  but they that have done evil, unto the
@c    resurrection of judgment.

@c    Unto the resurrection of judgment. . .That is, condemnation.

@c    5:30. I cannot of myself do any thing.  As I hear, so I judge.  And my
@c    judgment is just:  because I seek not my own will.  but the will of him
@c    that sent me.

@c    5:31. If I bear witness of myself, my witness is not true.

@c    5:32. There is another that beareth witness of me:  and I know that the
@c    witness which he witnesseth of me is true.

@c    5:33. You sent to John:  and he gave testimony to the truth.

@c    5:34. But I receive not testimony from man:  but I say these things,
@c    that you may be saved.

@c    5:35. He was a burning and a shining light:  and you were willing for a
@c    time to rejoice in his light.

@c    5:36. But I have a greater testimony than that of John:  for the works
@c    which the Father hath given me to perfect, the works themselves which I
@c    do, give testimony of me, that the Father hath sent me.

@c    5:37. And the Father himself who hath sent me hath given testimony of
@c    me:  neither have you heard his voice at any time, nor seen his shape.

@c    5:38. And you have not his word abiding in you:  for whom he hath sent,
@c    him you believe not.

@c    5:39. Search the scriptures:  for you think in them to have life
@c    everlasting.  And the same are they that give testimony of me.

@c    Or. . .You search the scriptures.  Scrutamini. . .It is not a command for
@c    all to read the scriptures; but a reproach to the Pharisees, that
@c    reading the scriptures as they did, and thinking to find everlasting
@c    life in them, they would not receive him to whom all those scriptures
@c    gave testimony, and through whom alone they could have that true life.

@c    5:40. And you will not come to me that you may have life.

@c    5:41. I receive not glory from men.

@c    5:42. But I know you, that you have not the love of God in you.

@c    5:43. I am come in the name of my Father, and you receive me not:  if
@c    another shall come in his own name, him you will receive.

@c    5:44. How can you believe, who receive glory one from another:  and the
@c    glory which is from God alone, you do not seek?

@c    5:45. Think not that I will accuse you to the Father.  There is one that
@c    accuseth you, Moses, in whom you trust.

@c    5:46. For if you did believe Moses, you would perhaps believe me also:
@c    for he wrote of me.

@c    5:47. But if you do not believe his writings, how will you believe my
@c    words?



@c    John Chapter 6


@c    Christ feeds five thousand with five loaves.  He walks upon the sea and
@c    discourses of the bread of life.

@c    6:1. After these things Jesus went over the sea of Galilee, which is
@c    that of Tiberias.

@c    6:2. And a great multitude followed him, because they saw the miracles
@c    which he did on them that were diseased.

@c    6:3. Jesus therefore went up into a mountain:  and there he sat with his
@c    disciples.

@c    6:4. Now the pasch, the festival day of the Jews, was near at hand.

@c    6:5. When Jesus therefore had lifted up his eyes and seen that a very
@c    great multitude cometh to him, he said to Philip:  Whence shall we buy
@c    bread, that these may eat?

@c    6:6. And this he said to try him:  for he himself knew what he would do.

@c    6:7. Philip answered him:  Two hundred pennyworth of bread is not
@c    sufficient for them that every one may take a little.

@c    6:8. One of his disciples, Andrew, the brother of Simon Peter, saith to
@c    him:

@c    6:9. There is a boy here that hath five barley loaves and two fishes.
@c    But what are these among so many?

@c    6:10. Then Jesus said:  Make the men sit down.  Now, there was much grass
@c    in the place.  The men therefore sat down, in number about five
@c    thousand.

@c    6:11. And Jesus took the loaves:  and when he had given thanks, he
@c    distributed to them that were set down.  In like manner also of the
@c    fishes, as much as they would.

@c    6:12. And when they were filled, he said to his disciples:  gather up
@c    the fragments that remain, lest they be lost.

@c    6:13. They gathered up therefore and filled twelve baskets with the
@c    fragments of the five barley loaves which remained over and above to
@c    them that had eaten.

@c    6:14. Now those men, when they had seen what a miracle Jesus had done,
@c    said:  This is of a truth the prophet that is to come into the world.

@c    6:15. Jesus therefore, when he knew that they would come to take him by
@c    force and make him king, fled again into the mountains, himself alone.

@c    6:16. And when evening was come, his disciples went down to the sea.

@c    6:17. And when they had gone up into a ship, they went over the sea to
@c    Capharnaum.  And it was now dark:  and Jesus was not come unto them.

@c    6:18. And the sea arose, by reason of a great wind that blew.

@c    6:19. When they had rowed therefore about five and twenty or thirty
@c    furlongs, they see Jesus walking upon the sea and drawing nigh to the
@c    ship.  And they were afraid.

@c    6:20. But he saith to them:  It is I.  Be not afraid.

@c    6:21. They were willing therefore to take him into the ship.  And
@c    presently the ship was at the land to which they were going.

@c    6:22. The next day, the multitude that stood on the other side of the
@c    sea saw that there was no other ship there but one:  and that Jesus had
@c    not entered into the ship with his disciples, but that his disciples
@c    were gone away alone.

@c    6:23. But other ships came in from Tiberias, nigh unto the place where
@c    they had eaten the bread, the Lord giving thanks.

@c    6:24. When therefore the multitude saw that Jesus was not there, nor
@c    his disciples, they took shipping and came to Capharnaum, seeking for
@c    Jesus.

@c    6:25. And when they had found him on that other side of the sea, they
@c    said to him:  Rabbi, when camest thou hither?

@c    6:26. Jesus answered them and said:  Amen, amen, I say to you, you seek
@c    me, not because you have seen miracles, but because you did eat of the
@c    loaves and were filled.

@c    6:27. Labour not for the meat which perisheth, but for that which
@c    endureth unto life everlasting, which the Son of man will give you.  For
@c    him hath God, the Father, sealed.

@c    6:28. They said therefore unto him:  What shall we do, that we may work
@c    the works of God?

@c    6:29. Jesus answered and said to them:  This is the work of God, that
@c    you believe in him whom he hath sent.

@c    6:30. They said therefore to him:  What sign therefore dost thou shew
@c    that we may see and may believe thee?  What dost thou work?

@c    6:31. Our fathers did eat manna in the desert, as it is written:  He
@c    gave them bread from heaven to eat.

@c    6:32. Then Jesus said to them:  Amen, amen, I say to you; Moses gave you
@c    not bread from heaven, but my Father giveth you the true bread from
@c    heaven.

@c    6:33. For the bread of God is that which cometh down from heaven and
@c    giveth life to the world.

@c    6:34. They said therefore unto him:  Lord, give us always this bread.

@c    6:35. And Jesus said to them:  I am the bread of life.  He that cometh to
@c    me shall not hunger:  and he that believeth in me shall never thirst.

@c    6:36. But I said unto you that you also have seen me, and you believe
@c    not.

@c    6:37. All that the Father giveth to me shall come to me:  and him that
@c    cometh to me, I will not cast out.

@c    6:38. Because I came down from heaven, not to do my own will but the
@c    will of him that sent me.

@c    6:39. Now this is the will of the Father who sent me:  that of all that
@c    he hath given me, I should lose nothing; but should raise it up again
@c    in the last day.

@c    6:40. And this is the will of my Father that sent me:  that every one
@c    who seeth the Son and believeth in him may have life everlasting.  And I
@c    will raise him up in the last day.

@c    6:41. The Jews therefore murmured at him, because he had said:  I am the
@c    living bread which came down from heaven.

@c    6:42. And they said:  Is not this Jesus, the son of Joseph, whose father
@c    and mother we know?  How then saith he:  I came down from heaven?

@c    6:43. Jesus therefore answered and said to them:  Murmur not among
@c    yourselves.

@c    6:44. No man can come to me, except the Father, who hath sent me, draw
@c    him.  And I will raise him up in the last day.

@c    Draw him. . .Not by compulsion, nor by laying the free will under any
@c    necessity, but by the strong and sweet motions of his heavenly grace.

@c    6:45. It is written in the prophets:  And they shall all be taught of
@c    God.  Every one that hath heard of the Father and hath learned cometh
@c    forth me.

@c    6:46. Not that any man hath seen the Father:  but he who is of God, he
@c    hath seen the Father.

@c    6:47. Amen, amen, I say unto you:  He that believeth in me hath
@c    everlasting life.

@c    6:48. I am the bread of life.

@c    6:49. Your fathers did eat manna in the desert:  and are dead.

@c    6:50. This is the bread which cometh down from heaven:  that if any man
@c    eat of it, he may not die.

@c    6:51. I am the living bread which came down from heaven.

@c    6:52. If any man eat of this bread, he shall live for ever:  and the
@c    bread that I will give is my flesh, for the life of the world.

@c    6:53. The Jews therefore strove among themselves, saying:  How can this
@c    man give us his flesh to eat?

@c    6:54. Then Jesus said to them:  Amen, amen, I say unto you:  except you
@c    eat the flesh of the Son of man and drink his blood, you shall not have
@c    life in you.

@c    Except you eat--and drink, etc. . .To receive the body and blood of
@c    Christ, is a divine precept, insinuated in this text; which the
@c    faithful fulfil, though they receive but in one kind; because in one
@c    kind they receive both body and blood, which cannot be separated from
@c    each other.  Hence, life eternal is here promised to the worthy
@c    receiving, though but in one kind.  Ver. 52.  If any man eat of this
@c    bread, he shall live for ever; and the bread that I will give, is my
@c    flesh for the life of the world.  Ver. 58.  He that eateth me, the same
@c    also shall live by me.  Ver. 59.  He that eateth this bread, shall liver
@c    for ever.

@c    6:55. He that eateth my flesh and drinketh my blood hath everlasting
@c    life:  and I will raise him up in the last day.

@c    6:56. For my flesh is meat indeed:  and my blood is drink indeed.

@c    6:57. He that eateth my flesh and drinketh my blood abideth in me:  and
@c    I in him.

@c    6:58. As the living Father hath sent me and I live by the Father:  so he
@c    that eateth me, the same also shall live by me.

@c    6:59. This is the bread that came down from heaven.  Not as your fathers
@c    did eat manna and are dead.  He that eateth this bread shall live for
@c    ever.

@c    6:60. These things he said, teaching in the synagogue, in Capharnaum.

@c    6:61. Many therefore of his disciples, hearing it, said:  This saying is
@c    hard; and who can hear it?

@c    6:62. But Jesus, knowing in himself that his disciples murmured at
@c    this, said to them:  Doth this scandalize you?

@c    6:63. If then you shall see the Son of man ascend up where he was
@c    before?

@c    If then you shall see, etc. . .Christ by mentioning his ascension, by
@c    this instance of his power and divinity, would confirm the truth of
@c    what he had before asserted; and at the same time correct their gross
@c    apprehension of eating his flesh, and drinking his blood, in a vulgar
@c    and carnal manner, by letting them know he should take his whole body
@c    living with him to heaven; and consequently not suffer it to be as they
@c    supposed, divided, mangled, and consumed upon earth.

@c    6:64. It is the spirit that quickeneth:  the flesh profiteth nothing.
@c    The words that I have spoken to you are spirit and life.

@c    The flesh profiteth nothing. . .Dead flesh separated from the spirit, in
@c    the gross manner they supposed they were to eat his flesh, would profit
@c    nothing.  Neither doth man's flesh, that is to say, man's natural and
@c    carnal apprehension, (which refuses to be subject to the spirit, and
@c    words of Christ,) profit any thing.  But it would be the height of
@c    blasphemy, to say the living flesh of Christ (which we receive in the
@c    blessed sacarament, with his spirit, that is, with his soul and
@c    divinity) profiteth nothing.  For if Christ's flesh had profitedus
@c    nothing, he would never have taken flesh for us, nor died in us
@c    nothing, he would never have taken flesh for us, nor died in the flesh
@c    for us.  Are spirit and life. . .By proposing to you a heavenly
@c    sacrament, in which you shall receive, in a wonderful manner, spirit,
@c    grace, and life, in its very fountain.

@c    6:65. But there are some of you that believe not.  For Jesus knew from
@c    the beginning who they were that did not believe and who he was that
@c    would betray him.

@c    6:66. And he said:  Therefore did I say to you that no man can come to
@c    me, unless it be given him by my Father.

@c    6:67. After this, many of his disciples went back and walked no more
@c    with him.

@c    6:68. Then Jesus said to the twelve:  Will you also go away?

@c    6:69. And Simon Peter answered him:  Lord, to whom shall we go?  Thou
@c    hast the words of eternal life.

@c    6:70. And we have believed and have known that thou art the Christ, the
@c    Son of God.

@c    6:71. Jesus answered them:  Have not I chosen you twelve?  And one of you
@c    is a devil.

@c    6:72. Now he meant Judas Iscariot, the son of Simon:  for this same was
@c    about to betray him, whereas he was one of the twelve.



@c    John Chapter 7


@c    Christ goes up to the feast of the tabernacles.  He teaches in the
@c    temple.

@c    7:1. After these things, Jesus walked in Galilee:  for he would not walk
@c    in Judea, because the Jews sought to kill him.

@c    7:2. Now the Jews feast of tabernacles was at hand.

@c    7:3. And his brethren said to, him:  Pass from hence and go into Judea,
@c    that thy disciples also may see thy works which thou dost.

@c    7:4. For there is no man that doth any thing in secret, and he himself
@c    seeketh to be known openly.  If thou do these things, manifest thyself
@c    to the world.

@c    7:5. For neither did his brethren believe in him.

@c    7:6. Then Jesus said to them:  My time is not yet come; but your time is
@c    always ready.

@c    7:7. The world cannot hate you:  but me it hateth, because I give
@c    testimony of it, that the works thereof are evil,

@c    7:8. Go you up to this festival day:  but I go not up to this festival
@c    day, because my time is not accomplished.

@c    7:9. When he had said these things, he himself stayed in Galilee.

@c    7:10. But after his brethren were gone up, then he also went up to the
@c    feast, not openly, but, as it were, in secret.

@c    7:11. The Jews therefore sought him on the festival day and said:  Where
@c    is he?

@c    7:12. And there was much murmuring among the multitude concerning him.
@c    For some said:  He is a good man.  And others said:  No, but he seduceth
@c    the people.

@c    7:13. Yet no man spoke openly of him, for fear of the Jews.

@c    7:14. Now, about the midst of the feast, Jesus went up into the temple
@c    and taught.

@c    7:15. And the Jews wondered, saying:  How doth this man know letters,
@c    having never learned?

@c    7:16. Jesus answered them and said:  My doctrine is not mine, but his
@c    that sent me.

@c    7:17. If any man will do the will of him, he shall know of the
@c    doctrine, whether it be of God, or whether I speak of myself.

@c    7:18. He that speaketh of himself seeketh his own glory:  but he that
@c    seeketh the glory of him that sent him, he is true and there is no
@c    injustice in him.

@c    7:19. Did not Moses give you the law, and yet none of you keepeth the
@c    law?

@c    7:20. Why seek you to kill me?  The multitude answered and said:  Thou
@c    hast a devil.  Who seeketh to kill thee?

@c    7:21. Jesus answered and said to them:  One work I have done:  and you
@c    all wonder.

@c    7:22. Therefore, Moses gave you circumcision (not because it is of
@c    Moses, but of the fathers):  and on the sabbath day you circumcise a
@c    man.

@c    7:23. If a man receive circumcision on the sabbath day, that the law of
@c    Moses may not be broken:  are you angry at me, because I have healed the
@c    whole man on the sabbath day?

@c    7:24. Judge not according to the appearance:  but judge just judgment.

@c    7:25. Some therefore of Jerusalem said:  Is not this he whom they seek
@c    to kill?

@c    7:26. And behold, he speaketh openly:  and they say nothing to him.  Have
@c    the rulers known for a truth that this is the Christ?

@c    7:27. But we know this man, whence he is:  but when the Christ cometh,
@c    no man knoweth, whence he is.

@c    7:28. Jesus therefore cried out in the temple, teaching and saying:  You
@c    both know me, and you know whence I am.  And I am not come of myself:
@c    but he that sent me is true, whom you know not.

@c    7:29. I know him, because I am from him:  and he hath sent me.

@c    7:30. They sought therefore to apprehend him:  and no man laid hands on
@c    him, because his hour was not yet come.

@c    7:31. But of the people many believed in him and said:  When the Christ
@c    cometh, shall he do more miracles than this man doth?

@c    7:32. The Pharisees heard the people murmuring these things concerning
@c    him:  and the rulers and Pharisees sent ministers to apprehend him.

@c    7:33. Jesus therefore said to them:  Yet a little while I am with you:
@c    and then I go to him that sent me.

@c    7:34. You shall seek me and shall not find me:  and where I am, thither
@c    you cannot come.

@c    7:35. The Jews therefore said among themselves:  Whither will he go,
@c    that we shall not find him?  Will he go unto the dispersed among the
@c    Gentiles and teach the Gentiles?

@c    7:36. What is this saying that he hath said:  You shall seek me and
@c    shall not find me?  And:  Where I am, you cannot come?

@c    7:37. And on the last, and great day of the festivity, Jesus stood and
@c    cried, saying:  If any man thirst, let him come to me and drink.

@c    7:38. He that believeth in me, as the scripture saith:  Out of his belly
@c    shall flow rivers of living water.

@c    7:39. Now this he said of the Spirit which they should receive who
@c    believed in him:  for as yet the Spirit was not given, because Jesus was
@c    not yet glorified.

@c    7:40. Of that multitude therefore, when they had heard these words of
@c    his, some said:  This is the prophet indeed.

@c    7:41. Others said:  This is the Christ.  But some said:  Doth the Christ
@c    come out of Galilee?

@c    7:42. Doth not the scripture say:  That Christ cometh of the seed of
@c    David and from Bethlehem the town where David was?

@c    7:43. So there arose a dissension among the people because of him.

@c    7:44. And some of them would have apprehended him:  but no man laid
@c    hands upon him.

@c    7:45. The ministers therefore came to the chief priests and the
@c    Pharisees.  And they said to them:  Why have you not brought him?

@c    7:46. The ministers answered:  Never did man speak like this man.

@c    7:47. The Pharisees therefore answered them:  Are you also seduced?

@c    7:48. Hath any one of the rulers believed in him, or of the Pharisees?

@c    7:49. But this multitude, that knoweth not the law, are accursed.

@c    7:50. Nicodemus said to them (he that came to him by night, who was one
@c    of them):

@c    7:51. Doth our law judge any man, unless it first hear him and know
@c    what he doth?

@c    7:52. They answered and said to him:  Art thou also a Galilean?  Search
@c    the scriptures, and see that out of Galilee a prophet riseth not.

@c    7:53. And every man returned to his own house.



@c    John Chapter 8


@c    The woman taken in adultery.  Christ justifies his doctrine.

@c    8:1. And Jesus went unto mount Olivet.

@c    8:2. And early in the morning he came again into the temple:  and all
@c    the people came to him.  And sitting down he taught them.

@c    8:3. And the scribes and Pharisees bring unto him a woman taken in
@c    adultery:  and they set her in the midst,

@c    8:4. And said to him:  Master, this woman was even now taken in
@c    adultery.

@c    8:5. Now Moses in the law commanded us to stone such a one.  But what
@c    sayest thou?

@c    8:6. And this they said tempting him, that they might accuse him.  But
@c    Jesus bowing himself down, wrote with his finger on the ground.

@c    8:7. When therefore they continued asking him, he lifted up himself and
@c    said to them:  He that is without sin among you, let him first cast a
@c    stone at her.

@c    8:8. And again stooping down, he wrote on the ground.

@c    8:9. But they hearing this, went out one by one, beginning at the
@c    eldest.  And Jesus alone remained, and the woman standing in the midst.

@c    8:10. Then Jesus lifting up himself, said to her:  Woman, where are they
@c    that accused thee?  Hath no man condemned thee?

@c    8:11. Who said:  No man, Lord.  And Jesus said:  Neither will I condemn
@c    thee.  Go, and now sin no more.

@c    8:12. Again therefore, Jesus spoke to:  them, saying:  I am the light of
@c    the world.  He that followeth me walketh not in darkness, but shall have
@c    the light of life.

@c    8:13. The Pharisees therefore said to him:  Thou givest testimony of
@c    thyself.  Thy testimony is not true.

@c    8:14. Jesus answered and said to them:  Although I give testimony of
@c    myself, my testimony is true:  for I know whence I came and whither I
@c    go.

@c    8:15. You judge according to the flesh:  I judge not any man.

@c    8:16. And if I do judge, my judgment is true:  because I am not alone,
@c    but I and the Father that sent me.

@c    8:17. And in your law it is written that the testimony of two men is
@c    true.

@c    8:18. I am one that give testimony of myself:  and the Father that sent
@c    me giveth testimony of me.

@c    8:19. They said therefore to him:  Where is thy Father?  Jesus answered:
@c    Neither me do you know, nor my Father.  If you did know me, perhaps you
@c    would know my Father also.

@c    8:20. These words Jesus spoke in the treasury, teaching in the temple:
@c    and no man laid hands on him, because his hour was not yet come.

@c    8:21. Again therefore Jesus said to them:  I go:  and you shall seek me.
@c    And you shall die in your sin.  Whither I go, you cannot come.

@c    8:22. The Jews therefore said:  Will he kill himself, because he said:
@c    Whither I go you cannot come?

@c    8:23. And he said to them:  You are from beneath:  I am from above.  You
@c    are of this world:  I am not of this world.

@c    8:24. Therefore I said to you that you shall die in your sins.  For if
@c    you believe not that I am he, you shall die in your sin.

@c    8:25. They said therefore to him:  Who art thou?  Jesus said to them:
@c    The beginning, who also speak unto you.

@c    8:26. Many things I have to speak and to judge of you.  But he that sent
@c    me, is true:  and the things I have heard of him, these same I speak in
@c    the world.

@c    8:27. And they understood not that he called God his Father.

@c    8:28. Jesus therefore said to them:  When you shall have lifted up, the
@c    Son of man, then shall you know that I am he and that I do nothing of
@c    myself.  But as the Father hath taught me, these things I speak.

@c    8:29. And he that sent me is with me:  and he hath not left me alone.
@c    For I do always the things that please him.

@c    8:30. When he spoke these things, many believed in him.

@c    8:31. Then Jesus said to those Jews who believed him:  If you continue
@c    in my word, you shall be my disciples indeed.

@c    8:32. And you shall know the truth:  and the truth shall make you free.

@c    8:33. They answered him:  We are the seed of Abraham:  and we have never
@c    been slaves to any man.  How sayest thou:  You shall be free?

@c    8:34. Jesus answered them:  Amen, amen, I say unto you that whosoever
@c    committeth sin is the servant of sin.

@c    8:35. Now the servant abideth not in the house for ever:  but the son
@c    abideth for ever.

@c    8:36. If therefore the son shall make you free, you shall be free
@c    indeed.

@c    8:37. I know that you are the children of Abraham:  but you seek to kill
@c    me, because my word hath no place in you.

@c    8:38. I speak that which I have seen with my Father:  and you do the
@c    things that you have seen with your father.

@c    8:39. They answered and said to him:  Abraham is our father.  Jesus saith
@c    them:  If you be the children of Abraham, do the works of Abraham.

@c    8:40. But now you seek to kill me, a man who have spoken the truth to
@c    you, which I have heard of God.  This Abraham did not.

@c    8:41. You do the works of your father.  They said therefore to him:  We
@c    are not born of fornication:  we have one Father, even God.

@c    8:42. Jesus therefore said to them:  If God were your Father, you would
@c    indeed love me.  For from God I proceeded and came.  For I came not of
@c    myself:  but he sent me.

@c    8:43. Why do you not know my speech?  Because you cannot hear my word.

@c    8:44. You are of your father the devil:  and the desires of your father
@c    you will do.  He was a murderer from the beginning:  and he stood not in
@c    the truth, because truth is not in him.  When he speaketh a lie, he
@c    speaketh of his own:  for he is a liar, and the father thereof.

@c    8:45. But if I say the truth, you believe me not.

@c    8:46. Which of you shall convince me of sin?  If I say the truth to you,
@c    why do you not believe me:

@c    8:47. He that is of God heareth the words of God.  Therefore you hear
@c    them not, because you are not of God.

@c    8:48. The Jews therefore answered and said to him:  Do not we say well
@c    that thou art a Samaritan and hast a devil?

@c    8:49. Jesus answered:  I have not a devil:  but I honour my Father.  And
@c    you have dishonoured me.

@c    8:50. But I seek not my own glory:  there is one that seeketh and
@c    judgeth.

@c    8:51. Amen, amen, I say to you:  If any man keep my word, he shall not
@c    see death for ever.

@c    8:52. The Jews therefore said:  Now we know that thou hast a devil.
@c    Abraham is dead, and the prophets:  and thou sayest:  If any man keep my
@c    word, he shall not taste death for ever.

@c    8:53. Art thou greater than our father Abraham who is dead?  And the
@c    prophets are dead.  Whom dost thou make thyself?

@c    8:54. Jesus answered:  If I glorify myself, my glory is nothing.  It is
@c    my Father that glorifieth me, of whom you say that he is your God.

@c    8:55. And you have not known him:  but I know him.  And if I shall say
@c    that I know him not, I shall be like to you, a liar.  But I do know him
@c    and do keep his word.

@c    8:56. Abraham your father rejoiced that he might see my day:  he saw it
@c    and was glad.

@c    8:57. The Jews therefore said to him:  Thou art not yet fifty years old.
@c    And hast thou seen Abraham?

@c    8:58. Jesus said to them:  Amen, amen, I say to you, before Abraham was
@c    made, I AM.

@c    8:59. They took up stones therefore to cast at him.  But Jesus hid
@c    himself and went out of the temple.



@c    John Chapter 9


@c    He gives sight to the man born blind.

@c    9:1. And Jesus passing by, saw a man who was blind from his birth.

@c    9:2. And his disciples asked him:  Rabbi, who hath sinned, this man or
@c    his parents, that he should be born blind?

@c    9:3. Jesus answered:  Neither hath this man sinned, nor his parents; but
@c    that the works of God should be made manifest in him.

@c    9:4. I must work the works of him that sent me, whilst it is day:  the
@c    night cometh, when no man can work.

@c    9:5. As long as I am in the world, I am the light of the world.

@c    9:6. When he had said these things, he spat on the ground and made clay
@c    of the spittle and spread the clay upon his eyes,

@c    9:7. And said to him:  Go, wash in the pool of Siloe, which is
@c    interpreted, Sent.  He went therefore and washed:  and he came seeing.

@c    9:8. The neighbours, therefore, and they who had seen him before that
@c    he was a beggar, said:  Is not this he that sat and begged?  Some said:
@c    This is he.

@c    9:9. But others said:  No, but he is like him.  But he said:  I am he.

@c    9:10. They said therefore to him:  How were thy eyes opened?

@c    9:11. He answered:  That man that is called Jesus made clay and anointed
@c    my eyes and said to me:  Go to the pool of Siloe and wash.  And I went:
@c    I washed:  and I see.

@c    9:12. And they said to him:  Where is he?  He saith:  I know not.

@c    9:13. They bring him that had been blind to the Pharisees.

@c    9:14. Now it was the sabbath, when Jesus made the clay and opened his
@c    eyes.

@c    9:15. Again therefore the Pharisees asked him how he had received his
@c    sight.  But he said to them:  He put clay upon my eyes:  and I washed:
@c    and I see.

@c    9:16. Some therefore of the Pharisees said:  This man is not of God, who
@c    keepeth not the sabbath.  But others said:  How can a man that is a
@c    sinner do such miracles?  And there was a division among them.

@c    9:17. They say therefore to the blind man again:  What sayest thou of
@c    him that hath opened thy eyes?  And he said:  He is a prophet.

@c    9:18. The Jews then did not believe concerning him, that he had been
@c    blind and had received his sight, until they called the parents of him
@c    that had received his sight,

@c    9:19. And asked them, saying:  Is this your son, who you say was born
@c    blind?  How then doth he now see?

@c    9:20. His parents answered them and said:  We know that this is our son
@c    and that he was born blind:

@c    9:21. But how he now seeth, we know not:  or who hath opened his eyes,
@c    we know not.  Ask himself:  he is of age:  Let him speak for himself.

@c    9:22. These things his parents said, because they feared the Jews:  for
@c    the Jews had already agreed among themselves that if any man should
@c    confess him to be Christ, he should be put out of the synagogue.

@c    9:23. Therefore did his parents say:  He is of age.  Ask himself.

@c    9:24. They therefore called the man again that had been blind and said
@c    to him:  Give glory to God.  We know that this man is a sinner.

@c    9:25. He said therefore to them:  If he be a sinner, I know not.  One
@c    thing I know, that whereas I was blind.  now I see.

@c    9:26. They said then to him:  What did he to thee?  How did he open thy
@c    eyes?

@c    9:27. He answered them:  I have told you already, and you have heard.
@c    Why would you hear it again?  Will you also become his disciples?

@c    9:28. They reviled him therefore and said:  Be thou his disciple; but we
@c    are the disciples of Moses.

@c    9:29. We know that God spoke to Moses:  but as to this man, we know not
@c    from whence he is.

@c    9:30. The man answered and said to them:  why, herein is a wonderful
@c    thing, that you know not from whence he is, and he hath opened my eyes.

@c    9:31. Now we know that God doth not hear sinners:  but if a man be a
@c    server of God and doth his, will, him he heareth.

@c    9:32. From the beginning of the world it hath not been heard, that any
@c    man hath opened the eyes of one born blind.

@c    9:33. Unless this man were of God, he could not do anything.

@c    9:34. They answered and said to him:  Thou wast wholly born in sins; and
@c    dost thou teach us?  And they cast him out.

@c    9:35. Jesus heard that they had cast him out.  And when he had found
@c    him, he said to him:  Dost thou believe in the Son of God?

@c    9:36. He answered, and said:  Who is he, Lord, that I may believe in
@c    him?

@c    9:37. And Jesus said to him:  Thou hast both seen him; and it is he that
@c    talketh with thee.

@c    9:38. And he said:  I believe, Lord.  And falling down, he adored him.

@c    9:39. And Jesus said:  For judgment I am come into this world:  that they
@c    who see not may see; and they who see may become blind.

@c    I am come, etc. . .Not that Christ came for that end, that any one
@c    should be made blind:  but that the Jews, by the abuse of his coming,
@c    and by their not receiving him, brought upon themselves this judgment
@c    of blindness.

@c    9:40. And some of the Pharisees, who were with him, heard:  and they
@c    said unto him:  Are we also blind?

@c    9:41. Jesus said to them:  If you were blind, you should not have sin:
@c    but now you say:  We see.  Your sin remaineth.

@c    If you were blind, etc. . .If you were invincibly ignorant, and had
@c    neither read the scriptures, nor seen my miracles, you would not be
@c    guilty of the sin of infidelity:  but now, as you boast of your
@c    knowledge of the scriptures, you are inexcusable.



@c    John Chapter 10


@c    Christ is the door and the good shepherd.  He and his Father are one.

@c    10:1. Amen, amen, I say to you:  He that entereth not by the door into
@c    the sheepfold but climbeth up another way, the same is a thief and a
@c    robber.

@c    10:2. But he that entereth in by the door is the shepherd of the sheep.

@c    10:3. To him the porter openeth:  and the sheep hear his voice.  And he
@c    calleth his own sheep by name and leadeth them out.

@c    10:4. And when he hath let out his own sheep, he goeth before them:  and
@c    the sheep follow him, because they know his voice.

@c    10:5. But a stranger they follow not, but fly from him, because they
@c    know not the voice of strangers.

@c    10:6. This proverb Jesus spoke to them.  But they understood not what he
@c    spoke.

@c    10:7. Jesus therefore said to them again:  Amen, amen, I say to you, I
@c    am the door of the sheep.

@c    10:8. All others, as many as have come, are thieves and robbers:  and
@c    the sheep heard them not.

@c    10:9. I am the door.  By me, if any man enter in, he shall be saved:  and
@c    he shall go in and go out, and shall find pastures.

@c    10:10. The thief cometh not, but for to steal and to kill and to
@c    destroy.  I am come that they may have life and may have it more
@c    abundantly.

@c    10:11. I am the good shepherd.  The good shepherd giveth his life for
@c    his sheep.

@c    10:12. But the hireling and he that is not the shepherd, whose own the
@c    sheep are not, seeth the wolf coming and leaveth the sheep and flieth:
@c    and the wolf casteth and scattereth the sheep,

@c    10:13. And the hireling flieth, because he is a hireling:  and he hath
@c    no care for the sheep.

@c    10:14. I am the good shepherd:  and I know mine, and mine know me.

@c    10:15. As the Father knoweth me, and I know the Father:  and I lay down
@c    my life for my sheep.

@c    10:16. And other sheep I have that are not of this fold:  them also I
@c    must bring.  And they shall hear my voice:  And there shall be one fold
@c    and one shepherd.

@c    10:17. Therefore doth the Father love me:  because I lay down my life,
@c    that I may take it again.

@c    10:18. No man taketh it away from me:  but I lay it down of myself.  And
@c    I have power to lay it down:  and I have power to take it up again.  This
@c    commandment have I received of my Father.

@c    10:19. A dissension rose again among the Jews for these words.

@c    10:20. And many of them said:  He hath a devil and is mad.  Why hear you
@c    him?

@c    10:21. Others said:  These are not the words of one that hath a devil.
@c    Can a devil open the eyes of the blind?

@c    10:22. And it was the feast of the dedication at Jerusalem:  and it was
@c    winter.

@c    10:23. And Jesus walked in the temple, in Solomon's porch.

@c    10:24. The Jews therefore came round about him and said to him:  How
@c    long dost thou hold our souls in suspense?  If thou be the Christ, tell
@c    us plainly.

@c    10:25. Jesus answered them:  I speak to you, and you believe not:  the
@c    works that I do in the name of my Father, they give testimony of me.

@c    10:26. But you do not believe, because you are not of my sheep.

@c    10:27. My sheep hear my voice.  And I know them:  and they follow me.

@c    10:28. And I give them life everlasting:  and they shall not perish for
@c    ever.  And no man shall pluck them out of my hand.

@c    10:29. That which my Father hath given me is greater than all:  and no
@c    one can snatch them out of the hand of my Father.

@c    10:30. I and the Father are one.

@c    I and the Father are one. . .That is, one divine nature, but two
@c    distinct persons.

@c    10:31. The Jews then took up stones to stone him.

@c    10:32. Jesus answered them:  Many good works I have shewed you from my
@c    Father.  For which of those works do you stone me?

@c    10:33. The Jews answered him:  For a good work we stone thee not, but
@c    for blasphemy:  and because that thou.  being a, man, makest thyself God.

@c    10:34. Jesus answered them:  Is it not written in your law:  I said, you
@c    are gods?

@c    10:35. If he called them gods to whom the word of God was spoken; and
@c    the scripture cannot be broken:

@c    10:36. Do you say of him whom the Father hath sanctified and sent into
@c    the world:  Thou blasphemest; because I said:  I am the Son of God?

@c    10:37. If I do not the works of my Father, believe me not.

@c    10:38. But if I do, though you will not believe me, believe the works:
@c    that you may know and believe that the Father is in me and I in the
@c    Father.

@c    10:39. They sought therefore to take him:  and he escaped out of their
@c    hands.

@c    10:40. And he went again beyond the Jordan, into that place where John
@c    was baptizing first.  And there he abode.

@c    10:41. And many resorted to him:  and they said:  John indeed did no
@c    sign.

@c    10:42. But all things whatsoever John said of this man were true.  And
@c    many believed n him.



@c    John Chapter 11


@c    Christ raises Lazarus to life.  The rulers resolve to put him to death.

@c    11:1. Now there was a certain man sick, named Lazarus, of Bethania, of
@c    the town of Mary and of Martha her sister.

@c    11:2. (And Mary was she that anointed the Lord with ointment and wiped
@c    his feet with her hair:  whose brother Lazarus was sick.)

@c    11:3. His sisters therefore sent to him, saying:  Lord, behold, he whom
@c    thou lovest is sick.

@c    11:4. And Jesus hearing it, said to them:  This sickness is not unto
@c    death, but for the glory of God:  that the Son of God may be glorified
@c    by it.

@c    11:5. Now Jesus loved Martha and her sister Mary and Lazarus.

@c    11:6. When he had heard therefore that he was sick, he still remained
@c    in the same place two days.

@c    11:7. Then after that, he said to his disciples:  Let us go into Judea
@c    again.

@c    11:8. The disciples say to him:  Rabbi, the Jews but now sought to stone
@c    thee.  And goest thou thither again?

@c    11:9. Jesus answered:  Are there not twelve hours of the day?  If a man
@c    walk in the day he stumbleth not, because he seeth the light of this
@c    world:

@c    11:10. But if he walk in the night, he stumbleth, because the light is
@c    not in him.

@c    11:11. These things he said; and after that he said to them:  Lazarus
@c    our friend sleepeth:  but I go that I may awake him out of sleep.

@c    11:12. His disciples therefore said:  Lord, if he sleep, he shall do
@c    well.

@c    11:13. But Jesus spoke of his death:  and they thought that he spoke of
@c    the repose of sleep.

@c    11:14. Then therefore Jesus said to them plainly:  Lazarus is dead.

@c    11:15. And I am glad, for your sakes; that I was not there, that you
@c    may believe.  But, let us go to him.

@c    11:16. Thomas therefore, who is called Didymus, said to his fellow
@c    disciples:  Let us also go, that we may die with him.

@c    11:17. Jesus therefore came:  and found that he had been four days
@c    already in the grave.

@c    11:18. (Now Bethania was near Jerusalem, about fifteen furlongs off.)

@c    11:19. And many of the Jews were come to Martha and Mary, to comfort
@c    them concerning their brother.

@c    11:20. Martha therefore, as soon as she heard that Jesus was come, went
@c    to meet him:  but Mary sat at home.

@c    11:21. Martha therefore said to Jesus:  Lord, if thou hadst been here,
@c    my brother had not died.

@c    11:22. But now also I know that whatsoever thou wilt ask of God, God
@c    will give it thee.

@c    11:23. Jesus saith to her:  Thy brother shall rise again.

@c    11:24. Martha saith to him:  I know that he shall rise again, in the
@c    resurrection at the last day.

@c    11:25. Jesus said to her:  I am the resurrection and the life:  he that
@c    believeth in me, although he be dead, shall live:

@c    11:26. And every one that liveth and believeth in me shall not die for
@c    ever.  Believest thou this?

@c    11:27. She saith to him:  Yea, Lord, I have believed that thou art
@c    Christ, the Son of the living God, who art come into this world.

@c    11:28. And when she had said these things, she went and called her
@c    sister Mary secretly, saying:  The master is come and calleth for thee.

@c    11:29. She, as soon as she heard this, riseth quickly and cometh to
@c    him.

@c    11:30. For Jesus was not yet come into the town:  but he was still in
@c    that place where Martha had met him.

@c    11:31. The Jews therefore, who were with her in the house and comforted
@c    her, when they saw Mary, that she rose up speedily and went out,
@c    followed her, saying:  She goeth to the grave to weep there.

@c    11:32. When Mary therefore was come where Jesus was, seeing him, she
@c    fell down at his feet and saith to him.  Lord, if thou hadst been here,
@c    my brother had not died.

@c    11:33. Jesus, therefore, when he saw her weeping, and the Jews that
@c    were come with her weeping, groaned in the spirit and troubled himself,

@c    11:34. And said:  Where have you laid him?  They say to him:  Lord, come
@c    and see.

@c    11:35. And Jesus wept.

@c    11:36. The Jews therefore said:  Behold how he loved him.

@c    11:37. But some of them said:  Could not he that opened the eyes of the
@c    man born blind have caused that this man should not die?

@c    11:38. Jesus therefore again groaning in himself, cometh to the
@c    sepulchre.  Now it was a cave; and a stone was laid over it.

@c    11:39. Jesus saith:  Take away the stone.  Martha, the sister of him that
@c    was dead, saith to him:  Lord, by this time he stinketh, for he is now
@c    of four days.

@c    11:40. Jesus saith to her:  Did not I say to thee that if thou believe,
@c    thou shalt see the glory of God?

@c    11:41. They took therefore the stone away.  And Jesus lifting up his
@c    eyes, said:  Father, I give thee thanks that thou hast heard me.

@c    11:42. And I knew that thou hearest me always:  but because of the
@c    people who stand about have I said it, that they may believe that thou
@c    hast sent me.

@c    11:43. When he had said these things, he cried with a loud voice:
@c    Lazarus, come forth.

@c    11:44. And presently he that had been dead came forth, bound feet and
@c    hands with winding bands.  And his face was bound about with a napkin.
@c    Jesus said to them:  Loose him and let him go.

@c    11:45. Many therefore of the Jews, who were come to Mary and Martha and
@c    had seen the things that Jesus did, believed in him.

@c    11:46. But some of them went to the Pharisees and told them the things
@c    that Jesus had done.

@c    11:47. The chief priests, therefore, and the Pharisees gathered a
@c    council and said:  What do we, for this man doth many miracles?

@c    11:48. If we let him alone so, all will believe in him; and the Romans
@c    will come, and take away our place and nation.

@c    11:49. But one of them, named Caiphas, being the high priest that year,
@c    said to them:  You know nothing.

@c    11:50. Neither do you consider that it is expedient for you that one
@c    man should die for the people and that the whole nation perish not.

@c    11:51. And this he spoke not of himself:  but being the high priest of
@c    that year, he prophesied that Jesus should die for the nation.

@c    11:52. And not only for the nation, but to gather together in one the
@c    children of God that were dispersed.

@c    11:53. From that day therefore they devised to put him to death.

@c    11:54. Wherefore Jesus walked no more openly among the Jews:  but he
@c    went into a country near the desert, unto a city that is called Ephrem.
@c    And there he abode with his disciples.

@c    11:55. And the pasch of the Jews was at hand:  and many from the country
@c    went up to Jerusalem, before the pasch, to purify themselves.

@c    11:56. They sought therefore for Jesus; and they discoursed one with
@c    another, standing in the temple:  What think you that he is not come to
@c    the festival day?  And the chief priests and Pharisees had given a
@c    commandment that, if any man knew where he was, he should tell, that
@c    they might apprehend him.



@c    John Chapter 12


@c    The anointing of Christ's feet.  His riding into Jerusalem upon an ass.
@c    A voice from heaven.

@c    12:1. Jesus therefore, six days before the pasch, came to Bethania,
@c    where Lazarus had been dead, whom Jesus raised to life.

@c    12:2. And they made him a supper there:  and Martha served.  But Lazarus
@c    was one of them that were at table with him.

@c    12:3. Mary therefore took a pound of ointment of right spikenard, of
@c    great price, and anointed the feet of Jesus and wiped his feet with her
@c    hair.  And the house was filled with the odour of the ointment.

@c    12:4. Then one of his disciples, Judas Iscariot, he that was about to
@c    betray him, said:

@c    12:5. Why was not this ointment sold for three hundred pence and given
@c    to the poor?

@c    12:6. Now he said this not because he cared for the poor; but because
@c    he was a thief and, having the purse, carried the things that were put
@c    therein.

@c    12:7. Jesus therefore said:  Let her alone, that she may keep it against
@c    the day of my burial.

@c    12:8. For the poor you have always with you:  but me you have not
@c    always.

@c    See the annotation of St. Matt. 26. 11.

@c    12:9. A great multitude therefore of the Jews knew that he was there;
@c    and they came, not for Jesus' sake only, but that they might see
@c    Lazarus, whom he had raised from the dead.

@c    12:10. But the chief priests thought to kill Lazarus also:

@c    12:11. Because many of the Jews, by reason of him, went away and
@c    believed in Jesus.

@c    12:12. And on the next day, a great multitude that was come to the
@c    festival day, when they had heard that Jesus was coming to Jerusalem,

@c    12:13. Took branches of palm trees and went forth to meet him and cried
@c    Hosanna.  Blessed is he that cometh in the name of the Lord, the king of
@c    Israel.

@c    12:14. And Jesus found a young ass and sat upon it, as it is written:

@c    12:15. Fear not, daughter of Sion:  behold thy king cometh, sitting on
@c    an ass's colt.

@c    12:16. These things his disciples did not know at the first:  but when
@c    Jesus was glorified, then they remembered that these things were
@c    written of him and that they had done these things to him.

@c    12:17. The multitude therefore gave testimony, which was with him, when
@c    he called Lazarus out of the grave and raised him from the dead.

@c    12:18. For which reason also the people came to meet him, because they
@c    heard that he had done this miracle.

@c    12:19. The Pharisees therefore said among themselves:  Do you see that
@c    we prevail nothing?  Behold, the whole world is gone after him.

@c    12:20. Now there were certain Gentiles among them, who came up to adore
@c    on the festival day.

@c    12:21. These therefore came to Philip, who was of Bethsaida of Galilee,
@c    and desired him, saying:  Sir, we would see Jesus.

@c    12:22. Philip cometh and telleth Andrew.  Again Andrew and Philip told
@c    Jesus.

@c    12:23. But Jesus answered them, saying:  The hour is come that the Son
@c    of man should be glorified.

@c    12:24. Amen, amen, I say to you, unless the grain of wheat falling into
@c    the ground die,

@c    12:25. Itself remaineth alone.  But if it die it bringeth forth much
@c    fruit.  He that loveth his life shall lose it and he that hateth his
@c    life in this world keepeth it unto life eternal.

@c    12:26. If any man minister to me, let him follow me:  and where I am,
@c    there also shall my minister be.  If any man minister to me, him will my
@c    Father honour.

@c    12:27. Now is my soul troubled.  And what shall I say?  Father, save me
@c    from this hour.  But for this cause I came unto this hour.

@c    12:28. Father, glorify thy name.  A voice therefore came from heaven:  I
@c    have both glorified it and will glorify it again.

@c    12:29. The multitude therefore that stood and heard said that it
@c    thundered.  Others said:  An angel spoke to him.

@c    12:30. Jesus answered and said:  This voice came not because of me, but
@c    for your sakes.

@c    12:31. Now is the judgment of the world:  now shall the prince of this
@c    world be cast out.

@c    12:32. And I, if I be lifted up from the earth, will draw all things to
@c    myself.

@c    12:33. (Now this he said, signifying what death he should die.)

@c    12:34. The multitude answered him:  We have heard out of the law that
@c    Christ abideth for ever.  And how sayest thou:  The Son of man must be
@c    lifted up?  Who is this Son of man?

@c    12:35. Jesus therefore said to them:  Yet a little while, the light is
@c    among you.  Walk whilst you have the light, and the darkness overtake
@c    you not.  And he that walketh in darkness knoweth not whither be goeth.

@c    12:36. Whilst you have the light, believe in the light, that you may be
@c    the children of light.  These things Jesus spoke:  and he went away and
@c    hid himself from them.

@c    12:37. And whereas he had done so many miracles before them, they
@c    believed not in him:

@c    12:38. That the saying of Isaias the prophet might be fulfilled, which
@c    he said:  Lord, who hath believed our hearing?  And to whom hath the arm
@c    of the Lord been revealed?

@c    12:39. Therefore they could not believe, because Isaias said again:

@c    They could not believe. . .Because they would not, saith St. Augustine,
@c    Tract. 33, in Joan.  See the annotation, St. Mark 4. 12.

@c    12:40. He hath blinded their eyes and hardened their heart, that they
@c    should not see with their eyes, nor understand with their heart and be
@c    converted:  and I should heal them.

@c    12:41. These things said Isaias, when he saw his glory, and spoke of
@c    him.

@c    12:42. However, many of the chief men also believed in him:  but because
@c    of the Pharisees they did not confess him, that they might not be cast
@c    out of the synagogue.

@c    12:43. For they loved the glory of men more than the glory of God.

@c    12:44. But Jesus cried and said:  He that believeth in me doth not
@c    believe in me, but in him that sent me.

@c    12:45. And he that seeth me, seeth him that sent me.

@c    12:46. I am come, a light into the world, that whosoever believeth in
@c    me may not remain in darkness.

@c    12:47. And if any man hear my words and keep them not, I do not judge
@c    him for I came not to judge the world, but to save the world.

@c    12:48. He that despiseth me and receiveth not my words hath one that
@c    judgeth him.  The word that I have spoken, the same shall judge him in
@c    the last day.

@c    12:49. For I have not spoken of myself:  but the Father who sent me, he
@c    gave me commandment what I should say and what I should speak.

@c    12:50. And I know that his commandment is life everlasting.  The things
@c    therefore that I speak, even as the Father said unto me, so do I speak.



@c    John Chapter 13


@c    Christ washes his disciples' feet.  The treason of Judas.  The new
@c    commandment of love.

@c    13:1. Before the festival day of the pasch, Jesus knowing that his hour
@c    was come, that he should pass out of this world to the Father:  having
@c    loved his own who were in the world, he loved them unto the end.

@c    Before the festival day of the pasch. . .This was the fourth and last
@c    pasch of the ministry of Christ, and according to the common
@c    computation, was in the thirty-third year of our Lord:  and in the year
@c    of the world 4036.  Some chronologers are of opinion that our Saviour
@c    suffered in the thirty-seventh year of his age:  but these different
@c    opinions on this subject are of no consequence.

@c    13:2. And when supper was done (the devil having now put into the heart
@c    of Judas Iscariot, the son of Simon, to betray him),

@c    13:3. Knowing that the Father had given him all things into his hands
@c    and that he came from God and goeth to God,

@c    13:4. He riseth from supper and layeth aside his garments and, having
@c    taken a towel, girded himself.

@c    13:5. After that, he putteth water into a basin and began to wash the
@c    feet of the disciples and to wipe them with the towel wherewith he was
@c    girded.

@c    13:6. He cometh therefore to Simon Peter.  And Peter saith to him:  Lord,
@c    dost thou wash my feet?

@c    13:7. Jesus answered and said to him:  What I do, thou knowest not now;
@c    but thou shalt know hereafter.

@c    13:8. Peter saith to him:  Thou shalt never wash my feet, Jesus answered
@c    him:  If I wash thee not, thou shalt have no part with me.

@c    13:9. Simon Peter saith to him:  Lord, not only my feet, but also my
@c    hands and my head.

@c    13:10. Jesus saith to him:  He that is washed needeth not but to wash
@c    his feet, but is clean wholly.  And you are clean, but not all.

@c    13:11. For he knew who he was that would betray him; therefore he said:
@c    You are not all clean.

@c    13:12. Then after he had washed their feet and taken his garments,
@c    being set down again, he said to them:  Know you what I have done to
@c    you?

@c    13:13. You call me Master and Lord.  And you say well:  for so I am.

@c    13:14. If then I being your Lord and Master, have washed your feet; you
@c    also ought to wash one another's feet.

@c    13:15. For I have given you an example, that as I have done to you, so
@c    you do also.

@c    13:16. Amen, amen, I say to you:  The servant is not greater than his
@c    lord:  neither is the apostle greater than he that sent him.

@c    13:17. If you know these things, you shall be blessed if you do them.

@c    13:18. I speak not of you all:  I know whom I have chosen.  But that the
@c    scripture may be fulfilled:  He that eateth bread with me shall lift up
@c    his heel against me,

@c    13:19. At present I tell you, before it come to pass:  that when it
@c    shall come to pass, you may believe that I am he.

@c    13:20. Amen, amen, I say to you, he that receiveth whomsoever I send
@c    receiveth me:  and he that receiveth me receiveth him that sent me.

@c    13:21. When Jesus had said these things, he was troubled in spirit; and
@c    he testified, and said:  Amen, amen, I say to you, one of you shall
@c    betray me.

@c    13:22. The disciples therefore looked one upon another, doubting of
@c    whom he spoke.

@c    13:23. Now there was leaning on Jesus' bosom one of his disciples, whom
@c    Jesus loved.

@c    13:24. Simon Peter therefore beckoned to him and said to him:  Who is it
@c    of whom he speaketh?

@c    13:25. He therefore, leaning on the breast of Jesus, saith to him:
@c    Lord, who is it?

@c    13:26. Jesus answered:  He it is to whom I shall reach bread dipped.  And
@c    when he had dipped the bread, he gave it to Judas Iscariot, the son of
@c    Simon.

@c    13:27. And after the morsel, Satan entered into him.  And Jesus said to
@c    him:  That which thou dost, do quickly.

@c    That which thou dost, do quickly. . .It is not a license, much less a
@c    command, to go about his treason:  but a signification to him that
@c    Christ would not hinder or resist what he was about, do it as soon as
@c    he pleased:  but was both ready and desirous to suffer for our
@c    redemption.

@c    13:28. Now no man at the table knew to what purpose he said this unto
@c    him.

@c    13:29. For some thought, because Judas had the purse, that Jesus had
@c    said to him:  Buy those things which we have need of for the festival
@c    day:  or that he should give something to the poor.

@c    13:30. He therefore, having received the morsel, went out immediately.
@c    And it was night.

@c    13:31. When he therefore was gone out, Jesus said:  Now is the Son of
@c    man glorified; and God is glorified in him.

@c    13:32. If God be glorified in him, God also will glorify him in
@c    himself:  and immediately will he glorify him.

@c    13:33. Little children, yet a little while I am with you.  You shall
@c    seek me.  And as I said to the Jews:  Whither I go you cannot come; so I
@c    say to you now.

@c    13:34. A new commandment I give unto you:  That you love one another, as
@c    I have loved you, that you also love one another.

@c    13:35. By this shall all men know that you are my disciples, if you
@c    have love one for another.

@c    13:36. Simon Peter saith to him:  Lord, whither goest thou?  Jesus
@c    answered:  Whither I go, thou canst not follow me now:  but thou shalt
@c    follow hereafter.

@c    13:37. Peter saith to him:  Why cannot I follow thee now?  I will lay
@c    down my life for thee.

@c    13:38. Jesus answered him:  Wilt thou lay down thy life for me?  Amen,
@c    amen, I say to thee, the cock shall not crow, till thou deny me thrice.



@c    John Chapter 14


@c    Christ's discourse after his last supper.

@c    14:1. Let not your heart be troubled.  You believe in God:  believe also
@c    in me.

@c    14:2. In my Father's house there are many mansions.  If not, I would
@c    have told you:  because I go to prepare a place for you.

@c    14:3. And if I shall go and prepare a place for you, I will come again
@c    and will take you to myself:  that where I am, you also may be.

@c    14:4. And whither I go you know:  and the way you know.

@c    14:5. Thomas saith to him:  Lord, we know not whither thou goest.  And
@c    how can we know the way?

@c    14:6. Jesus saith to him:  I am the way, and the truth, and the life.  No
@c    man cometh to the Father, but by me.

@c    14:7. If you had known me, you would without doubt have known my Father
@c    also:  and from henceforth you shall know him.  And you have seen him.

@c    14:8. Philip saith to him:  Lord, shew us the Father; and it is enough
@c    for us.

@c    14:9. Jesus saith to him:  Have I been so long a time with you and have
@c    you not known me?  Philip, he that seeth me seeth the Father also.  How
@c    sayest thou:  Shew us the Father?

@c    14:10. Do you not believe that I am in the Father and the Father in me?
@c    The words that I speak to you, I speak not of myself.  But the Father
@c    who abideth in me, he doth the works.

@c    14:11. Believe you not that I am in the Father and the Father in me?

@c    14:12. Otherwise believe for the very works' sake.  Amen, amen, I say to
@c    you, he that believeth in me, the works that I do, he also shall do:
@c    and greater than these shall he do.

@c    14:13. Because I go to the Father:  and whatsoever you shall ask the
@c    Father in my name, that will I do:  that the Father may be glorified in
@c    the Son.

@c    14:14. If you shall ask me any thing in my name, that I will do.

@c    14:15. If you love me, keep my commandments.

@c    14:16. And I will ask the Father:  and he shall give you another
@c    Paraclete, that he may abide with you for ever:

@c    Paraclete. . .That is, a comforter:  or also an advocate; inasmuch as by
@c    inspiring prayer, he prays, as it were, in us, and pleads for us.  For
@c    ever. . .Hence it is evident that this Spirit of Truth was not only
@c    promised to the persons of the apostles, but also to their successors
@c    through all generations.

@c    14:17. The spirit of truth, whom the world cannot receive, because it
@c    seeth him not, nor knoweth him.  But you shall know him; because he
@c    shall abide with you and shall be in you.

@c    14:18. I will not leave you orphans:  I will come to you.

@c    14:19. Yet a little while and the world seeth me no more.  But you see
@c    me:  because I live, and you shall live.

@c    14:20. In that day you shall know that I am in my Father:  and you in
@c    me, and I in you.

@c    14:21. He that hath my commandments and keepeth them; he it is that
@c    loveth me.  And he that loveth me shall be loved of my Father:  and I
@c    will love him and will manifest myself to him.

@c    14:22. Judas saith to him, not the Iscariot:  Lord, how is it that thou
@c    wilt manifest thyself to us, and not to the world?

@c    14:23. Jesus answered and said to him:  If any one love me, he will keep
@c    my word.  And my Father will love him and we will come to him and will
@c    make our abode with him.

@c    14:24. He that loveth me not keepeth not my words.  And the word which
@c    you have heard is not mine; but the Father's who sent me.

@c    14:25. These things have I spoken to you, abiding with you.

@c    14:26. But the Paraclete, the Holy Ghost, whom the Father will send in
@c    my name, he will teach you all things and bring all things to your
@c    mind, whatsoever I shall have said to you.

@c    Teach you all things. . .Here the Holy Ghost is promised to the apostles
@c    and their successors, particularly, in order to teach them all truth,
@c    and to preserve them from error.

@c    14:27. Peace I leave with you:  my peace I give unto you:  not as the
@c    world giveth, do I give unto you.  Let not your heart be troubled:  nor
@c    let it be afraid.

@c    14:28. You have heard that I said to you:  I go away, and I come unto
@c    you.  If you loved me you would indeed be glad, because I go to the
@c    Father:  for the Father is greater than I.

@c    For the Father is greater than I. . .It is evident, that Christ our Lord
@c    speaks here of himself as he is made man:  for as God he is equal to the
@c    Father. (See Phil. 2.)  Any difficulty of understanding the meaning of
@c    these words will vanish, when the relative circumstances of the text
@c    here are considered:  for Christ being at this time shortly to suffer
@c    death, signified to his apostles his human nature by these very words:
@c    for as God he could not die.  And therefore as he was both God and man,
@c    it must follow that according to his humanity he was to die, which the
@c    apostles were soon to see and believe, as he expresses, ver. 29.  And
@c    now I have told you before it come to pass:  that when it shall come to
@c    pass, you may believe.

@c    14:29. And now I have told you before it come to pass:  that when it
@c    shall come to pass, you may believe.

@c    14:30. I will not now speak many things with you.  For the prince of
@c    this world:  cometh:  and in me he hath not any thing.

@c    14:31. But that the world may know that I love the Father:  and as the
@c    Father hath given me commandments, so do I.  Arise, let us go hence.



@c    John Chapter 15


@c    A continuation of Christ's discourse to his disciples.

@c    15:1. I am the true vine:  and my Father is the husbandman.

@c    15:2. Every branch in me that beareth not fruit, he will take away:  and
@c    every one that beareth fruit, he will purge it, that it may bring forth
@c    more fruit.

@c    15:3. Now you are clean, by reason of the word which I have spoken to
@c    you.

@c    15:4. Abide in me:  and I in you.  As the branch cannot bear fruit of
@c    itself, unless it abide in the vine, so neither can you, unless you
@c    abide in me.

@c    15:5. I am the vine:  you the branches.  He that abideth in me, and I in
@c    him, the same beareth much fruit:  for without me you can do nothing.

@c    15:6. If any one abide not in me, he shall be cast forth as a branch
@c    and shall wither:  and they shall gather him up and cast him into the
@c    fire:  and he burneth.

@c    15:7. If you abide in me and my words abide in you, you shall ask
@c    whatever you will:  and it shall be done unto you.

@c    15:8. In this is my Father glorified:  that you bring forth very much
@c    fruit and become my disciples.

@c    15:9. As the Father hath loved me, I also have loved you.  Abide in my
@c    love.

@c    15:10. If you keep my commandments, you shall abide in my love:  as I
@c    also have kept my Father's commandments and do abide in his love.

@c    15:11. These things I have spoken to you, that my joy may be in you,
@c    and your joy may be filled.

@c    15:12. This is my commandment, that you love one another, as I have
@c    loved you.

@c    15:13. Greater love than this no man hath, that a man lay down his life
@c    for his friends.

@c    15:14. You are my friends, if you do the things that I command you.

@c    15:15. I will not now call you servants:  for the servant knoweth not
@c    what his lord doth.  But I have called you friends.  because all things,
@c    whatsoever I have heard of my Father, I have made known to you.

@c    15:16. You have not chosen me:  but I have chosen you; and have
@c    appointed you, that you should go and should bring forth fruit; and
@c    your fruit should remain:  that whatsoever you shall ask of the Father
@c    in my name, he may give it you.

@c    15:17. These things I command you, that you love one another.

@c    15:18. If the world hate you, know ye that it hath hated me before you.

@c    15:19. If you had been of the world, the world would love its own:  but
@c    because you are not of the world, but I have chosen you out of the
@c    world, therefore the world hateth you.

@c    15:20. Remember my word that I said to you:  The servant is not greater
@c    than his master.  If they have persecuted me, they will also persecute
@c    you.  If they have kept my word, they will keep yours also.

@c    15:21. But all these things they will do to you for my name's sake:
@c    because they know not him that sent me.

@c    15:22. If I had not come and spoken to them, they would not have sin:
@c    but now they have no excuse for their sin.

@c    15:23. He that hateth me hateth my Father also.

@c    15:24. If I had not done among them the works that no other man hath
@c    done, they would not have sin:  but now they have both seen and hated
@c    both me and my Father.

@c    15:25. But that the word may be fulfilled which is written in their
@c    law:  they hated me without cause.

@c    15:26. But when the Paraclete cometh, whom I will send you from the
@c    Father, the Spirit of truth, who proceedeth from the Father, he shall
@c    give testimony of me.

@c    Whom I will send. . .This proves, against the modern Greeks, that the
@c    Holy Ghost proceedeth from the Son, as well as from the Father:
@c    otherwise he could not be sent by the Son.

@c    15:27. And you shall give testimony, because you are with me from the
@c    beginning.



@c    John Chapter 16


@c    The conclusion of Christ's last discourse to his disciples.

@c    16:1. These things have I spoken to you things have I spoken to you
@c    that you may not be scandalized.

@c    16:2. They will put you out of the synagogues:  yea, the hour cometh,
@c    that whosoever killeth you will think that he doth a service to God.

@c    16:3. And these things will they do to you; because they have not known
@c    the Father nor me.

@c    16:4. But these things I have told you, that when the hour shall come,
@c    you may remember that I told you of them.

@c    16:5. But I told you not these things from the beginning, because I was
@c    with you.  And now I go to him that sent me, and none of you asketh me:
@c    Whither goest thou?

@c    16:6. But because I have spoken these things to you, sorrow hath filled
@c    your heart.

@c    16:7. But I tell you the truth:  it is expedient to you that I go.  For
@c    if I go not, the Paraclete will not come to you:  but if I go, I will
@c    send him to you.

@c    16:8. And when he is come, he will convince the world of sin and of
@c    justice and of judgment.

@c    He will convince the world of sin, etc. . .The Holy Ghost, by his coming
@c    brought over many thousands, first, to a sense of their sin in not
@c    believing in Christ.  Secondly, to a conviction of the justice of
@c    Christ, now sitting at the right hand of his Father.  And thirdly, to a
@c    right apprehension of the judgment prepared for them that choose to
@c    follow Satan, who is already judged and condemned.

@c    16:9. Of sin:  because they believed not in me.

@c    16:10. And of justice:  because I go to the Father:  and you shall see me
@c    no longer.

@c    16:11. And of judgment:  because the prince of this world is already
@c    judged.

@c    16:12. I have yet many things to say to you:  but you cannot bear them
@c    now.

@c    16:13. But when he, the Spirit of truth, is come, he will teach you all
@c    truth.  For he shall not speak of himself:  but what things soever he
@c    shall hear, he shall speak.  And the things that are to come, he shall
@c    shew you.

@c    Will teach you all truth. . .See the annotation on chap. 14. ver. 26.

@c    16:14. He shall glorify me:  because he shall receive of mine and shall
@c    shew it to you.

@c    16:15. All things whatsoever the Father hath are mine.  Therefore I said
@c    that he shall receive of me and shew it to you.

@c    16:16. A little while, and now you shall not see me:  and again a little
@c    while, and you shall see me:  because I go to the Father.

@c    16:17. Then some of his disciples said one to another:  What is this
@c    that he saith to us:  A little while, and you shall not see me:  and
@c    again a little while, and you shall see me, and, Because I go to the
@c    Father?

@c    16:18. They said therefore:  What is this that he saith, A little while?
@c    We know not what he speaketh.

@c    16:19. And Jesus knew that they had a mind to ask him.  And he said to
@c    them:  Of this do you inquire among yourselves, because I said:  A little
@c    while, and you shall not see me; and again a little while, and you
@c    shall see me?

@c    16:20. Amen, amen, I say to you, that you shall lament and weep, but
@c    the world shall rejoice:  and you shall be made sorrowful, but your
@c    sorrow shall be turned into joy.

@c    16:21. A woman, when she is in labour, hath sorrow, because her hour is
@c    come; but when she hath brought forth the child, she remembereth no
@c    more the anguish, for joy that a man is born into the world.

@c    16:22. So also you now indeed have sorrow:  but I will see you again and
@c    your heart shall rejoice.  And your joy no man shall take from you.

@c    16:23. And in that day you shall not ask me any thing.  Amen, amen, I
@c    say to you:  if you ask the Father any thing in my name, he will give it
@c    you.

@c    16:24. Hitherto, you have not asked any thing in my name.  Ask, and you
@c    shall receive; that your joy may be full.

@c    16:25. These things I have spoken to you in proverbs.  The hour cometh
@c    when I will no longer speak to you in proverbs, but will shew you
@c    plainly of the Father.

@c    16:26. In that day, you shall ask in my name:  and I say not to you that
@c    I will ask the Father for you.

@c    16:27. For the Father himself loveth you, because you have loved me and
@c    have believed that I came out from God.

@c    16:28. I came forth from the Father and am come into the world:  again I
@c    leave the world and I go to the Father.

@c    16:29. His disciples say to him:  Behold, now thou speakest plainly and
@c    speakest no proverb.

@c    16:30. Now we know that thou knowest all things and thou needest not
@c    that any man should ask thee.  By this we believe that thou camest forth
@c    from God.

@c    16:31. Jesus answered them:  Do you now believe?

@c    16:32. Behold, the hour cometh, and it is now come, that you shall be
@c    scattered every man to his own and shall leave me alone.  And yet I am
@c    not alone, because the Father is with me.

@c    16:33. These things I have spoken to you, that in me you may have
@c    peace.  In the world you shall have distress.  But have confidence.  I
@c    have overcome the world.



@c    John Chapter 17


@c    Christ's prayer for his disciples.

@c    17:1. These things Jesus spoke:  and lifting up his eyes to heaven, he
@c    said:  the hour is come.  Glorify thy Son, that thy Son may glorify thee.

@c    17:2. As thou hast given him power over all flesh, that he may give
@c    eternal life to all whom thou hast given him.

@c    17:3. Now this is eternal life:  That they may know thee, the only true
@c    God, and Jesus Christ, whom thou hast sent.

@c    17:4. I have glorified thee on the earth; I have finished the work
@c    which thou gavest me to do.

@c    17:5. And now glorify thou me, O Father, with thyself, with the glory
@c    which I had, before the world was, with thee.

@c    17:6. I have manifested thy name to the men whom thou hast given me out
@c    of the world.  Thine they were:  and to me thou gavest them.  And they
@c    have kept thy word.

@c    17:7. Now they have known that all things which thou hast given me are
@c    from thee:

@c    17:8. Because the words which thou gavest me, I have given to them.  And
@c    they have received them and have known in very deed that I came out
@c    from thee:  and they have believed that thou didst send me.

@c    17:9. I pray for them.  I pray not for the world, but for them whom thou
@c    hast given me:  because they are thine.

@c    17:10. And all my things are thine, and thine are mine:  and I am
@c    glorified in them.

@c    17:11. And now I am not in the world, and these are in the world, and I
@c    come to thee.  Holy Father, keep them in thy name whom thou hast given
@c    me:  that they may be one, as we also are.

@c    17:12. While I was with them, I kept them in thy name.  Those whom thou
@c    gavest me have I kept:  and none of them is lost, but the son of
@c    perdition:  that the scripture may be fulfilled.

@c    17:13. And now I come to thee:  and these things I speak in the world,
@c    that they may have my joy filled in themselves.

@c    17:14. I have given them thy word, and the world hath hated them:
@c    because they are not of the world, as I also am not of the world.

@c    17:15. I pray not that thou shouldst take them out of the world, but
@c    that thou shouldst keep them from evil.

@c    17:16. They are not of the world, as I also am not of the world.

@c    17:17. Sanctify them in truth.  Thy word is truth.

@c    17:18. As thou hast sent me into the world, I also have sent them into
@c    the world.

@c    17:19. And for them do I sanctify myself, that they also may be
@c    sanctified in truth.

@c    17:20. And not for them only do I pray, but for them also who through
@c    their word shall believe in me.

@c    17:21. That they all may be one, as thou, Father, in me, and I in thee;
@c    that they also may be one in us:  that the world may believe that thou
@c    hast sent me.

@c    17:22. And the glory which thou hast given me, I have given to them:
@c    that, they may be one, as we also are one.

@c    17:23. I in them, and thou in me:  that they may be made perfect in one:
@c    and the world may know that thou hast sent me and hast loved them, as
@c    thou hast also loved me.

@c    17:24. Father, I will that where I am, they also whom thou hast given
@c    me may be with me:  that they may see my glory which thou hast given me,
@c    because thou hast loved me before the creation of the world.

@c    17:25. Just Father, the world hath not known thee:  but I have known
@c    thee.  And these have known that thou hast sent me.

@c    17:26. And I have made known thy name to them and will make it known:
@c    that the love wherewith thou hast loved me may be in them, and I in
@c    them.



@c    John Chapter 18


@c    The history of the passion of Christ.

@c    18:1. When Jesus had said these things, he went forth with his
@c    disciples over the brook Cedron, where there was a garden, into which
@c    he entered with his disciples.

@c    18:2. And Judas also, who betrayed him, knew the place:  because Jesus
@c    had often resorted thither together with his disciples.

@c    18:3. Judas therefore having received a band of soldiers and servants
@c    from the chief priests and the Pharisees, cometh thither with lanterns
@c    and torches and weapons.

@c    18:4. Jesus therefore, knowing all things that should come upon him,
@c    went forth and said to them:  Whom seek ye?

@c    18:5. They answered him:  Jesus of Nazareth.  Jesus saith to them:  I am
@c    he.  And Judas also, who betrayed him, stood with them.

@c    18:6. As soon therefore as he had said to them:  I am he; they went
@c    backward and fell to the ground.

@c    18:7. Again therefore he asked them:  Whom seek ye?  And they said:
@c    Jesus of Nazareth.

@c    18:8. Jesus answered:  I have told you that I am he.  If therefore you
@c    seek me, let these go their way,

@c    18:9. That the word might be fulfilled which he said:  Of them whom thou
@c    hast given me, I have not lost any one.

@c    18:10. Then Simon Peter, having a sword, drew it and struck the servant
@c    of the high priest and cut off his right ear.  And the name of thee
@c    servant was Malchus.

@c    18:11. Jesus therefore said to Peter:  Put up thy sword into the
@c    scabbard.  The chalice which my father hath given me, shall I not drink
@c    it?

@c    18:12. Then the band and the tribune and the servants of the Jews took
@c    Jesus and bound him.

@c    18:13. And they led him away to Annas first, for he was father-in-law
@c    to Caiphas, who was the high priest of that year.

@c    18:14. Now Caiphas was he who had given the counsel to the Jews:  That
@c    it was expedient that one man should die for the people.

@c    18:15. And Simon Peter followed Jesus:  and so did another disciple.  And
@c    that disciple was known to the high priest and went in with Jesus into
@c    the court of the high priest.

@c    18:16. But Peter stood at the door without.  The other disciple
@c    therefore, who was known to the high priest, went out and spoke to the
@c    portress and brought in Peter.

@c    18:17. The maid therefore that was portress saith to Peter:  Art not
@c    thou also one of this man's disciple?  He saith I am not.

@c    18:18. Now the servants and ministers stood at a fire of coals, because
@c    it was cold, and warmed themselves.  And with them was Peter also,
@c    standing and warming himself.

@c    18:19. The high priest therefore asked Jesus of his disciples and of
@c    his doctrine.

@c    18:20. Jesus answered him:  I have spoken openly to the world.  I have
@c    always taught in the synagogue and in the temple, whither all the Jews
@c    resort:  and in secret I have spoken nothing.

@c    18:21. Why askest thou me?  Ask them who have heard what I have spoken
@c    unto them.  Behold they know what things I have said.

@c    18:22. And when he had said these things, one of the servants standing
@c    by gave Jesus a blow, saying:  Answerest thou the high priest so?

@c    18:23. Jesus answered him:  If I have spoken evil, give testimony of the
@c    evil; but if well, why strikest thou me?

@c    18:24. And Annas sent him bound to Caiphas the high priest.

@c    18:25. And Simon Peter was standing and warming himself.  They said
@c    therefore to him:  Art not thou also one of his disciples?  He denied it
@c    and said:  I am not.

@c    18:26. One of the servants of the high priest (a kinsman to him whose
@c    ear Peter cut off) saith to him:  Did not I see thee in the garden with
@c    him?

@c    18:27. Again therefore Peter denied:  and immediately the cock crew.

@c    18:28. Then they led Jesus from Caiphas to the governor's hall.  And it
@c    was morning:  and they went not into the hall, that they might not be
@c    defiled, but that they might eat the pasch.

@c    18:29. Pilate therefore went out to them, and said:  What accusation
@c    bring you against this man?

@c    18:30. They answered and said to him:  If he were not a malefactor, we
@c    would not have delivered him up to thee.

@c    18:31. Pilate therefore said to them:  Take him you, and judge him
@c    according to your law.  The Jews therefore said to him:  It is not lawful
@c    for us to put any man to death.

@c    18:32. That the word of Jesus might be fulfilled, which he said,
@c    signifying what death he should die.

@c    18:33. Pilate therefore went into the hall again and called Jesus and
@c    said to him:  Art thou the king of the Jews?

@c    18:34. Jesus answered:  Sayest thou this thing of thyself, or have
@c    others told it thee of me?

@c    18:35. Pilate answered:  Am I a Jew?  Thy own nation and the chief
@c    priests have delivered thee up to me.  What hast thou done?

@c    18:36. Jesus answered:  My kingdom is not of this world.  If my kingdom
@c    were of this world, my servants would certainly strive that I should
@c    not be delivered to the Jews:  but now my kingdom is not from hence.

@c    18:37. Pilate therefore said to him:  Art thou a king then?  Jesus
@c    answered:  Thou sayest that I am a king.  For this was I born, and for
@c    this came I into the world; that I should give testimony to the truth.
@c    Every one that is of the truth heareth my voice.

@c    18:38. Pilate saith to him:  What is truth?  And when he said this, he
@c    went out again to the Jews and saith to them:  I find no cause in him.

@c    18:39. But you have a custom that I should release one unto you at the
@c    Pasch.  Will you, therefore, that I release unto you the king of the
@c    Jews?

@c    18:40. Then cried they all again, saying:  Not this man, but Barabbas.
@c    Now Barabbas was a robber.



@c    John Chapter 19


@c    The continuation of the history of the Passion of Christ.

@c    19:1. Then therefore Pilate took Jesus and scourged him.

@c    19:2. And the soldiers platting a crown of thorns, put it upon his
@c    head:  and they put on him a purple garment.

@c    19:3. And they came to him and said:  Hail, king of the Jews.  And they
@c    gave him blows.

@c    19:4. Pilate therefore went forth again and saith to them:  Behold, I
@c    bring him forth unto you, that you may know that I find no cause in
@c    him.

@c    19:5. (Jesus therefore came forth, bearing the crown of thorns and the
@c    purple garment.)  And he saith to them:  Behold the Man.

@c    19:6. When the chief priests, therefore, and the servants had seen him,
@c    they cried out, saying:  Crucify him, Crucify him.  Pilate saith to them:
@c    Take him you, and crucify him:  for I find no cause in him.

@c    19:7. The Jews answered him:  We have a law; and according to the law he
@c    ought to die, because he made himself the Son of God.

@c    19:8. When Pilate therefore had heard this saying, he feared the more.

@c    19:9. And he entered into the hall again; and he said to Jesus:  Whence
@c    art thou?  But Jesus gave him no answer.

@c    19:10. Pilate therefore saith to him:  Speakest thou not to me?  Knowest
@c    thou not that I have power to crucify thee, and I have power to release
@c    thee?

@c    19:11. Jesus answered:  Thou shouldst not have any power against me,
@c    unless it were given thee from above.  Therefore, he that hath delivered
@c    me to thee hath the greater sin.

@c    19:12. And from henceforth Pilate sought to release him.  But the Jews
@c    cried out, saying:  If thou release this man, thou art not Caesar's
@c    friend.  For whosoever maketh himself a king speaketh against Caesar.

@c    19:13. Now when Pilate had heard these words, he brought Jesus forth
@c    and sat down in the judgment seat, in the place that is called
@c    Lithostrotos, and in Hebrew Gabbatha.

@c    19:14. And it was the parasceve of the pasch, about the sixth hour:  and
@c    he saith to the Jews:  Behold your king.

@c    The parasceve of the pasch. . .That is, the day before the paschal
@c    sabbath.  The eve of every sabbath was called the parasceve, or day of
@c    preparation.  But this was the eve of a high sabbath, viz., that which
@c    fell in the paschal week.

@c    19:15. But they cried out:  Away with him:  Away with him:  Crucify him.
@c    Pilate saith to them:  shall I crucify your king?  The chief priests
@c    answered:  We have no king but Caesar.

@c    19:16. Then therefore he delivered him to them to be crucified.  And
@c    they took Jesus and led him forth.

@c    19:17. And bearing his own cross, he went forth to the place which is
@c    called Calvary, but in Hebrew Golgotha.

@c    19:18. Where they crucified him, and with him two others, one on each
@c    side, and Jesus in the midst.

@c    19:19. And Pilate wrote a title also:  and he put it upon the cross.  And
@c    the writing was:  JESUS OF NAZARETH, THE KING OF THE JEWS.

@c    19:20. This title therefore many of the Jews did read:  because the
@c    place where Jesus was crucified was nigh to the city.  And it was
@c    written in Hebrew, in Greek, and in Latin.

@c    19:21. Then the chief priests of the Jews said to Pilate:  Write not:
@c    The King of the Jews.  But that he said:  I am the King of the Jews.

@c    19:22. Pilate answered:  What I have written, I have written.

@c    19:23. The soldiers therefore, when they had crucified him, took his
@c    garments, (and they made four parts, to every soldier a part) and also
@c    his coat.  Now the coat was without seam, woven from the top throughout.

@c    19:24. They said then one to another:  Let us not cut it but let us cast
@c    lots for it, whose it shall be; that the scripture might be fulfilled,
@c    saying:  They have parted my garments among them, and upon my vesture
@c    they have cast lots.  And the soldiers indeed did these things.

@c    19:25. Now there stood by the cross of Jesus, his mother and his
@c    mother's sister, Mary of Cleophas, and Mary Magdalen.

@c    19:26. When Jesus therefore had seen his mother and the disciple
@c    standing whom he loved, he saith to his mother:  Woman, behold thy son.

@c    19:27. After that, he saith to the disciple:  Behold thy mother.  And
@c    from that hour, the disciple took her to his own.

@c    19:28. Afterwards, Jesus knowing that all things were now accomplished,
@c    that the scripture might be fulfilled, said:  I thirst.

@c    19:29. Now there was a vessel set there, full of vinegar.  And they,
@c    putting a sponge full of vinegar about hyssop, put it to his mouth.

@c    19:30. Jesus therefore, when he had taken the vinegar, said:  It is
@c    consummated.  And bowing his head, he gave up the ghost.

@c    19:31. Then the Jews (because it was the parasceve), that the bodies
@c    might not remain upon the cross on the sabbath day (for that was a
@c    great sabbath day), besought Pilate that their legs might be broken:
@c    and that they might be taken away.

@c    19:32. The soldiers therefore came:  and they broke the legs of the
@c    first, and of the other that was crucified with him.

@c    19:33. But after they were come to Jesus, when they saw that he was
@c    already dead, they did not break his legs.

@c    19:34. But one of the soldiers with a spear opened his side:  and
@c    immediately there came out blood and water.

@c    19:35. And he that saw it hath given testimony:  and his testimony is
@c    true.  And he knoweth that he saith true:  that you also may believe.

@c    19:36. For these things were done that the scripture might be
@c    fulfilled:  You shall not break a bone of him.

@c    19:37. And again another scripture saith:  They shall look on him whom
@c    they pierced.

@c    19:38. And after these things, Joseph of Arimathea (because he was a
@c    disciple of Jesus, but secretly for fear of the Jews), besought Pilate
@c    that he might take away the body of Jesus.  And Pilate gave leave.  He
@c    came therefore and took away the body of Jesus.

@c    19:39. And Nicodemus also came (he who at the first came to Jesus by
@c    night), bringing a mixture of myrrh and aloes, about an hundred pound
@c    weight.

@c    19:40. They took therefore the body of Jesus and bound it in linen
@c    cloths, with the spices, as the manner of the Jews is to bury.

@c    19:41. Now there was in the place where he was crucified a garden:  and
@c    in the garden a new sepulchre, wherein no man yet had been laid.

@c    19:42. There, therefore, because of the parasceve of the Jews, they
@c    laid Jesus:  because the sepulchre was nigh at hand.



@c    John Chapter 20


@c    Christ's resurrection and manifestation to his disciples.

@c    20:1. And on the first day of the week, Mary Magdalen cometh early,
@c    when it was yet dark, unto the sepulchre:  and she saw the stone taken
@c    away from the sepulchre.

@c    20:2. She ran therefore and cometh to Simon Peter and to the other
@c    disciple whom Jesus loved and saith to them:  They have taken away the
@c    Lord out of the sepulchre:  and we know not where they have laid him.

@c    20:3. Peter therefore went out, and the other disciple:  and they came
@c    to the sepulchre.

@c    20:4. And they both ran together:  and that other disciple did outrun
@c    Peter and came first to the sepulchre.

@c    20:5. And when he stooped down, he saw the linen cloths lying:  but yet
@c    he went not in.

@c    20:6. Then cometh Simon Peter, following him, and went into the
@c    sepulchre:  and saw the linen cloths lying,

@c    20:7. And the napkin that had been about his head, not lying with the
@c    linen cloths, but apart, wrapped up into one place.

@c    20:8. Then that other disciple also went in, who came first to the
@c    sepulchre:  and he saw and believed.

@c    20:9. For as yet they knew not the scripture, that he must rise again
@c    from the dead.

@c    20:10. The disciples therefore departed again to their home.

@c    20:11. But Mary stood at the sepulchre without, weeping.  Now as she was
@c    weeping, she stooped down and looked into the sepulchre,

@c    20:12. And she saw two angels in white, sitting, one at the head, and
@c    one at the feet, where the body of Jesus had been laid.

@c    20:13. They say to her:  Woman, why weepest thou?  She saith to them:
@c    Because they have taken away my Lord:  and I know not where they have
@c    laid him.

@c    20:14. When she had thus said, she turned herself back and saw Jesus
@c    standing:  and she knew not that it was Jesus.

@c    20:15. Jesus saith to her:  Woman, why weepest thou?  Whom seekest thou?
@c    She, thinking that it was the gardener, saith to him:  Sir, if thou hast
@c    taken him hence, tell me where thou hast laid him:  and I will take him
@c    away.

@c    20:16. Jesus saith to her:  Mary.  She turning, saith to him:  Rabboni
@c    (which is to say, Master).

@c    20:17. Jesus saith to her:  Do not touch me:  for I am not yet ascended
@c    to my Father.  But go to my brethren and say to them:  I ascend to my
@c    Father and to your Father, to my God and to your God.

@c    20:18. Mary Magdalen cometh and telleth the disciples:  I have seen the
@c    Lord; and these things he said to me.

@c    20:19. Now when it was late the same day, the first of the week, and
@c    the doors were shut, where the disciples were gathered together, for
@c    fear of the Jews, Jesus came and stood in the midst and said to them:
@c    Peace be to you.

@c    The doors were shut. . .The same power which could bring Christ's whole
@c    body, entire in all its dimensions, through the doors, can without the
@c    least question make the same body really present in the sacrament;
@c    though both the one and the other be above our comprehension.

@c    20:20. And when he had said this, he shewed them his hands and his
@c    side.  The disciples therefore were glad, when they saw the Lord.

@c    20:21. He said therefore to them again:  Peace be to you.  As the Father
@c    hath sent me, I also send you.

@c    20:22. When he had said this, he breathed on them; and he said to them:
@c    Receive ye the Holy Ghost.

@c    20:23. Whose sins you shall forgive, they are forgiven them:  and whose
@c    sins you shall retain, they are retained.

@c    Whose sins, etc. . .See here the commission, stamped by the broad seal
@c    of heaven, by virtue of which the pastors of Christ's church absolve
@c    repenting sinners upon their confession.

@c    20:24. Now Thomas, one of the twelve, who is called Didymus, was not
@c    with them when Jesus came.

@c    20:25. The other disciples therefore said to him:  We have seen the
@c    Lord.  But he said to them:  Except I shall see in his hands the print of
@c    the nails and put my finger into the place of the nails and put my hand
@c    into his side, I will not believe.

@c    20:26. And after eight days, again his disciples were within, and
@c    Thomas with them.  Jesus cometh, the doors being shut, and stood in the
@c    midst and said:  Peace be to you.

@c    20:27. Then he said to Thomas:  Put in thy finger hither and see my
@c    hands.  And bring hither the hand and put it into my side.  And be not
@c    faithless, but believing.

@c    20:28. Thomas answered and said to him:  My Lord and my God.

@c    20:29. Jesus saith to him:  Because thou hast seen me, Thomas, thou hast
@c    believed:  blessed are they that have not seen and have believed.

@c    20:30. Many other signs also did Jesus in the sight of his disciples,
@c    which are not written in this book.

@c    20:31. But these are written, that you may believe that Jesus is the
@c    Christ, the Son of God:  and that believing, you may have life in his
@c    name.



@c    John Chapter 21


@c    Christ manifests himself to his disciples by the sea side and gives
@c    Peter the charge of his sheep.

@c    21:1. After this, Jesus shewed himself to the disciples at the sea of
@c    Tiberias.  And he shewed himself after this manner.

@c    21:2. There were together:  Simon Peter and Thomas, who is called
@c    Didymus, and Nathanael, who was of Cana of Galilee, and the sons of
@c    Zebedee and two others of his disciples.

@c    21:3. Simon Peter saith to them:  I go a fishing.  They say to him:  We
@c    also come with thee.  And they went forth and entered into the ship:  and
@c    that night they caught nothing.

@c    21:4. But when the morning was come, Jesus stood on the shore:  yet the
@c    disciples knew not that it was Jesus.

@c    21:5. Jesus therefore said to them:  Children, have you any meat?  They
@c    answered him:  No.

@c    21:6. He saith to them:  Cast the net on the right side of the ship; and
@c    you shall find.  They cast therefore:  and now they were not able to draw
@c    it, for the multitude of fishes.

@c    21:7. That disciple therefore whom Jesus loved said to Peter:  It is the
@c    Lord.  Simon Peter, when he heard that it was the Lord, girt his coat
@c    about him (for he was naked) and cast himself into the sea.

@c    21:8. But the other disciples came in the ship (for they were not far
@c    from the land, but as it were two hundred cubits) dragging the net with
@c    fishes.

@c    21:9. As soon then as they came to land they saw hot coals lying, and a
@c    fish laid thereon, and bread.

@c    21:10. Jesus saith to them:  Bring hither of the fishes which you have
@c    now caught.

@c    21:11. Simon Peter went up and drew the net to land, full of great
@c    fishes, one hundred and fifty-three.  And although there were so many,
@c    the net was not broken.

@c    21:12. Jesus saith to them:  Come and dine.  And none of them who were at
@c    meat, durst ask him:  Who art thou?  Knowing that it was the Lord.

@c    21:13. And Jesus cometh and taketh bread and giveth them:  and fish in
@c    like manner.

@c    21:14. This is now the third time that Jesus was manifested to his
@c    disciples, after he was risen from the dead.

@c    21:15. When therefore they had dined, Jesus saith to Simon Peter:
@c    Simon, son of John, lovest thou me more than these?  He saith to him:
@c    Yea, Lord, thou knowest that I love thee.  He saith to him:  Feed my
@c    lambs.

@c    21:16. He saith to him again:  Simon, son of John, lovest thou me?  He
@c    saith to him:  yea, Lord, thou knowest that I love thee.  He saith to
@c    him:  Feed my lambs.

@c    21:17. He said to him the third time:  Simon, son of John, lovest thou
@c    me?  Peter was grieved because he had said to him the third time:  Lovest
@c    thou me?  And he said to him:  Lord, thou knowest all things:  thou
@c    knowest that I love thee.  He said to him:  Feed my sheep.

@c    Feed my sheep. . .Our Lord had promised the spiritual supremacy to St.
@c    Peter; St. Matt. 16. 19; and here he fulfils that promise, by charging
@c    him with the superintendency of all his sheep, without exception; and
@c    consequently of his whole flock, that is, of his own church.

@c    21:18. Amen, amen, I say to thee, When thou wast younger, thou didst
@c    gird thyself and didst walk where thou wouldst.  But when thou shalt be
@c    old, thou shalt stretch forth thy hands, and another shall gird thee
@c    and lead thee whither thou wouldst not.

@c    21:19. And this he said, signifying by what death he should glorify
@c    God.  And when he had said this, he saith to him:  Follow me.

@c    21:20. Peter turning about, saw that disciple whom Jesus loved
@c    following, who also leaned on his breast at supper and said:  Lord, who
@c    is he that shall betray thee?

@c    21:21. Him therefore when Peter had seen, he saith to Jesus:  Lord, and
@c    what shall this man do?

@c    21:22. Jesus saith to him:  So I will have him to remain till I come,
@c    what is it to thee?  Follow thou me.

@c    21:23. This saying therefore went abroad among the brethren, that that
@c    disciple should not die.  And Jesus did not say to him:  He should not
@c    die; but:  So I will have him to remain till I come, what is it to thee?

@c    21:24. This is that disciple who giveth testimony of these things and
@c    hath written these things:  and we know that his testimony is true.

@c    21:25. But there are also many other things which Jesus did which, if
@c    they were written every one, the world itself.  I think, would not be
@c    able to contain the books that should be written.
