@c    THE CATHOLIC EPISTLE OF ST. JAMES THE APOSTLE



@c    This Epistle is called Catholic or Universal, as formerly were also the
@c    two Epistles of St. Peter, the first of St. John and that of St. Jude,
@c    because they were not written to any peculiar people or particular
@c    person, but to the faithful in general.  It was written by the apostle
@c    St. James, called the Less, who was also called the brother of our
@c    Lord, being his kinsman (for cousins german with the Hebrews were
@c    called brothers).  He was the first Bishop of Jerusalem.  In this Epistle
@c    are set forth many precepts appertaining to faith and morals;
@c    particularly, that faith without good works will not save a man and
@c    that true wisdom is given only from above.  In the fifth chapter he
@c    publishes the sacrament of anointing the sick.  It was written a short
@c    time before his martyrdom, about twenty-eight years after our Lord's
@c    Ascension.



@c    James Chapter 1


@c    The benefit of tribulations.  Prayer with faith.  God is the author of
@c    all good, but not of evil.  We must be slow to anger and not hearers
@c    only, but doers of the word.  Of bridling the tongue and of pure
@c    religion.

@c    1:1. James, the servant of God and of our Lord Jesus Christ, to the
@c    twelve tribes which are scattered abroad, greeting.

@c    1:2. My brethren, count it all joy, when you shall fall into divers
@c    temptations:

@c    Into divers temptations. . .The word temptation, in this epistle, is
@c    sometimes taken for trials by afflictions or persecutions, as in this
@c    place:  at other times, it is to be understood, tempting, enticing, or
@c    drawing others into sin.

@c    1:3. Knowing that the trying of your faith worketh patience

@c    1:4. And patience hath a perfect work:  that you may be perfect and
@c    entire, failing in nothing.

@c    1:5. But if any of you want wisdom, let him ask of God who giveth to
@c    all men abundantly and upbraideth not.  And it shall be given him.

@c    1:6. But let him ask in faith, nothing wavering.  For he that wavereth
@c    is like a wave of the sea, which is moved and carried about by the
@c    wind.

@c    1:7. Therefore let not that man think that he shall receive any thing
@c    of the Lord.

@c    1:8. A double minded man is inconstant in all his ways.

@c    1:9. But let the brother of low condition glory in his exaltation:

@c    1:10. And the rich, in his being low:  because as the flower of the
@c    grass shall he pass away.

@c    1:11. For the sun rose with a burning heat and parched the grass:  and
@c    the flower thereof fell off, and the beauty of the shape thereof
@c    perished.  So also shall the rich man fade away in his ways.

@c    1:12. Blessed is the man that endureth temptation:  for, when he hath
@c    been proved, he shall receive the crown of life which God hath promised
@c    to them that love him.

@c    1:13. Let no man, when he is tempted, say that he is tempted by God.
@c    For God is not a tempter of evils:  and he tempteth no man.

@c    1:14. But every man is tempted by his own concupiscence, being drawn
@c    away and allured.

@c    1:15. Then, when concupiscence hath conceived, it bringeth forth sin.
@c    But sin, when it is completed, begetteth death.

@c    1:16. Do not err, therefore, my dearest brethren.

@c    1:17. Every best gift and every perfect gift is from above, coming down
@c    from the Father of lights, with whom there is no change nor shadow of
@c    alteration.

@c    1:18. For of his own will hath he begotten us by the word of truth,
@c    that we might be some beginning of his creature.

@c    Some beginning. . .That is, a kind of first fruits of his creatures.

@c    1:19. You know, my dearest brethren.  And let every man be swift to
@c    hear, but slow to speak and slow to anger.

@c    1:20. For the anger of man worketh not the justice of God.

@c    1:21. Wherefore, casting away all uncleanness and abundance of
@c    naughtiness, with meekness receive the ingrafted word, which is able to
@c    save your souls.

@c    1:22. But be ye doers of the word and not hearers only, deceiving your
@c    own selves.

@c    1:23. For if a man be a hearer of the word and not a doer, he shall be
@c    compared to a man beholding his own countenance in a glass.

@c    1:24. For he beheld himself and went his way and presently forgot what
@c    manner of man he was.

@c    1:25. But he that hath looked into the perfect law of liberty and hath
@c    continued therein, not becoming a forgetful hearer but a doer of the
@c    work:  this man shall be blessed in his deed.

@c    1:26. And if any man think himself to be religious, not bridling his
@c    tongue but deceiving his own heart, this man's religion is vain.

@c    1:27. Religion clean and undefiled before God and the Father is this:
@c    to visit the fatherless and widows in their tribulation and to keep
@c    one's self unspotted from this world.



@c    James Chapter 2


@c    Against respect of persons.  The danger of transgressing one point of
@c    the law.  Faith is dead without works.

@c    2:1. My brethren, have not the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ of glory,
@c    with respect of persons.

@c    With respect of persons. . .The meaning is, that in matters relating to
@c    faith, the administering of the sacraments, and other spiritual
@c    functions in God's church, there should be no respect of persons; but
@c    that the souls of the poor should be as much regarded as those of the
@c    rich.  See Deut. 1.17.

@c    2:2. For if there shall come into your assembly a man having a golden
@c    ring, in fine apparel; and there shall come in also a poor man in mean
@c    attire:

@c    2:3. And you have respect to him that is clothed with the fine apparel
@c    and shall say to him:  Sit thou here well:  but say to the poor man:
@c    Stand thou there, or:  Sit under my footstool:

@c    2:4. Do you not judge within yourselves, and are become judges of
@c    unjust thoughts?

@c    2:5. Hearken, my dearest brethren:  Hath not God chosen the poor in this
@c    world, rich in faith and heirs of the kingdom which God hath promised
@c    to them that love him?

@c    2:6. But you have dishonoured the poor man.  Do not the rich oppress you
@c    by might?  And do not they draw you before the judgment seats?

@c    2:7. Do not they blaspheme the good name that is invoked upon you?

@c    2:8. If then you fulfil the royal law, according to the scriptures:
@c    Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself; you do well.

@c    2:9. But if you have respect to persons, you commit sin, being reproved
@c    by the law as transgressors.

@c    2:10. And whosoever shall keep the whole law, but offend in one point,
@c    is become guilty of all.

@c    Guilty of all;. . .That is, he becomes a transgressor of the law in such
@c    a manner, that the observing of all other points will not avail him to
@c    salvation; for he despises the lawgiver, and breaks through the great
@c    and general commandment of charity, even by one mortal sin.  For all the
@c    precepts of the law are to be considered as one total and entire law,
@c    and as it were a chain of precepts, where, by breaking one link of this
@c    chain, the whole chain is broken, or the integrity of the law
@c    consisting of a collection of precepts.  A sinner, therefore, by a
@c    grievous offence against any one precept, incurs eternal punishment;
@c    yet the punishment in hell shall be greater for those who have been
@c    greater sinners, as a greater reward shall be for those in heaven who
@c    have lived with greater sanctity and perfection.

@c    2:11. For he that said:  Thou shalt not commit adultery, said also:  Thou
@c    shalt not kill.  Now if thou do not commit adultery, but shalt kill,
@c    thou art become a transgressor of the law.

@c    2:12. So speak ye and so do, as being to be judged by the law of
@c    liberty.

@c    2:13. For judgment without mercy to him that hath not done mercy.  And
@c    mercy exalteth itself above judgment.

@c    2:14. What shall it profit, my brethren, if a man say he hath faith,
@c    but hath not works?  Shall faith be able to save him?

@c    2:15. And if a brother or sister be naked and want daily food:

@c    2:16. And one of you say to them:  Go in peace, be ye warmed and filled;
@c    yet give them not those things that are necessary for the body, what
@c    shall it profit?

@c    2:17. So faith also, if it have not works, is dead in itself.

@c    2:18. But some man will say:  Thou hast faith, and I have works.  Shew me
@c    thy faith without works; and I will shew thee, by works, my faith.

@c    2:19. Thou believest that there is one God.  Thou dost well:  the devils
@c    also believe and tremble.

@c    2:20. But wilt thou know, O vain man, that faith without works is dead?

@c    2:21. Was not Abraham our father justified by works, offering up Isaac
@c    his son upon the altar?

@c    2:22. Seest thou that faith did cooperate with his works and by works
@c    faith was made perfect?

@c    2:23. And the scripture was fulfilled, saying:  Abraham believed God,
@c    and it was reputed to him to justice, and he was called the friend of
@c    God.

@c    2:24. Do you see that by works a man is justified, and not by faith
@c    only?

@c    2:25. And in like manner also Rahab the harlot, was not she justified
@c    by works, receiving the messengers and sending them out another way?

@c    2:26. For even as the body without the spirit is dead:  so also faith
@c    without works is dead.



@c    James Chapter 3


@c    Of the evils of the tongue.  Of the difference between the earthly and
@c    heavenly wisdom.

@c    3:1. Be ye not many masters, my brethren, knowing that you receive the
@c    greater judgment.

@c    3:2. For in many things we all offend.  If any man offend not in word,
@c    the same is a perfect man.  He is able also with a bridle to lead about
@c    the whole body.

@c    3:3. For if we put bits into the mouths of horses, that they may obey
@c    us:  and we turn about their whole body.

@c    3:4. Behold also ships, whereas they are great and are driven by strong
@c    winds, yet are they turned about with a small helm, whithersoever the
@c    force of the governor willeth.

@c    3:5. Even so the tongue is indeed a little member and boasteth great
@c    things.  Behold how small a fire kindleth a great wood.

@c    3:6. And the tongue is a fire, a world of iniquity.  The tongue is
@c    placed among our members, which defileth the whole body and inflameth
@c    the wheel of our nativity, being set on fire by hell.

@c    3:7. For every nature of beasts and of birds and of serpents and of the
@c    rest is tamed and hath been tamed, by the nature of man.

@c    3:8. But the tongue no man can tame, an unquiet evil, full of deadly
@c    poison.

@c    3:9. By it we bless God and the Father:  and by it we curse men who are
@c    made after the likeness of God.

@c    3:10. Out of the same mouth proceedeth blessing and cursing.  My
@c    brethren, these things ought not so to be.

@c    3:11. Doth a fountain send forth, out of the same hole, sweet and
@c    bitter water?

@c    3:12. Can the fig tree, my brethren, bear grapes?  Or the vine, figs?  So
@c    neither can the salt water yield sweet.

@c    3:13. Who is a wise man and endued with knowledge, among you?  Let him
@c    shew, by a good contestation, his work in the meekness of wisdom.

@c    3:14. But if you have bitter zeal, and there be contention in your
@c    hearts:  glory not and be not liars against the truth.

@c    3:15. For this is not wisdom, descending from above:  but earthly,
@c    sensual, devilish.

@c    3:16. For where envying and contention is:  there is inconstancy and
@c    every evil work.

@c    3:17. But the wisdom that is from above, first indeed is chaste, then
@c    peaceable, modest, easy to be persuaded, consenting to the good, full
@c    of mercy and good fruits, without judging, without dissimulation.

@c    3:18. And the fruit of justice is sown in peace, to them that make
@c    peace.



@c    James Chapter 4


@c    The evils that flow from yielding to concupiscence and being friends to
@c    this world.  Admonitions against pride, detraction and the like.

@c    4:1. From whence are wars and contentions among you?  Are they not
@c    hence, from your concupiscences, which war in your members?

@c    4:2. You covet, and have not:  you kill and envy and cannot obtain.  You
@c    contend and war, and you have not:  because you ask not.

@c    4:3. You ask and receive not:  because you ask amiss, that you may
@c    consume it on your concupiscences.

@c    4:4. Adulterers, know you not that the friendship of this world is the
@c    enemy of God?  Whosoever therefore will be a friend of this world
@c    becometh an enemy of God.

@c    4:5. Or do you think that the scripture saith in vain:  To envy doth the
@c    spirit covet which dwelleth in you?

@c    4:6. But he giveth greater grace.  Wherefore he saith:  God resisteth the
@c    proud and giveth grace to the humble.

@c    4:7. Be subject therefore to God.  But resist the devil:  and he will fly
@c    from you.

@c    4:8. Draw nigh to God:  and he will draw nigh to you.  Cleanse your
@c    hands, ye sinners, and purify your hearts, ye double minded.

@c    4:9. Be afflicted and mourn and weep:  let your laughter be turned into
@c    mourning and your joy into sorrow.

@c    4:10. Be humbled in the sight of the Lord:  and he will exalt you.

@c    4:11. Detract not one another, my brethren.  He that detracteth his
@c    brother, or he that judgeth his brother, detracteth the law and judgeth
@c    the law.  But if thou judge the law, thou art not a doer of the law, but
@c    a judge.

@c    4:12. There is one lawgiver and judge, that is able to destroy and to
@c    deliver.

@c    4:13. But who art thou that judgest thy neighbour?  Behold, now you that
@c    say:  To-day or to-morrow we will go into such a city, and there we will
@c    spend a year and will traffic and make our gain.

@c    4:14. Whereas you know not what shall be on the morrow.

@c    4:15. For what is your life?  It is a vapour which appeareth for a
@c    little while and afterwards shall vanish away.  For that you should say:
@c    If the Lord will, and, If we shall live, we will do this or that.

@c    4:16. But now you rejoice in your arrogancies.  All such rejoicing is
@c    wicked.

@c    4:17. To him therefore who knoweth to do good and doth it not, to him
@c    it is sin.



@c    James Chapter 5


@c    A woe to the rich that oppress the poor.  Exhortations to patience and
@c    to avoid swearing.  Of the anointing the sick, confession of sins and
@c    fervour in prayer.

@c    5:1. Go to now, ye rich men:  weep and howl in your miseries, which
@c    shall come upon you.

@c    5:2. Your riches are corrupted:  and your garments are motheaten.

@c    5:3. Your gold and silver is cankered:  and the rust of them shall be
@c    for a testimony against you and shall eat your flesh like fire.  You
@c    have stored up to yourselves wrath against the last days.

@c    5:4. Behold the hire of the labourers who have reaped down your fields,
@c    which by fraud has been kept back by you, crieth:  and the cry of them
@c    hath entered into the ears of the Lord of Sabaoth.

@c    5:5. You have feasted upon earth:  and in riotousness you have nourished
@c    your hearts, in the day of slaughter.

@c    5:6. You have condemned and put to death the Just One:  and he resisted
@c    you not.

@c    5:7. Be patient therefore, brethren, until the coming of the Lord.
@c    Behold, the husbandman waiteth for the precious fruit of the earth:
@c    patiently bearing till he receive the early and latter rain.

@c    5:8. Be you therefore also patient and strengthen your hearts:  for the
@c    coming of the Lord is at hand.

@c    5:9. Grudge not, brethren, one against another, that you may not be
@c    judged.  Behold the judge standeth before the door.

@c    5:10. Take, my brethren, for example of suffering evil, of labour and
@c    patience, the prophets who spoke in the name of the Lord.

@c    5:11. Behold, we account them blessed who have endured.  You have heard
@c    of the patience of Job and you have seen the end of the Lord, that the
@c    Lord is merciful and compassionate.

@c    5:12. But above all things, my brethren, swear not, neither by heaven,
@c    nor by the earth, nor by any other oath.  But let your speech be:  Yea,
@c    Yea:  No, No:  that you fall not under judgment.

@c    5:13. Is any of you sad?  Let him pray:  Is he cheerful in mind?  Let him
@c    sing.

@c    5:14. Is any man sick among you?  Let him bring in the priests of the
@c    church and let them pray over him, anointing him with oil in the name
@c    of the Lord.

@c    Let him bring in, etc. . .See here a plain warrant of scripture for the
@c    sacrament of extreme unction, that any controversy against its
@c    institution would be against the express words of the sacred text in
@c    the plainest terms.

@c    5:15. And the prayer of faith shall save the sick man.  And the Lord
@c    shall raise him up:  and if he be in sins, they shall be forgiven him.

@c    5:16. Confess therefore your sins one to another:  and pray one for
@c    another, that you may be saved.  For the continual prayer of a just man
@c    availeth much.

@c    Confess your sins one to another. . .That is, to the priests of the
@c    church, whom (ver.14) he had ordered to be called for, and brought in
@c    to the sick; moreover, to confess to persons who had no power to
@c    forgive sins, would be useless.  Hence the precept here means, that we
@c    must confess to men whom God hath appointed, and who, by their
@c    ordination and jurisdiction, have received the power of remitting sins
@c    in his name.

@c    5:17. Elias was a man passible like unto us:  and with prayer he prayed
@c    that it might not rain upon the earth.  And it rained not for three
@c    years and six months.

@c    5:18. And he prayed again.  And the heaven gave rain:  and the earth
@c    brought forth her fruit.

@c    5:19. My brethren, if any of you err from the truth and one convert
@c    him:

@c    5:20. He must know that he who causeth a sinner to be converted from
@c    the error of his way shall save his soul from death and shall cover a
@c    multitude of sins.
