@c    THE CATHOLIC EPISTLE OF ST. JUDE



@c    St. Jude, who wrote this Epistle, was one of the twelve Apostles and
@c    brother to St. James the Less.  The time it was written is uncertain:
@c    only it may be inferred from verse 17 that few or none of the Apostles
@c    were then living, except St. John.  He inveighs against the heresies and
@c    wicked practices of the Simonians, Nicolaites, and Gnostics, etc.,
@c    describing them and their leaders by strong epithets and similes, He
@c    exhorts the faithful to contend earnestly for the faith first delivered
@c    to them and to beware of heretics.



@c    Jude Chapter 1


@c    He exhorts them to stand to the faith first delivered to them and to
@c    beware of heretics.

@c    1:1. Jude, the servant of Jesus Christ and brother of James:  to them
@c    that are beloved in God the Father and preserved in Jesus Christ and
@c    called.

@c    1:2. Mercy unto you and peace:  and charity be fulfilled.

@c    1:3. Dearly beloved, taking all care to write unto you concerning your
@c    common salvation, I was under a necessity to write unto you:  to beseech
@c    you to contend earnestly for the faith once delivered to the saints.

@c    1:4. For certain men are secretly entered in (who were written of long
@c    ago unto this judgment), ungodly men, turning the grace of our Lord God
@c    into riotousness and denying the only sovereign Ruler and our Lord
@c    Jesus Christ.

@c    1:5. I will therefore admonish you, though ye once knew all things,
@c    that Jesus, having saved the people out of the land of Egypt, did
@c    afterwards destroy them that believed not.

@c    1:6. And the angels who kept not their principality but forsook their
@c    own habitation, he hath reserved under darkness in everlasting chains,
@c    unto the judgment of the great day.

@c    Principality. . .That is, the state in which they were first created,
@c    their original dignity.

@c    1:7. As Sodom and Gomorrha and the neighbouring cities, in like manner,
@c    having given themselves to fornication and going after other flesh,
@c    were made an example, suffering the punishment of eternal fire.

@c    1:8. In like manner, these men also defile the flesh and despise
@c    dominion and blaspheme majesty.

@c    Blaspheme majesty. . .Speak evil of them that are in dignity; and even
@c    utter blasphemies against the divine majesty.

@c    1:9. When Michael the archangel, disputing with the devil, contended
@c    about the body of Moses, he durst not bring against him the judgment of
@c    railing speech, but said:  The Lord command thee.

@c    Contended about the body, etc. . .This contention, which is no where
@c    else mentioned in holy writ, was originally known by revelation, and
@c    transmitted by tradition.  It is thought the occasion of it was, that
@c    the devil would have had the body buried in such a place and manner, as
@c    to be worshipped by the Jews with divine honours.  Command thee. . .or
@c    rebuke thee.

@c    1:10. But these men blaspheme whatever things they know not:  and what
@c    things soever they naturally know, like dumb beasts, in these they are
@c    corrupted.

@c    1:11. Woe unto them!  For they have gone in the way of Cain:  and after
@c    the error of Balaam they have for reward poured out themselves and have
@c    perished in the contradiction of Core.

@c    Gone in the way, etc. . .Heretics follow the way of Cain, by murdering
@c    the souls of their brethren; the way of Balaam, by putting a scandal
@c    before the people of God, for their own private ends; and the way of
@c    Core or Korah, by their opposition to the church governors of divine
@c    appointment.

@c    1:12. These are spots in their banquets, feasting together without
@c    fear, feeding themselves:  clouds without water, which are carried about
@c    by winds:  trees of the autumn, unfruitful, twice dead, plucked up by
@c    the roots:

@c    1:13. Raging waves of the sea, foaming out their own confusion:
@c    wandering stars, to whom the storm of darkness is reserved for ever.

@c    1:14. Now of these Enoch also, the seventh from Adam, prophesied,
@c    saying:  Behold, the Lord cometh with thousands of his saints:

@c    Prophesied. . .This prophecy was either known by tradition, or from some
@c    book that is since lost.

@c    1:15. To execute judgment upon all and to reprove all the ungodly for
@c    all the works of their ungodliness, whereby they have done ungodly:  and
@c    for all the hard things which ungodly sinners have spoken against God.

@c    1:16. These are murmurers, full of complaints, walking according to
@c    their own desires:  and their mouth speaketh proud things, admiring
@c    persons, for gain's sake.

@c    1:17. But you, my dearly beloved, be mindful of the words which have
@c    been spoken before by the apostles of our Lord Jesus Christ:

@c    But you, my dearly beloved, be mindful, etc. . .He now exhorts the
@c    faithful to remain steadfast in the belief and practice of what they
@c    had heard from the apostles, who had also foretold that in aftertimes
@c    (lit. in the last time) there should be false teachers, scoffing and
@c    ridiculing all revealed truths, abandoning themselves to their passions
@c    and lusts; who separate themselves from the Catholic communion by
@c    heresies and schisms.  Sensual men. . .carried away and enslaved by the
@c    pleasures of the senses.

@c    1:18. Who told you that in the last time there should come mockers,
@c    walking according to their own desires in ungodlinesses.

@c    1:19. These are they who separate themselves, sensual men, having not
@c    the Spirit.

@c    1:20. But you, my beloved, building yourselves upon your most holy
@c    faith, praying in the Holy Ghost,

@c    1:21. Keep yourselves in the love of God, waiting for the mercy of our
@c    Lord Jesus Christ, unto life everlasting.

@c    Building yourselves upon your most holy faith. . .Raising by your
@c    actions, a spiritual building, founded, 1st, upon faith; 2d, on the
@c    love of God; 3d, upon hope, whilst you are waiting for the mercies of
@c    God, and the reward of eternal life; 4th, joined with the great duty of
@c    prayer.

@c    1:22. And some indeed reprove, being judged:

@c    1:23. But others save, pulling them out of the fire.  And on others have
@c    mercy, in fear, hating also the spotted garment which is carnal.

@c    And some indeed reprove being judged. . .He gives them another
@c    instruction to practice charity in endeavouring to convert their
@c    neighbour, where they will meet with three sorts of persons:  1st, With
@c    persons obstinate in their errors and sins; these may be said to be
@c    already judged and condemned; they are to be sharply reprehended,
@c    reproved, and if possible convinced of their error.  2d, As to others
@c    you must endeavour to save them, by pulling them, as it were, out of
@c    the fire, from the ruin they stand in great danger of.  3d, You must
@c    have mercy on others in fear, when you see them through ignorance of
@c    frailty, in danger of being drawn into the snares of these heretics;
@c    with these you must deal more gently and mildly, with a charitable
@c    compassion, hating always, and teaching others to hate the carnal
@c    garment which is spotted, their sensual and corrupt manners, that
@c    defile both the soul and body.

@c    1:24. Now to him who is able to preserve you without sin and to present
@c    you spotless before the presence of his glory with exceeding joy, in
@c    the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ:

@c    1:25. To the only God our Saviour through Jesus Christ our Lord, be
@c    glory and magnificence, empire and power, before all ages, and now, and
@c    for all ages of ages.  Amen.

@c    Now to him, etc. . .St. Jude concludes his epistle with this doxology of
@c    praising God, and praying to the only God our Saviour, which may either
@c    signify God the Father, or God as equally agreeing to all the three
@c    persons, who are equally the cause of Christ's incarnation, and man's
@c    salvation, through Jesus Christ our Lord, who, being God from eternity,
@c    took upon him our human nature, that he might become our Redeemer.
