@c    THE HOLY GOSPEL OF JESUS CHRIST ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE



@c    St. Luke was a native of Antioch, the capital of Syria.  He was by
@c    profession a physician; and some ancient writers say, that he was very
@c    skillful in painting.  He was converted by St. Paul and became his
@c    disciple and companion in his travels, and fellow-labourer in the
@c    ministry of the Gospel.  He wrote in Greek, about twenty-four years
@c    after our Lord's Ascension.



@c    Luke Chapter 1


@c    The conception of John the Baptist, and of Christ.  The visitation and
@c    canticle of the Blessed Virgin.  The birth of the Baptist and the
@c    canticle of Zachary.

@c    1:1. Forasmuch as many have taken in hand to set forth in order a
@c    narration of the things that have been accomplished among us,

@c    1:2. According as they have delivered them unto us, who from the
@c    beginning were eyewitnesses and ministers of the word:

@c    1:3. It seemed good to me also, having diligently attained to all
@c    things from the beginning, to write to thee in order, most excellent
@c    Theophilus,

@c    1:4. That thou mayest know the verity of those words in which thou hast
@c    been instructed.

@c    1:5. There was in the days of Herod, the king of Judea, a certain
@c    priest named Zachary, of the course of Abia:  and his wife was of the
@c    daughters of Aaron, and her name Elizabeth.

@c    Of the course of Abia. . .that is, of the rank of Abia, which word in
@c    the Greek is commonly put for the employment of one day:  but here for
@c    the functions of a whole week.  For, by the appointment of David, 1 Par.
@c    24., the descendants from Aaron were divided into twenty-four families,
@c    of which the eighth was Abia, from whom descended this Zachary, who at
@c    this time was in the week of his priestly functions.

@c    1:6. And they were both just before God, walking in all the
@c    commandments and justifications of the Lord without blame.

@c    1:7. And they had no son, for that Elizabeth was barren:  and they both
@c    were well advanced in years.

@c    1:8. And it came to pass, when he executed the priestly function in the
@c    order of his course before God,

@c    1:9. According to the custom of the priestly office, it was his lot to
@c    offer incense, going into the temple of the Lord.

@c    1:10. And all the multitude of the people was praying without, at the
@c    hour of incense.

@c    1:11. And there appeared to him an angel of the Lord, standing on the
@c    right side of the altar of incense.

@c    1:12. And Zachary seeing him, was troubled:  and fear fell upon him.

@c    1:13. But the angel said to him:  Fear not, Zachary, for thy prayer is
@c    heard:  and thy wife Elizabeth shall bear thee a son.  And thou shalt
@c    call his name John.

@c    1:14. And thou shalt have joy and gladness:  and many shall rejoice in
@c    his nativity.

@c    1:15. For he shall be great before the Lord and shall drink no wine nor
@c    strong drink:  and he shall be filled with the Holy Ghost, even from his
@c    mother's womb.

@c    1:16. And he shall convert many of the children of Israel to the Lord
@c    their God.

@c    1:17. And he shall go before him in the spirit and power of Elias:  that
@c    he may turn the hearts of the fathers unto the children and the
@c    incredulous to the wisdom of the just, to prepare unto the Lord a
@c    perfect people.

@c    1:18. And Zachary said to the angel:  Whereby shall I know this?  For I
@c    am an old man, and my wife is advanced in years.

@c    1:19. And the angel answering, said to him:  I am Gabriel, who stand
@c    before God and am sent to speak to thee and to bring thee these good
@c    tidings.

@c    1:20. And behold, thou shalt be dumb and shalt not be able to speak
@c    until the day wherein these things shall come to pass:  because thou
@c    hast not believed my words, which shall be fulfilled in their time.

@c    1:21. And the people were waiting for Zachary:  and they wondered that
@c    he tarried so long in the temple.

@c    1:22. And when he came out, he could not speak to them:  and they
@c    understood that he had seen a vision in the temple.  And he made signs
@c    to them and remained dumb.

@c    1:23. And it came to pass, after the days of his office were
@c    accomplished, he departed to his own house.

@c    1:24. And after those days, Elizabeth his wife conceived and hid
@c    herself five months, saying:

@c    1:25. Thus hath the Lord dealt with me in the days wherein he hath had
@c    regard to take away my reproach among men.

@c    1:26. And in the sixth month, the angel Gabriel was sent from God into
@c    a city of Galilee, called Nazareth,

@c    1:27. To a virgin espoused to a man whose name was Joseph, of the house
@c    of David:  and the virgin's name was Mary.

@c    1:28. And the angel being come in, said unto her:  Hail, full of grace,
@c    the Lord is with thee:  blessed art thou among women.

@c    1:29. Who having heard, was troubled at his saying and thought with
@c    herself what manner of salutation this should be.

@c    1:30. And the angel said to her:  Fear not, Mary, for thou hast found
@c    grace with God.

@c    1:31. Behold thou shalt conceive in thy womb and shalt bring forth a
@c    son:  and thou shalt call his name Jesus.

@c    1:32. He shall be great and shall be called the Son of the Most High.
@c    And the Lord God shall give unto him the throne of David his father:
@c    and he shall reign in the house of Jacob for ever.

@c    1:33. And of his kingdom there shall be no end.

@c    1:34. And Mary said to the angel:  How shall this be done, because I
@c    know not man?

@c    1:35. And the angel answering, said to her:  The Holy Ghost shall come
@c    upon thee and the power of the Most High shall overshadow thee.  And
@c    therefore also the Holy which shall be born of thee shall be called the
@c    Son of God.

@c    1:36. And behold thy cousin Elizabeth, she also hath conceived a son in
@c    her old age:  and this is the sixth month with her that is called
@c    barren.

@c    1:37. Because no word shall be impossible with God.

@c    1:38. And Mary said:  Behold the handmaid of the Lord:  be it done to me
@c    according to thy word.  And the angel departed from her.

@c    1:39. And Mary rising up in those days, went into the hill country with
@c    haste into a city of Juda.

@c    1:40. And she entered into the house of Zachary and saluted Elizabeth.

@c    1:41. And it came to pass that when Elizabeth heard the salutation of
@c    Mary, the infant leaped in her womb.  And Elizabeth was filled with the
@c    Holy Ghost.

@c    1:42. And she cried out with a loud voice and said:  Blessed art thou
@c    among women and blessed is the fruit of thy womb.

@c    1:43. And whence is this to me that the mother of my Lord should come
@c    to me?

@c    1:44. For behold as soon as the voice of thy salutation sounded in my
@c    ears, the infant in my womb leaped for joy.

@c    1:45. And blessed art thou that hast believed, because those things
@c    shall be accomplished that were spoken to thee by the Lord.

@c    1:46. And Mary said:  My soul doth magnify the Lord.

@c    1:47. And my spirit hath rejoiced in God my Saviour.

@c    1:48. Because he hath regarded the humility of his handmaid:  for behold
@c    from henceforth all generations shall call me blessed.

@c    Shall call me blessed. . .These words are a prediction of that honour
@c    which the church in all ages should pay to the Blessed Virgin.  Let
@c    Protestants examine whether they are any way concerned in this
@c    prophecy.

@c    1:49. Because he that is mighty hath done great things to me:  and holy
@c    is his name.

@c    1:50. And his mercy is from generation unto generations, to them that
@c    fear him.

@c    1:51. He hath shewed might in his arm:  he hath scattered the proud in
@c    the conceit of their heart.

@c    1:52. He hath put down the mighty from their seat and hath exalted the
@c    humble.

@c    1:53. He hath filled the hungry with good things:  and the rich he hath
@c    sent empty away.

@c    1:54. He hath received Israel his servant, being mindful of his mercy.

@c    1:55. As he spoke to our fathers:  to Abraham and to his seed for ever.

@c    1:56. And Mary abode with her about three months.  And she returned to
@c    her own house.

@c    1:57. Now Elizabeth's full time of being delivered was come:  and she
@c    brought forth a son.

@c    1:58. And her neighbors and kinsfolks heard that the Lord had shewed
@c    his great mercy towards her:  and they congratulated with her.

@c    1:59. And it came to pass that on the eighth day they came to
@c    circumcise the child:  and they called him by his father's name Zachary.

@c    1:60. And his mother answering, said:  Not so.  But he shall be called
@c    John.

@c    1:61. And they said to her:  There is none of thy kindred that is called
@c    by this name.

@c    1:62. And they made signs to his father, how he would have him called.

@c    1:63. And demanding a writing table, he wrote, saying:  John is his
@c    name.  And they all wondered.

@c    1:64. And immediately his mouth was opened and his tongue loosed:  and
@c    he spoke, blessing God.

@c    1:65. And fear came upon all their neighbours:  and all these things
@c    were noised abroad over all the hill country of Judea.

@c    1:66. And all they that had heard them laid them up in their heart,
@c    saying:  What an one, think ye, shall this child be?  For the hand of the
@c    Lord was with him.

@c    1:67. And Zachary his father was filled with the Holy Ghost.  And he
@c    prophesied, saying:

@c    1:68. Blessed be the Lord God of Israel:  because he hath visited and
@c    wrought the redemption of his people.

@c    1:69. And hath raised up an horn of salvation to us, in the house of
@c    David his servant.

@c    Horn of salvation. . .That is, A powerful salvation, as Dr.  Witham
@c    translates it.  For in the Scripture, by horn is generally understood
@c    strength and power.

@c    1:70. As he spoke by the mouth of his holy prophets, who are from the
@c    beginning.

@c    1:71. Salvation from our enemies and from the hand of all that hate us.

@c    1:72. To perform mercy to our fathers and to remember his holy
@c    testament.

@c    1:73. The oath, which he swore to Abraham our father, that he would
@c    grant to us.

@c    1:74. That being delivered from the hand of our enemies, we may serve
@c    him without fear:

@c    1:75. In holiness and justice before him, all our days.

@c    1:76. And thou, child, shalt be called the prophet of the Highest:  for
@c    thou shalt, go before the face of the Lord to prepare his ways:

@c    1:77. To give knowledge of salvation to his people, unto the remission
@c    of their sins.

@c    1:78. Through the bowels of the mercy of our God, in which the Orient
@c    from on high hath visited us:

@c    The Orient. . .It is one of the titles of the Messias, the true light of
@c    the world, and the sun of justice.

@c    1:79. To enlighten them that sit in darkness and in the shadow of
@c    death:  to direct our feet into the way of peace.

@c    1:80. And the child grew and was strengthened in spirit:  and was in the
@c    deserts until the day of his manifestation to Israel.



@c    Luke Chapter 2


@c    The birth of Christ.  His presentation in the temple.  Simeon's prophecy.
@c    Christ at twelve years of age, is found amongst the doctors.

@c    2:1. And it came to pass that in those days there went out a decree
@c    from Caesar Augustus that the whole world should be enrolled.

@c    2:2. This enrolling was first made by Cyrinus, the governor of Syria.

@c    2:3. And all went to be enrolled, every one into his own city.

@c    2:4. And Joseph also went up from Galilee, out of the city of Nazareth,
@c    into Judea, to the city of David, which is called Bethlehem:  because he
@c    was of the house and family of David.

@c    2:5. To be enrolled with Mary his espoused wife, who was with child.

@c    2:6. And it came to pass that when they were there, her days were
@c    accomplished that she should be delivered.

@c    2:7. And she brought forth her first born son and wrapped him up in
@c    swaddling clothes and laid him in a manger:  because there was no room
@c    for them in the inn.

@c    Her firstborn. . .The meaning is, not that she had afterward any other
@c    child; but it is a way of speech among the Hebrews, to call them also
@c    the firstborn, who are the only children.  See annotation Matt. 1. 25.

@c    2:8. And there were in the same country shepherds watching and keeping
@c    the night watches over their flock.

@c    2:9. And behold an angel of the Lord stood by them and the brightness
@c    of God shone round about them:  and they feared with a great fear.

@c    2:10. And the angel said to them:  Fear not; for, behold, I bring you
@c    good tidings of great joy that shall be to all the people:

@c    2:11. For, this day is born to you a Saviour, who is Christ the Lord,
@c    in the city of David.

@c    2:12. And this shall be a sign unto you.  You shall find the infant
@c    wrapped in swaddling clothes and laid in a manger.

@c    2:13. And suddenly there was with the angel a multitude of the heavenly
@c    army, praising God and saying:

@c    2:14. Glory to God in the highest:  and on earth peace to men of good
@c    will.

@c    2:15. And it came to pass, after the angels departed from them into
@c    heaven, the shepherds said one to another:  Let us go over to Bethlehem
@c    and let us see this word that is come to pass, which the Lord hath
@c    shewed to us.

@c    2:16. And they came with haste:  and they found Mary and Joseph, and the
@c    infant lying in the manger.

@c    2:17. And seeing, they understood of the word that had been spoken to
@c    them concerning this child.

@c    2:18. And all that heard wondered:  and at those things that were told
@c    them by the shepherds.

@c    2:19. But Mary kept all these words, pondering them in her heart.

@c    2:20. And the shepherds returned, glorifying and praising God for all
@c    the things they had heard and seen, as it was told unto them.

@c    2:21. And after eight days were accomplished, that the child should be
@c    circumcised, his name was called JESUS, which was called by the angel
@c    before he was conceived in the womb.

@c    2:22. And after the days of her purification, according to the law of
@c    Moses, were accomplished, they carried him to Jerusalem, to present him
@c    to the Lord:

@c    2:23. As it is written in the law of the Lord:  Every male opening the
@c    womb shall be called holy to the Lord:

@c    2:24. And to offer a sacrifice, according as it is written in the law
@c    of the Lord, a pair of turtledoves or two young pigeons:

@c    2:25. And behold there was a man in Jerusalem named Simeon:  and this
@c    man was just and devout, waiting for the consolation of Israel.  And the
@c    Holy Ghost was in him.

@c    2:26. And he had received an answer from the Holy Ghost, that he should
@c    not see death before he had seen the Christ of the Lord.

@c    2:27. And he came by the Spirit into the temple.  And when his parents
@c    brought in the child Jesus, to do for him according to the custom of
@c    the law,

@c    2:28. He also took him into his arms and blessed God and said

@c    2:29. Now thou dost dismiss thy servant, O Lord, according to thy word
@c    in peace:

@c    2:30. Because my eyes have seen thy salvation,

@c    2:31. Which thou hast prepared before the face of all peoples:

@c    2:32. A light to the revelation of the Gentiles and the glory of thy
@c    people Israel.

@c    2:33. And his father and mother were wondering at those things which
@c    were spoken concerning him.

@c    2:34. And Simeon blessed them and said to Mary his mother:  Behold this
@c    child is set for the fall and for the resurrection of many in Israel
@c    and for a sign which shall be contradicted.

@c    For the fall, etc. . .Christ came for the salvation of all men; but here
@c    Simeon prophesies what would come to pass, that many through their own
@c    wilful blindness and obstinacy would not believe in Christ, nor receive
@c    his doctrine, which therefore would be ruin to them:  but to others a
@c    resurrection, by their believing in him, and obeying his commandments.

@c    2:35. And thy own soul a sword shall pierce, that, out of many hearts
@c    thoughts may be revealed.

@c    2:36. And there was one Anna, a prophetess, the daughter of Phanuel, of
@c    the tribe of Aser.  She was far advanced in years and had lived with her
@c    husband seven years from her virginity.

@c    2:37. And she was a widow until fourscore and four years:  who departed
@c    not from the temple, by fastings and prayers serving night and day.

@c    2:38. Now she, at the same hour, coming in, confessed to the Lord:  and
@c    spoke of him to all that looked for the redemption of Israel.

@c    2:39. And after they had performed all things according to the law of
@c    the Lord, they returned into Galilee, to their city Nazareth.

@c    2:40. And the child grew and waxed strong, full of wisdom:  and the
@c    grace of God was in him.

@c    2:41. And his parents went every year to Jerusalem, at the solemn day
@c    of the pasch.

@c    2:42. And when he was twelve years old, they going up into Jerusalem,
@c    according to the custom of the feast,

@c    2:43. And having fulfilled the days, when they returned, the child
@c    Jesus remained in Jerusalem.  And his parents knew it not.

@c    2:44. And thinking that he was in the company, they came a day's
@c    journey and sought him among their kinsfolks and acquaintance.

@c    2:45. And not finding him, they returned into Jerusalem, seeking him.

@c    2:46. And it came to pass, that, after three days, they found him in
@c    the temple, sitting in the midst of the doctors, hearing them and
@c    asking them questions.

@c    2:47. And all that heard him were astonished at his wisdom and his
@c    answers.

@c    2:48. And seeing him, they wondered.  And his mother said to him:  Son,
@c    why hast thou done so to us?  Behold thy father and I have sought thee
@c    sorrowing.

@c    2:49. And he said to them:  How is it that you sought me?  Did you not
@c    know that I must be about my father's business?

@c    2:50. And they understood not the word that he spoke unto them.

@c    2:51. And he went down with them and came to Nazareth and was subject
@c    to them.  And his mother kept all these words in her heart.

@c    2:52. And Jesus advanced in wisdom and age and grace with God and men.



@c    Luke Chapter 3


@c    John's mission and preaching.  Christ is baptized by him.

@c    3:1. Now in the fifteenth year of the reign of Tiberius Caesar, Pontius
@c    Pilate being governor of Judea, and Herod being tetrarch of Galilee,
@c    and Philip his brother tetrarch of Iturea and the country of
@c    Trachonitis, and Lysanias tetrarch of Abilina:

@c    3:2. Under the high priests Anna and Caiphas:  the word of the Lord was
@c    made unto John, the son of Zachary, in the desert.

@c    3:3. And he came into all the country about the Jordan, preaching the
@c    baptism of penance for the remission of sins.

@c    3:4. As it was written in the book of the sayings of Isaias the
@c    prophet:  A voice of one crying in the wilderness:  Prepare ye the way of
@c    the Lord, make straight his paths.

@c    3:5. Every valley shall be filled and every mountain and hill shall be
@c    brought low:  and the crooked shall be made straight, and the rough ways
@c    plain.

@c    3:6. And all flesh shall see the salvation of God.

@c    3:7. He said therefore to the multitudes that went forth to be baptized
@c    by him:  Ye offspring of vipers, who hath shewed you to flee from the
@c    wrath to come?

@c    3:8. Bring forth therefore fruits worthy of penance:  and do not begin
@c    to say, We have Abraham for our father.  For I say unto you that God is
@c    able of these stones, to raise up children to Abraham.

@c    3:9. For now the axe is laid to the root of the trees.  Every tree
@c    therefore that bringeth not forth good fruit shall be cut down and cast
@c    into the fire.

@c    3:10. And the people asked him, saying:  What then shall we do?

@c    3:11. And he answering, said to them:  He that hath two coats, let him
@c    give to him that hath none; and he that hath meat, let him do in like
@c    manner.

@c    3:12. And the publicans also came to be baptized and said to him:
@c    Master, what shall we do?

@c    3:13. But he said to them:  Do nothing more than that which is appointed
@c    you.

@c    3:14. And the soldiers also asked him, saying:  And what shall we do?
@c    And he said to them:  Do violence to no man, neither calumniate any man;
@c    and be content with your pay.

@c    3:15. And as the people were of opinion, and all were thinking in their
@c    hearts of John, that perhaps he might be the Christ:

@c    3:16. John answered, saying unto all:  I indeed baptize you with water:
@c    but there shall come one mightier than I, the latchet of whose shoes I
@c    am not worthy to loose.  He shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost and
@c    with fire;

@c    3:17. Whose fan is in his hand:  and he will purge his floor and will
@c    gather the wheat into his barn:  but the chaff he will burn with
@c    unquenchable fire.

@c    3:18. And many other things exhorting did he preach to the people.

@c    3:19. But Herod the tetrarch, when he was reproved by him for Herodias,
@c    his brother's wife, and for all the evils which Herod had done:

@c    3:20. He added this also above all and shut up John in prison.

@c    3:21. Now it came to pass, when all the people were baptized, that
@c    Jesus also being baptized and praying, heaven was opened.

@c    3:22. And the Holy Ghost descended in a bodily shape, as a dove, upon
@c    him.  And a voice came from heaven:  Thou art my beloved Son.  In thee I
@c    am well pleased.

@c    3:23. And Jesus himself was beginning about the age of thirty years:
@c    being (as it was supposed) the son of Joseph, who was of Heli, who was
@c    of Mathat,

@c    Who was of Heli. . .St. Joseph, who by nature was the son of Jacob, (St.
@c    Matt. 1. 16,) in the account of the law, was son of Heli.  For Heli and
@c    Jacob were brothers, by the same mother; and Heli, who was the elder,
@c    dying without issue, Jacob, as the law directed, married his widow:  in
@c    consequence of such marriage, his son Joseph was reputed in the law the
@c    son of Heli.

@c    3:24. Who was of Levi, who was of Melchi.  who was of Janne, who was of
@c    Joseph,

@c    3:25. Who was of Mathathias, who was of Amos, who was of Nahum, who was
@c    of Hesli, who was of Nagge,

@c    3:26. Who was of Mahath, who was of Mathathias, who was of Semei, who
@c    was of Joseph, who was of Juda,

@c    3:27. Who was of Joanna, who was of Reza, who was of Zorobabel, who was
@c    of Salathiel, who was of Neri,

@c    3:28. Who was of Melchi, who was of Addi, who was of Cosan, who was of
@c    Helmadan, who was of Her,

@c    3:29. Who was of Jesus, who was of Eliezer, who was of Jorim, who was
@c    of Mathat, who was of Levi,

@c    3:30. Who was of Simeon, who was of Judas, who was of Joseph, who was
@c    of Jona, who was of Eliakim,

@c    3:31. Who was of Melea, who was of Menna, who was of Mathatha, who was
@c    of Nathan, who was of David,

@c    3:32. Who was of Jesse, who was of Obed, who was of Booz, who was of
@c    Salmon, who was of Naasson,

@c    3:33. Who was of Aminadab, who was of Aram, who was of Esron, who was
@c    of Phares, who was of Judas,

@c    3:34. Who was of Jacob, who was of Isaac, who was of Abraham, who was
@c    of Thare, who was of Nachor,

@c    3:35. Who was of Sarug, who was of Ragau, who was of Phaleg, who was of
@c    Heber, who was of Sale,

@c    3:36. Who was of Cainan, who was of Arphaxad, who was of Sem, who was
@c    Of Noe, who was of Lamech,

@c    3:37. Who was of Mathusale, who was of Henoch, who was of Jared, who
@c    was of Malaleel, who was of Cainan,

@c    3:38. Who was of Henos, who was of Seth, who was of Adam, who was of
@c    God.



@c    Luke Chapter 4


@c    Christ's fasting and temptation.  He is persecuted in Nazareth.  His
@c    miracles in Capharnaum.

@c    4:1. And Jesus being full of the Holy Ghost, returned from the Jordan
@c    and was led the by the spirit into the desert,

@c    4:2. For the space of forty days, and was tempted by the devil.  And he
@c    ate nothing in those days.  And when they were ended, he was hungry.

@c    4:3. And the devil said to him:  If thou be the Son of God, say to this
@c    stone that it be made bread.

@c    4:4. And Jesus answered him:  is written that Man liveth not by bread
@c    alone, but by every word of God.

@c    4:5. And the devil led him into a high mountain and shewed him all the
@c    kingdoms of the world in a moment of time.

@c    4:6. And he said to him:  To thee will I give all this power and the
@c    glory of them.  For to me they are delivered:  and to whom I will, I give
@c    them.

@c    4:7. If thou therefore wilt adore before me, all shall be thine.

@c    4:8. And Jesus answering said to him.  It is written:  Thou shalt adore
@c    the Lord thy God, and him only shalt thou serve.

@c    4:9. And he brought him to Jerusalem and set him on a pinnacle of the
@c    temple and said to him:  If thou be the Son of God, cast thyself from
@c    hence.

@c    4:10. For it is written that He hath given his angels charge over thee
@c    that they keep thee.

@c    4:11. And that in their hands they shall bear thee up, lest perhaps
@c    thou dash thy foot against a stone.

@c    4:12. And Jesus answering, said to him:  It is said:  Thou shalt not
@c    tempt the Lord thy God.

@c    4:13. And all the temptation being ended, the devil departed from him
@c    for a time.

@c    4:14. And Jesus returned in the power of the spirit, into Galilee:  and
@c    the fame of him went out through the whole country.

@c    4:15. And he taught in their synagogues and was magnified by all.

@c    4:16. And he came to Nazareth, where he was brought up:  and he went
@c    into the synagogue, according to his custom, on the sabbath day:  and he
@c    rose up to read.

@c    4:17. And the book of Isaias the prophet was delivered unto him.  And as
@c    he unfolded the book, he found the place where it was written:

@c    4:18. The spirit of the Lord is upon me.  Wherefore he hath anointed me
@c    to preach the gospel to the poor, he hath sent me to heal the contrite
@c    of heart,

@c    4:19. To preach deliverance to the captives and sight to the blind, to
@c    set at liberty them that are bruised, to preach the acceptable year of
@c    the Lord and the day of reward.

@c    4:20. And when he had folded the book, he restored it to the minister
@c    and sat down.  And the eyes of all in the synagogue were fixed on him.

@c    4:21. And he began to say to them:  This day is fulfilled this scripture
@c    in your ears.

@c    4:22. And all gave testimony to him.  And they wondered at the words of
@c    grace that proceeded from his mouth.  And they said:  Is not this the son
@c    of Joseph?

@c    4:23. And he said to them:  Doubtless you will say to me this
@c    similitude:  Physician, heal thyself.  As great things as we have heard
@c    done in Capharnaum, do also here in thy own country.

@c    4:24. And he said:  Amen I say to you that no prophet is accepted in his
@c    own country.

@c    4:25. In truth I say to You, there were many widows in the days of
@c    Elias in Israel, when heaven was shut up three years and six months,
@c    when there was a great famine throughout all the earth.

@c    4:26. And to none of them was Elias sent, but to Sarepta of Sidon, to a
@c    widow woman.

@c    4:27. And there were many lepers in Israel in the time of Eliseus the
@c    prophet:  and none of them was cleansed but Naaman the Syrian.

@c    4:28. And all they in the synagogue, hearing these things, were filled
@c    with anger.

@c    4:29. And they rose up and thrust him out of the city:  and they brought
@c    him to the brow of the hill whereon their city was built, that they
@c    might cast him down headlong.

@c    4:30. But he passing through the midst of them, went his way.

@c    4:31. And he went down into Capharnaum, a city of Galilee:  and there he
@c    taught them on the sabbath days.

@c    4:32. And they were astonished at his doctrine:  for his speech was with
@c    power.

@c    4:33. And in the synagogue there was a man who had an unclean devil:
@c    and he cried out with a loud voice,

@c    4:34. Saying:  Let us alone.  What have we to do with thee, Jesus of
@c    Nazareth?  Art thou come to destroy us?  I know thee who thou art, the
@c    holy one of God.

@c    4:35. And Jesus rebuked him, saying:  Hold thy peace and go out of him.
@c    And when the devil had thrown him into the midst, he went out of him
@c    and hurt him not at all.

@c    4:36. And there came fear upon all; and they talked among themselves,
@c    saying:  What word is this, for with authority and power he commandeth
@c    the unclean spirits, and they go out?

@c    4:37. And the fame of him was published into every place of the
@c    country.

@c    4:38. And Jesus rising up out of the synagogue, went into Simon's
@c    house.  And Simon's wife's mother was taken with a great fever:  and they
@c    besought him for her.

@c    4:39. And standing over her, he commanded the fever:  and it left her.
@c    And immediately rising, she ministered to them.

@c    4:40. And when the sun was down, all they that had any sick with divers
@c    diseases brought them to him.  But he, laying his hands on every one of
@c    them, healed them.

@c    4:41. And devils went out from many, crying out and saying:  Thou art
@c    the son of God.  And rebuking them he suffered them not to speak; for
@c    they knew that he was Christ.

@c    4:42. And when it was day, going out he went into a desert place:  and
@c    the multitudes sought him, and came unto him.  And they stayed him that
@c    should not depart from them.

@c    4:43. To whom he said:  To other cities also I must preach the kingdom
@c    of God:  for therefore am I sent.

@c    4:44. And he was preaching in the synagogues of Galilee.



@c    Luke Chapter 5


@c    The miraculous draught of fishes.  The cure of the leper and of the
@c    paralytic.  The call of Matthew.

@c    5:1. And it came to pass, that when the multitudes pressed upon him to
@c    hear the word of God, he stood by the lake of Genesareth,

@c    5:2. And saw two ships standing by the lake:  but the fishermen were
@c    gone out of them and were washing their nets.

@c    5:3. And going into one of the ships that was Simon's, he desired him
@c    to draw back a little from the land.  And sitting, he taught the
@c    multitudes out of the ship.

@c    5:4. Now when he had ceased to speak, he said to Simon:  Launch out into
@c    the deep and let down your nets for a draught.

@c    5:5. And Simon answering said to him:  Master, we have laboured all the
@c    night and have taken nothing:  but at thy word I will let down the net.

@c    5:6. And when they had done this, they enclosed a very great multitude
@c    of fishes:  and their net broke.

@c    5:7. And they beckoned to their partners that were in the other ship,
@c    that they should come and help them.  And they came and filled both the
@c    ships, so that they were almost sinking.

@c    5:8. Which when Simon Peter saw, he fell down at Jesus' knees, saying:
@c    Depart from me, for I am a sinful man, O Lord.

@c    5:9. For he was wholly astonished, and all that were with him, at the
@c    draught of the fishes which they had taken.

@c    5:10. And so were also James and John, the sons of Zebedee, who were
@c    Simon's partners.  And Jesus saith to Simon:  Fear not:  from henceforth
@c    thou shalt catch men.

@c    5:11. And having brought their ships to land, leaving all things, they
@c    followed him.

@c    5:12. And it came to pass, when he was in a certain city, behold a man
@c    full of leprosy who, seeing Jesus and falling on his face, besought him
@c    saying:  Lord, if thou wilt, thou canst make me clean.

@c    5:13. And stretching forth his hand, he touched him, saying:  I will.  Be
@c    thou cleansed.  And immediately the leprosy departed from him.

@c    5:14. And he charged him that he should tell no man, but:  Go, shew
@c    thyself to the priest and offer for thy cleansing according as Moses
@c    commanded, for a testimony to them.

@c    5:15. But the fame of him went abroad the more:  and great multitudes
@c    came together to hear and to be healed by him of their infirmities.

@c    5:16. And he retired into the desert; and prayed.

@c    5:17. And it came to pass on a certain day, as he sat teaching, that
@c    there were also Pharisees and doctors of the law sitting by, that were
@c    come out of every town of Galilee and Judea and Jerusalem:  and the
@c    power of the Lord was to heal them.

@c    5:18. And behold, men brought in a bed a man who had the palsy:  and
@c    they sought means to bring him in and to lay him before him.

@c    5:19. And when they could not find by what way they might bring him in,
@c    because of the multitude, they went up upon the roof and let him down
@c    through the tiles with his bed into the midst before Jesus.

@c    5:20. Whose faith when he saw, he said:  Man, thy sins are forgiven
@c    thee.

@c    5:21. And the scribes and Pharisees began to think, saying:  Who is this
@c    who speaketh blasphemies?  Who can forgive sins, but God alone?

@c    5:22. And when Jesus knew their thoughts, answering he said to them:
@c    What is it you think in your hearts?

@c    5:23. Which is easier to say:  Thy sins are forgiven thee; or to say:
@c    Arise and walk?

@c    5:24. But that you may know that the Son of man hath the power on earth
@c    to forgive sins (he saith to the sick of the palsy), I say to thee to:
@c    Arise, take up thy bed and go into thy house.

@c    5:25. And immediately rising up before them, he took up the bed on
@c    which he lay:  and he went away to his own house, glorifying God.

@c    5:26. And all were astonished:  and they glorified God.  And they were
@c    filled with fear, saying:  We have seen wonderful things to-day.

@c    5:27. And after these things, he went forth and saw a publican named
@c    Levi, sitting at the receipt of custom:  and he said to him:  Follow me.

@c    5:28. And leaving all things, he rose up and followed him.

@c    5:29. And Levi made him a great feast in his own house:  And there was a
@c    great company of publicans and of others that were at table with them.

@c    5:30. But the Pharisees and scribes murmured, saying to his disciples:
@c    Why do you eat and drink with publicans and sinners?

@c    5:31. And Jesus answering, said to them:  They that are whole need not
@c    the physician:  but they that are sick.

@c    5:32. I came not to call the just, but sinners to penance.

@c    5:33. And they said to him:  Why do the disciples of John fast often and
@c    make prayers, and the disciples of the Pharisees in like manner; but
@c    thine eat and drink?

@c    5:34. To whom he said:  Can you make the children of the bridegroom fast
@c    whilst the bridegroom is with them?

@c    5:35. But the days will come when the bridegroom shall be taken away
@c    from them:  then shall they fast in those days.

@c    5:36. And he spoke also a similitude to them:  That no man putteth a
@c    piece from a new garment upon an old garment:  otherwise he both rendeth
@c    the new, and the piece taken from the new agreeth not with the old.

@c    5:37. And no man putteth new wine into old bottles:  otherwise the new
@c    wine will break the bottles; and it will be spilled and the bottles
@c    will be lost.

@c    5:38. But new wine must be put into new bottles:  and both are
@c    preserved.

@c    5:39. And no man drinking old hath presently a mind to new:  for he
@c    saith:  The old is better.



@c    Luke Chapter 6


@c    Christ excuses his disciples.  He cures upon the sabbath day, chooses
@c    the twelve and makes a sermon to them.

@c    6:1. And it came to pass on the second first sabbath that, as he went
@c    through the corn fields, his disciples plucked the ears and did eat,
@c    rubbing them in their hands.

@c    The second first sabbath. . .Some understand this of the sabbath of
@c    Pentecost, which was the second in course among the great feasts:
@c    others, of a sabbath day that immediately followed any solemn feast.

@c    6:2. And some of the Pharisees said to them:  Why do you that which is
@c    not lawful on the sabbath days?

@c    6:3. And Jesus answering them, said:  Have you not read so much as this,
@c    what David did, when himself was hungry and they that were with him:

@c    6:4. How he went into the house of God and took and ate the bread of
@c    proposition and gave to them that were with him, which is not lawful to
@c    eat but only for the priests?

@c    6:5. And he said to them:  The Son of man is Lord also of the sabbath.

@c    6:6. And it came to pass also, on another sabbath, that he entered into
@c    the synagogue and taught.  And there was a man whose right hand was
@c    withered.

@c    6:7. And the scribes and Pharisees watched if he would heal on the
@c    sabbath:  that they might find an accusation against him.

@c    6:8. But he knew their thoughts and said to the man who had the
@c    withered hand:  Arise and stand forth in the midst.  And rising he stood
@c    forth.

@c    6:9. Then Jesus said to them:  I ask you, if it be lawful on the sabbath
@c    days to do good or to do evil?  To save life or to destroy?

@c    6:10. And looking round about on them all, he said to the man:  Stretch
@c    forth thy hand.  And he stretched it forth.  And his hand was restored.

@c    6:11. And they were filled with madness:  and they talked one with
@c    another, what they might do to Jesus.

@c    6:12. And it came to pass in those days, that he went out into a
@c    mountain to pray:  and he passed the whole night in the prayer of God.

@c    6:13. And when day was come, he called unto him his disciples:  and he
@c    chose twelve of them (whom also he named apostles):

@c    6:14. Simon, whom he surnamed Peter, and Andrew his brother, James and
@c    John, Philip and Bartholomew,

@c    6:15. Matthew and Thomas, James the son of Alpheus, and Simon who is
@c    called Zelotes,

@c    6:16. And Jude the brother of James, and Judas Iscariot, who was the
@c    traitor.

@c    6:17. And coming down with them, he stood in a plain place:  and the
@c    company of his disciples and a very great multitude of people from all
@c    Judea and Jerusalem and the sea coast, both of Tyre and Sidon,

@c    6:18. Who were come to hear him and to be healed of their diseases.  And
@c    they that were troubled with unclean spirits were cured.

@c    6:19. And all the multitude sought to touch him:  for virtue went out
@c    from him and healed all.

@c    6:20. And he, lifting up his eyes on his disciples, said:  Blessed are
@c    ye poor:  for yours is the kingdom of God.

@c    6:21. Blessed are ye that hunger now:  for you shall be filled.  Blessed
@c    are ye that weep now:  for you shall laugh.

@c    6:22. Blessed shall you be when men shall hate you, and when they shall
@c    separate you and shall reproach you and cast out your name as evil, for
@c    the Son of man's sake.

@c    6:23. Be glad in that day and rejoice:  for behold, your reward is great
@c    in heaven, For according to these things did their fathers to the
@c    prophets.

@c    6:24. But woe to you that are rich:  for you have your consolation.

@c    6:25. Woe to you that are filled:  for you shall hunger.  Woe to you that
@c    now laugh:  for you shall mourn and weep.

@c    6:26. Woe to you when men shall bless you:  for according to these
@c    things did their fathers to the false prophets.

@c    6:27. But I say to you that hear:  Love your enemies.  Do good to them
@c    that hate you.

@c    6:28. Bless them that curse you and pray for them that calumniate you.

@c    6:29. And to him that striketh thee on the one cheek, offer also the
@c    other.  And him that taketh away from thee thy cloak, forbid not to take
@c    thy coat also.

@c    6:30. Give to every one that asketh thee:  and of him that taketh away
@c    thy goods, ask them not again.

@c    6:31. And as you would that men should do to you, do you also to them
@c    in like manner.

@c    6:32. And if you love them that love you, what thanks are to you?  For
@c    sinners also love those that love them.

@c    6:33. And if you do good to them who do good to you, what thanks are to
@c    you?  For sinners also do this.

@c    6:34. And if you lend to them of whom you hope to receive, what thanks
@c    are to you?  For sinners also lend to sinners, for to receive as much.

@c    6:35. But love ye your enemies:  do good, and lend, hoping for nothing
@c    thereby:  and your reward shall be great, and you shall be the sons of
@c    the Highest.  For he is kind to the unthankful and to the evil.

@c    6:36. Be ye therefore merciful, as your Father also is merciful.

@c    6:37. Judge not:  and you shall not be judged.  Condemn not:  and you
@c    shall not be condemned.  Forgive:  and you shall be forgiven.

@c    6:38. Give:  and it shall be given to you:  good measure and pressed down
@c    and shaken together and running over shall they give into your bosom.
@c    For with the same measure that you shall mete withal, it shall be
@c    measured to you again.

@c    6:39. And he spoke also to them a similitude:  Can the blind lead the
@c    blind?  Do they not both fall into the ditch?

@c    6:40. The disciple is not above his master:  but every one shall be
@c    perfect, if he be as his master.

@c    6:41. And why seest thou the mote in thy brother's eye:  but the beam
@c    that is in thy own eye thou considerest not?

@c    6:42. Or how canst thou say to thy brother:  Brother, let me pull the
@c    mote out of thy eye, when thou thyself seest not the beam in thy own
@c    eye?  Hypocrite, cast first the beam out of thy own eye:  and then shalt
@c    thou see clearly to take out the mote from thy brother's eye.

@c    6:43. For there is no good tree that bringeth forth evil fruit:  nor an
@c    evil tree that bringeth forth good fruit.

@c    6:44. For every tree is known by its fruit.  For men do not gather figs
@c    from thorns:  nor from a bramble bush do they gather the grape.

@c    6:45. A good man out of the good treasure of his heart bringeth forth
@c    that which is good:  and an evil man out of the evil treasure bringeth
@c    forth that which is evil.  For out of the abundance of the heart the
@c    mouth speaketh.

@c    6:46. And why call you me, Lord, Lord; and do not the things which I
@c    say?

@c    6:47. Every one that cometh to me and heareth my words and doth them, I
@c    will shew you to whom he is like.

@c    6:48. He is like to a man building a house, who digged deep and laid
@c    the foundation upon a rock.  And when a flood came, the stream beat
@c    vehemently upon that house:  and it could not shake it:  for it was
@c    founded on a rock.

@c    6:49. But he that heareth and doth not is like to a man building his
@c    house upon the earth without a foundation:  against which the stream
@c    beat vehemently.  And immediately it fell:  and the ruin of that house
@c    was great.



@c    Luke Chapter 7


@c    Christ heals the centurion's servant.  He raises the widow's son to
@c    life, answers the messengers sent by John and absolves the penitent
@c    sinner.

@c    7:1. And when he had finished all his words in the hearing of the
@c    people, he entered into Capharnaum.

@c    7:2. And the servant of a certain centurion who was dear to him, being
@c    sick, was ready to die.

@c    7:3. And when he had heard of Jesus, he sent unto him the ancients of
@c    the Jews, desiring him to come and heal his servant.

@c    7:4. And when they came to Jesus, they besought him earnestly, saying
@c    to him:  He is worthy that thou shouldest do this for him.

@c    7:5. For he loveth our nation:  and he hath built us a synagogue.

@c    7:6. And Jesus went with them.  And when he was now not far from the
@c    house, the centurion sent his friends to him, saying:  Lord, trouble not
@c    thyself; for I am not worthy that thou shouldst enter under my roof.

@c    7:7. For which cause neither did I think myself worthy to come to thee:
@c    but say the word, and my servant shall be healed.

@c    7:8. For I also am a man subject to authority, having under me
@c    soldiers:  and I say to one, Go, and he goeth:  and to another, Come, and
@c    he cometh; and to my servant, Do this, and he doth it.

@c    7:9. Which Jesus hearing, marvelled:  and turning about to the multitude
@c    that followed him, he said:  Amen I say to you, I have not found so
@c    great faith, not even in Israel.

@c    7:10. And they who were sent, being returned to the house, found the
@c    servant whole who had been sick.

@c    7:11. And it came to pass afterwards that he went into a city that is
@c    called Naim:  and there went with him his disciples and a great
@c    multitude.

@c    7:12. And when he came nigh to the gate of the city, behold a dead man
@c    was carried out, the only son of his mother:  and she was a widow.  And a
@c    great multitude of the city was with her.

@c    7:13. Whom when the Lord had seen, being moved with mercy towards her,
@c    he said to her:  Weep not.

@c    7:14. And he came near and touched the bier.  And they that carried it
@c    stood still.  And he said:  Young man, I say to thee, arise.

@c    7:15. And he that was dead sat up and begun to speak.  And he gave him
@c    to his mother.

@c    7:16. And there came a fear upon them all:  and they glorified God
@c    saying:  A great prophet is risen up among us:  and, God hath visited his
@c    people.

@c    7:17. And this rumour of him went forth throughout all Judea and
@c    throughout all the country round about.

@c    7:18. And John's disciples told him of all these things.

@c    7:19. And John called to him two of his disciples and sent them to
@c    Jesus, saying:  Art thou he that art to come?  Or look we for another?

@c    7:20. And when the men were come unto him, they said:  John the Baptist
@c    hath sent us to thee, saying:  Art thou he that art to come?  Or look we
@c    for another?

@c    7:21. (And in that same hour, he cured many of their diseases and hurts
@c    and evil spirits:  and to many that were blind he gave sight.)

@c    7:22. And answering, he said to them:  Go and relate to John what you
@c    have heard and seen:  the blind see, the lame walk, the lepers are made
@c    clean, the deaf hear, the dead rise again, to the poor the gospel is
@c    preached.

@c    7:23. And blessed is he whosoever shall not be scandalized in me.

@c    7:24. And when the messengers of John were departed, he began to speak
@c    to the multitudes concerning John.  What went ye out into the desert to
@c    see?  A reed shaken with the wind?

@c    7:25. But what went you out to see?  A man clothed in soft garments?
@c    Behold they that are in costly apparel and live delicately are in the
@c    houses of kings.

@c    7:26. But what went you out to see?  A prophet?  Yea, I say to you, and
@c    more than a prophet.

@c    7:27. This is he of whom it is written:  Behold I send my angel before
@c    thy face, who shall prepare thy way before thee.

@c    7:28. For I say to you:  Amongst those that are born of men, there is
@c    not a greater prophet than John the Baptist.  But he that is the lesser
@c    in the kingdom of God is greater than he.

@c    7:29. And all the people hearing, and the publicans, justified God,
@c    being baptized with John's baptism.

@c    Justified God. . .that is, praised the justice of God, feared and
@c    worshipped God, as just and merciful.

@c    7:30. But the Pharisees and the lawyers despised the counsel of God
@c    against themselves, being not baptized by him.

@c    7:31. And the Lord said:  Whereunto then shall I liken the men of this
@c    generation?  And to what are they like?

@c    7:32. They are like to children sitting in the marketplace and speaking
@c    one to another and saying:  We have piped to you, and you have not
@c    danced:  we have mourned, and you have not wept.

@c    7:33. For John the Baptist came neither eating bread nor drinking wine.
@c    And you say:  He hath a devil.

@c    7:34. The Son of man is come eating and drinking.  And you say:  Behold a
@c    man that is a glutton and a drinker of wine, a friend of publicans and
@c    sinners.

@c    7:35. And wisdom is justified by all her children.

@c    7:36. And one of the Pharisees desired him to eat with him.  And he went
@c    into the house of the Pharisee and sat down to meat.

@c    One of the Pharisees:  that is, Simon.

@c    7:37. And behold a woman that was in the city, a sinner, when she knew
@c    that he sat at meat in the Pharisee's house, brought an alabaster box
@c    of ointment.

@c    7:38. And standing behind at his feet.  she began to wash his feet with
@c    tears and wiped them with the hairs of her head and kissed his feet and
@c    anointed them with the ointment.

@c    7:39. And the Pharisee, who had invited him, seeing it, spoke within
@c    himself, saying:  This man, if he were if a prophet, would know surely
@c    who and what manner of woman this is that toucheth him, that she is a
@c    sinner.

@c    7:40. And Jesus answering, said to him:  Simon, I have somewhat to say
@c    to thee.  But he said:  Master, say it.

@c    7:41. A certain creditor had two debtors:  the one owed five hundred
@c    pence and the other fifty.

@c    7:42. And whereas they had not wherewith to pay, he forgave them both.
@c    Which therefore of the two loveth him most?

@c    7:43. Simon answering, said:  I suppose that he to whom he forgave most.
@c    And he said to him:  Thou hast judged rightly.

@c    7:44. And turning to the woman, he said unto Simon:  Dost thou see this
@c    woman?  I entered into thy house:  thou gavest me no water for my feet.
@c    But she with tears hath washed my feet; and with her hairs hath wiped
@c    them.

@c    7:45. Thou gavest me no kiss.  But she, since she cane in, hath not
@c    ceased to kiss my feet.

@c    7:46. My head with oil thou didst not anoint.  But she with ointment
@c    hath anointed my feet.

@c    7:47. Wherefore, I say to thee:  Many sins are forgiven her, because she
@c    hath loved much.  But to whom less is forgiven, he loveth less.

@c    Many sins are forgiven her, because she hath loved much. . .In the
@c    scripture an effect sometimes seems attributed to one only cause, when
@c    there are divers other concurring dispositions; for the sins of this
@c    woman, in this verse, are said to be forgiven, because she loved much:
@c    but (ver. 50) Christ tells her, Thy faith hath made thee safe.  Hence in
@c    a true conversion are joined faith, hope, love, sorrow for sin, and
@c    other pious dispositions.

@c    7:48. And he said to her:  Thy sins are forgiven thee.

@c    7:49. And they that sat at meat with him began to say within
@c    themselves:  Who is this that forgiveth sins also?

@c    7:50. And he said to the woman:  Thy faith hath made thee safe.  Go in
@c    peace.



@c    Luke Chapter 8


@c    The parable of the seed.  Christ stills the storm at sea, casts out the
@c    legion, heals the issue of blood and raises the daughter of Jairus to
@c    life.

@c    8:1. And it came to pass afterwards he travelled through the cities and
@c    towns, preaching and evangelizing the kingdom of God:  and the twelve
@c    with him:

@c    8:2. And certain women who had been healed of evil spirits and
@c    infirmities:  Mary who is called Magdalen, out of whom seven devils were
@c    gone forth,

@c    8:3. And Joanna the wife of Chusa, Herod's steward, and Susanna and
@c    many others who ministered unto him of their substance.

@c    8:4. And when a very great multitude was gathered together and hastened
@c    out of the cities, unto him, he spoke by a similitude.

@c    8:5. The sower went out to sow his seed.  And as he sowed, some fell by
@c    the way side.  And it was trodden down:  and the fowls of the air
@c    devoured it.

@c    8:6. And other some fell upon a rock.  And as soon as it was sprung up,
@c    it withered away, because it had no moisture.

@c    8:7. And other some fell among thorns.  And the thorns growing up with
@c    it, choked it.

@c    8:8. And other some fell upon good ground and, being sprung up, yielded
@c    fruit a hundredfold.  Saying these things, he cried out:  He that hath
@c    ears to hear, let him hear.

@c    8:9. And his disciples asked him what this parable might be.

@c    8:10. To whom he said:  To you it is given to know the mystery of the
@c    kingdom of God; but to the rest in parables, that seeing they may not
@c    see and hearing may not understand.

@c    Seeing they may not see. . .See the annotation, Mark 4. 12.

@c    8:11. Now the parable is this:  The seed is the word of God.

@c    8:12. And they by the way side are they that hear:  then the devil
@c    cometh and taketh the word out of their heart, lest believing they
@c    should be saved.

@c    8:13. Now they upon the rock are they who when they hear receive the
@c    word with joy:  and these have no roots:  for they believe for a while
@c    and in time of temptation they fall away.

@c    8:14. And that which fell among thorns are they who have heard and,
@c    going their way, are choked with the cares and riches and pleasures of
@c    this life and yield no fruit.

@c    8:15. But that on the good ground are they who in a good and perfect
@c    heart, hearing the word, keep it and bring forth fruit in patience.

@c    8:16. Now no man lighting a candle covereth it with a vessel or putteth
@c    it under a bed:  but setteth it upon a candlestick, that they who come
@c    in may see the light.

@c    8:17. For there is not any thing secret that shall not be made
@c    manifest, nor hidden that shall not be known and come abroad.

@c    8:18. Take heed therefore how you hear.  For whosoever hath, to him
@c    shall be given:  and whosoever hath not, that also which he thinketh he
@c    hath shall be taken away from him.

@c    8:19. And his mother and brethren came unto him:  and they could not
@c    come at him for the crowd.

@c    8:20. And it was told him:  Thy mother and thy brethren stand without,
@c    desiring to see thee.

@c    8:21. Who answering, said to them:  My mother and my brethren are they
@c    who hear the word of God and do it.

@c    8:22. And it came to pass on a certain day that he went into a little
@c    ship with his disciples.  And he said to them:  Let us go over to the
@c    other side of the lake.  And they launched forth.

@c    8:23. And when they were sailing, he slept.  And there came down a storm
@c    of wind upon the lake:  and they were filled and were in danger.

@c    8:24. And they came and awaked him, saying:  Master, we perish.  But he
@c    arising, rebuked the wind and the rage of the water.  And it ceased:  and
@c    there was a calm.

@c    8:25. And he said to them:  Where is your faith?  Who being afraid,
@c    wondered, saying one to another:  Who is this (think you), that he
@c    commandeth both the winds and the sea:  and they obey him?

@c    8:26. And they sailed to the country of the Gerasens, which is over
@c    against Galilee.

@c    8:27. And when he was come forth to the land, there met him a certain
@c    man who had a devil now a very long time.  And he wore no clothes:
@c    neither did he abide in a house, but in the sepulchres.

@c    8:28. And when he saw Jesus, he fell down before him.  And crying out
@c    with a loud voice, he said:  What have I to do with thee, Jesus, Son of
@c    the most high God?  I beseech thee, do not torment me.

@c    8:29. For he commanded the unclean spirit to go out of the man.  For
@c    many times it seized him:  and he was bound with chains and kept in
@c    fetters:  and breaking the bonds, he was driven by the devil into the
@c    deserts.

@c    8:30. And Jesus asked him, saying:  What is thy name?  But he said:
@c    Legion.  Because many devils were entered into him.

@c    8:31. And they besought him that he would not command them to go into
@c    the abyss.

@c    8:32. And there was there a herd of many swine feeding on the mountain:
@c    and they besought him that he would suffer them to enter into them.  And
@c    he suffered them.

@c    8:33. The devils therefore went out of the man and entered into the
@c    swine.  And the herd ran violently down a steep place into the lake and
@c    were stifled.

@c    8:34. Which when they that fed them saw done, they fled away and told
@c    it in the city and in the villages.

@c    8:35. And they went out to see what was done.  And they came to Jesus
@c    and found the man out of whom the devils were departed, sitting at his
@c    feet, clothed and in his right mind.  And they were afraid.

@c    8:36. And they also that had seen told them how he had been healed from
@c    the legion.

@c    8:37. And all the multitude of the country of the Gerasens besought him
@c    to depart from them:  for they were taken with great fear.  And he, going
@c    up into the ship, returned back again.

@c    8:38. Now the man out of whom the devils were departed besought him
@c    that he might be with him.  But Jesus sent him away, saying:

@c    8:39. Return to thy house and tell how great things God hath done to
@c    thee.  And he went through the whole city, publishing how great things
@c    Jesus had done to him.

@c    8:40. And it came to pass that when Jesus was returned, the multitude
@c    received him:  for they were all waiting for him.

@c    8:41. And behold there came a man whose name was Jairus:  and he was a
@c    ruler of the synagogue.  And he fell down at the feet of Jesus,
@c    beseeching him that he would come into his house:

@c    8:42. For he had an only daughter, almost twelve years old, and she was
@c    dying.  And it happened as he went that he was thronged by the
@c    multitudes.

@c    8:43. And there was a certain woman having an issue of blood twelve
@c    years, who had bestowed all her substance on physicians and could not
@c    be healed by any.

@c    8:44. She came behind him and touched the hem of his garment:  and
@c    immediately the issue of her blood stopped.

@c    8:45. And Jesus said:  Who is it that touched me?  And all denying, Peter
@c    and they that were with him said:  Master, the multitudes throng and
@c    press thee; and dost thou say, who touched me?

@c    8:46. And Jesus said:  Somebody hath touched me; for I know that virtue
@c    is gone out from me.

@c    8:47. And the woman seeing that she was not hid, came trembling and
@c    fell down before his feet and declared before all the people for what
@c    cause she had touched him, and how she was immediately healed.

@c    8:48. But he said to her:  Daughter, thy faith hath made thee whole.  Go
@c    thy way in peace.

@c    8:49. As he was yet speaking, there cometh one to the ruler of the
@c    synagogue, saying to him:  Thy daughter is dead:  trouble him not.

@c    8:50. And Jesus hearing this word, answered the father of the maid:
@c    Fear not.  Believe only:  and she shall be safe.

@c    8:51. And when he was come to the house, he suffered not any man to go
@c    in with him, but Peter and James and John, and the father and mother of
@c    the maiden.

@c    8:52. And all wept and mourned for her.  But he said:  Weep not.  The
@c    maid is not dead, but sleepeth.

@c    8:53. And they laughed him to scorn, knowing that she was dead.

@c    8:54. But he taking her by the hand, cried out, saying:  Maid, arise.

@c    8:55. And her spirit returned:  and she arose immediately.  And he bid
@c    them give her to eat.

@c    8:56. And her parents were astonished, whom he charged to tell no man
@c    what was done.



@c    Luke Chapter 9


@c    Christ sends forth his apostles, feeds five thousand with five loaves,
@c    is transfigured and casts out a devil.

@c    9:1. Then calling together the twelve apostles, he gave them power and
@c    authority over all devils and to cure diseases.

@c    9:2. And he sent them to preach the kingdom of God and to heal the
@c    sick.

@c    9:3. And he said to them:  Take nothing for your journey, neither staff,
@c    nor scrip, nor bread, nor money; neither have two coats.

@c    9:4. And whatsoever house you shall enter into, abide there and depart
@c    not from thence.

@c    9:5. And whosoever will not receive you, when ye go out of that city,
@c    shake off even the dust of your feet, for a testimony against them.

@c    9:6. And going out, they went about through the towns, preaching the
@c    gospel and healing every where.

@c    9:7. Now Herod, the tetrarch, heard of all things that were done by
@c    him.  And he was in a doubt, because it was said

@c    9:8. By some that John was risen from the dead:  but by other some, that
@c    Elias had appeared:  and by others, that one of the old prophets was
@c    risen again.

@c    9:9. And Herod said:  John I have beheaded.  But who is this of whom I
@c    hear such things?  And he sought to see him.

@c    9:10. And the apostles, when they were returned, told him all they had
@c    done.  And taking them, he went aside into a desert place, apart, which
@c    belongeth to Bethsaida.

@c    9:11. Which when the people knew, they followed him:  and he received
@c    them and spoke to them of the kingdom of God and healed them who had
@c    need of healing.

@c    9:12. Now the day began to decline.  And the twelve came and said to
@c    him:  Send away the multitude, that, going into the towns and villages
@c    round about, they may lodge and get victuals; for we are here in a
@c    desert place.

@c    9:13. But he said to them:  Give you them to eat.  And they said:  We
@c    have no more than five loaves and two fishes; unless perhaps, we should
@c    go and buy food for all this multitude.

@c    9:14. Now there were about five thousand men.  And he said to his
@c    disciples:  Make them sit down by fifties in a company.

@c    9:15. And they did so and made them all sit down.

@c    9:16. And taking the five loaves and the two fishes, he looked up to
@c    heaven and blessed them:  and he broke and distributed to his disciples,
@c    to set before the multitude.

@c    9:17. And they did all eat and were filled.  And there were taken up of
@c    fragments that remained to them, twelve baskets.

@c    9:18. And it came to pass, as he was alone praying, his disciples also
@c    were with him:  and he asked them, saying:  Whom do the people say that I
@c    am?

@c    9:19. But they answered and said:  John the Baptist; but some say Elias:
@c    and others say that one of the former prophets is risen again.

@c    9:20. And he said to them:  But whom do you say that I am?  Simon Peter
@c    answering, said:  The Christ of God.

@c    9:21. But he strictly charging them, commanded they should tell this to
@c    no man.

@c    9:22. Saying:  The Son of man must suffer many things and be rejected by
@c    the ancients and chief priests and scribes and be killed and the third
@c    day rise again.

@c    9:23. And he said to all:  If any man will come after me, let him deny
@c    himself and take up his cross daily and follow me.

@c    9:24. For whosoever will save his life shall lose it:  for he that shall
@c    lose his life for my sake shall save it.

@c    9:25. For what is a man advantaged, if he gain the whole world and lose
@c    himself and cast away himself?

@c    9:26. For he that shall be ashamed of me and of my words, of him the
@c    Son of man shall be ashamed, when he shall come in his majesty and that
@c    of his Father and of the holy angels.

@c    9:27. But I tell you of a truth:  There are some standing here that
@c    shall not taste death till they see the kingdom of God.

@c    9:28. And it came to pass, about eight days after these words, that he
@c    took Peter and James and John and went up into a mountain to pray.

@c    9:29. And whilst he prayed, the shape of his countenance was altered
@c    and his raiment became white and glittering.

@c    9:30. And behold two men were talking with him.  And they were Moses and
@c    Elias,

@c    9:31. Appearing in majesty.  And they spoke of his decease that he
@c    should accomplish in Jerusalem.

@c    9:32. But Peter and they that were with him were heavy with sleep.  And
@c    waking, they saw his glory and the two men that stood with him.

@c    9:33. And it came to pass that, as they were departing from him, Peter
@c    saith to Jesus:  Master, it is good for us to be here:  and let us make
@c    three tabernacles, one for thee, and one for Moses; and one for Elias:
@c    not knowing what he said.

@c    9:34. And as he spoke these things, there came a cloud and overshadowed
@c    them.  And they were afraid when they entered into the cloud.

@c    9:35. And a voice came out of the cloud; saying:  This is my beloved
@c    son.  Hear him.

@c    9:36. And whilst the voice was uttered Jesus was found alone.  And they
@c    held their peace and told no man in those days any of these things
@c    which they had seen.

@c    9:37. And it came to pass the day following, when they came down from
@c    the mountain, there met him a great multitude.

@c    9:38. And behold a man among the crowd cried out, saying:  Master, I
@c    beseech thee, look upon my son, because he is my only one.

@c    9:39. And lo, a spirit seizeth him, and he suddenly crieth out, and he
@c    throweth him down and teareth him, so that he foameth; and bruising
@c    him, he hardly departeth from him.

@c    9:40. And I desired thy disciples to cast him out:  and they could not.

@c    9:41. And Jesus, answering:, said:  O faithless and perverse generation,
@c    how long shall I be with you and suffer you?  Bring hither thy son.

@c    9:42. And as he was coming to him, the devil threw him down and tore
@c    him.

@c    9:43. And Jesus rebuked the unclean spirit and cured the boy and
@c    restored him to his father.

@c    9:44. And all were astonished at the mighty power of God.  But while all
@c    wondered at all the things he did, he said to his disciples:  Lay you up
@c    in your hearts these words, for it shall come to pass that the Son of
@c    man shall be delivered into the hands of men.

@c    9:45. But they understood not this word:  and it was hid from them, so
@c    that they perceived it not.  And they were afraid to ask him concerning
@c    this word.

@c    9:46. And there entered a thought into them, which of them should be
@c    greater.

@c    9:47. But Jesus seeing the thoughts of their hearts, took a child and
@c    set him by him,

@c    9:48. And said to them:  Whosoever shall receive this child in my name
@c    receiveth me; and whosoever shall receive me receiveth him that sent
@c    me.  For he that is the lesser among you all, he is the greater.

@c    9:49. And John, answering, said:  Master, we saw a certain man casting
@c    out devils in thy name:  and we forbade him, because he followeth not
@c    with us.

@c    9:50. And Jesus said to him:  Forbid him not:  for he that is not against
@c    you is for you.

@c    9:51. And it came to pass, when the days of his assumption were
@c    accomplishing, that he steadfastly set his face to go to Jerusalem.

@c    9:52. And he sent messengers before his face:  and going, they entered
@c    into a city of the Samaritans, to prepare for him.

@c    9:53. And they received him not, because his face was of one going to
@c    Jerusalem.

@c    9:54. And when his disciples, James and John, had seen this, they said:
@c    Lord, wilt thou that we command fire to come down from heaven and
@c    consume them?

@c    9:55. And turning, he rebuked them, saying:  you know not of what spirit
@c    you are.

@c    9:56. The Son of man came not to destroy souls, but to save.  And they
@c    went into another town.

@c    9:57. And it came to pass, as they walked in the way, that a certain
@c    man said to him:  I will follow thee whithersoever thou goest.

@c    9:58. Jesus said to him:  The foxes have holes, and the birds of the air
@c    nests:  but the Son of man hath not where to lay his head.

@c    9:59. But he said to another:  Follow me.  And he said:  Lord, suffer me
@c    first to go and to bury my father.

@c    9:60. And Jesus said to him:  Let the dead bury their dead:  but go thou
@c    and preach the kingdom of God.

@c    9:61. And another said:  I will follow thee, Lord; but let me first take
@c    my leave of them that are at my house.

@c    9:62. Jesus said to him:  No man putting his hand to the plough and
@c    looking back is fit for the kingdom of God.



@c    Luke Chapter 10


@c    Christ sends forth and instructs his seventy-two disciples.  The good
@c    Samaritan.

@c    10:1. And after these things, the Lord appointed also other
@c    seventy-two.  And he sent them two and two before his face into every
@c    city and place whither he himself was to come.

@c    10:2. And he said to them:  The harvest indeed is great, but the
@c    labourers are few.  Pray ye therefore the Lord of the harvest that he
@c    send labourers into his harvest.

@c    10:3. Go:  Behold I send you as lambs among wolves.

@c    10:4. Carry neither purse, nor scrip, nor shoes:  and salute no man by
@c    the way.

@c    10:5. Into whatever house you enter, first say:  Peace be to this house.

@c    10:6. And if the son of peace be there, your peace shall rest upon him:
@c    but if not, it shall return to you.

@c    10:7. And in the same house, remain, eating and drinking such things as
@c    they have:  for the labourer is worthy of his hire.  Remove not from
@c    house to house.

@c    10:8. And into what city soever you enter, and they receive you, eat
@c    such things as are set before you.

@c    10:9. And heal the sick that are therein and say to them:  The kingdom
@c    of God is come nigh unto you.

@c    10:10. But into whatsoever city you enter, and they receive you not,
@c    going forth into the streets thereof, say:

@c    10:11. Even the very dust of your city that cleaveth to us, we wipe off
@c    against you.  Yet know this, that the kingdom of God is at hand.

@c    10:12. I say to you, it shall be more tolerable at that day for Sodom
@c    than for that city.

@c    10:13. Woe to thee, Corozain!  Woe to thee, Bethsaida!  For if in Tyre
@c    and Sidon had been wrought the mighty works that have been wrought in
@c    you, they would have done penance long ago, sitting in sackcloth and
@c    ashes.

@c    10:14. But it shall be more tolerable for Tyre and Sidon at the
@c    judgment than for you.

@c    10:15. And thou, Capharnaum, which art exalted unto heaven, thou shalt
@c    be thrust down to hell.

@c    10:16. He that heareth you heareth me:  and he that despiseth you
@c    despiseth me:  and he that despiseth me despiseth him that sent me.

@c    10:17. And the seventy-two returned with joy, saying:  Lord, the devils
@c    also are subject to us in thy name.

@c    10:18. And he said to them:  I saw Satan like lightning falling from
@c    heaven.

@c    10:19. Behold, I have given you power to tread upon serpents and
@c    scorpions and upon all the power of the enemy:  and nothing shall hurt
@c    you.

@c    10:20. But yet rejoice not in this, that spirits are subject unto you:
@c    but rejoice in this, that your names are written in heaven.

@c    10:21. In that same hour, he rejoiced in the Holy Ghost and said:  I
@c    confess to thee, O Father, Lord of heaven and earth, because thou hast
@c    hidden these things from the wise and prudent and hast revealed them to
@c    little ones.  Yea, Father, for so it hath seemed good in thy sight.

@c    He rejoiced in the Holy Ghost. . .That is, according to his humanity he
@c    rejoiced in the Holy Ghost, and gave thanks to his eternal Father.

@c    10:22. All things are delivered to me by my Father.  And no one knoweth
@c    who the Son is, but the Father:  and who the Father is, but the Son and
@c    to whom the Son will reveal him.

@c    10:23. And turning to his disciples, he said:  Blessed are the eyes that
@c    see the things which you see.

@c    10:24. For I say to you that many prophets and kings have desired to
@c    see the things that you see and have not seen them; and to hear the
@c    things that you hear and have not heard them.

@c    10:25. And behold a certain lawyer stood up, tempting him and saying,
@c    Master, what must I do to possess eternal life?

@c    10:26. But he said to him:  What is written in the law?  How readest
@c    thou?

@c    10:27. He answering, said:  Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with thy
@c    whole heart and with thy whole soul and with all thy strength and with
@c    all thy mind:  and thy neighbour as thyself.

@c    10:28. And he said to him:  Thou hast answered right.  This do:  and thou
@c    shalt live.

@c    10:29. But he willing to justify himself, said to Jesus:  And who is my
@c    neighbour?

@c    10:30. And Jesus answering, said:  A certain man went down from
@c    Jerusalem to Jericho and fell among robbers, who also stripped him and
@c    having wounded him went away, leaving him half dead.

@c    10:31. And it chanced, that a certain priest went down the same way:
@c    and seeing him, passed by.

@c    10:32. In like manner also a Levite, when he was near the place and saw
@c    him, passed by.

@c    10:33. But a certain Samaritan, being on his journey, came near him:
@c    and seeing him, was moved with compassion:

@c    10:34. And going up to him, bound up his wounds, pouring in oil and
@c    wine:  and setting him upon his own beast, brought him to an inn and
@c    took care of him.

@c    10:35. And the next day he took out two pence and gave to the host and
@c    said:  Take care of him; and whatsoever thou shalt spend over and above,
@c    I, at my return, will repay thee.

@c    10:36. Which of these three, in thy opinion, was neighbour to him that
@c    fell among the robbers?

@c    10:37. But he said:  He that shewed mercy to him.  And Jesus said to him:
@c    Go, and do thou in like manner.

@c    10:38. Now it came to pass, as they went, that he entered into a
@c    certain town:  and a certain woman named Martha received him into her
@c    house.

@c    10:39. And she had a sister called Mary.  who, sitting also at the
@c    Lord's feet, heard his word.

@c    10:40. But Martha was busy about much serving.  Who stood and said:
@c    Lord, hast thou no care that my sister hath left me alone to serve?
@c    Speak to her therefore, that she help me.

@c    10:41. And the Lord answering, said to her:  Martha, Martha, thou art
@c    careful and art troubled about many things:

@c    10:42. But one thing is necessary.  Mary hath chosen the best part,
@c    which shall not be taken away from her.



@c    Luke Chapter 11


@c    Christ teaches his disciples to pray.  He casts out a dumb devil,
@c    confutes the Pharisees, and pronounces woes against them for their
@c    hypocrisy.

@c    11:1. And it came to pass that as he was in a certain place praying,
@c    when he ceased, one of his disciples said to him:  Lord, teach us to
@c    pray, as John also taught his disciples.

@c    11:2. And he said to them:  When you pray, say:  Father, hallowed be thy
@c    name.  Thy kingdom come.

@c    11:3. Give us this day our daily bread.

@c    11:4. And forgive us our sins, for we also forgive every one that is
@c    indebted to us.  And lead us not into temptation.

@c    11:5. And he said to them:  Which of you shall have a friend and shall
@c    go to him at midnight and shall say to him:  Friend, lend me three
@c    loaves,

@c    11:6. Because a friend of mine is come off his journey to me and I have
@c    not what to set before him.

@c    11:7. And he from within should answer and say:  Trouble me not; the
@c    door is now shut, and my children are with me in bed.  I cannot rise and
@c    give thee.

@c    11:8. Yet if he shall continue knocking, I say to you, although he will
@c    not rise and give him because he is his friend; yet, because of his
@c    importunity, he will rise and give him as many as he needeth.

@c    11:9. And I say to you:  Ask, and it shall be given you:  seek, and you
@c    shall find:  knock, and it shall be opened to you.

@c    11:10. For every one that asketh receiveth:  and he that seeketh
@c    findeth:  and to him that knocketh it shall be opened:

@c    11:11. And which of you, if he ask his father bread, will he give him a
@c    stone?  Or a fish, will he for a fish give him a serpent?

@c    11:12. Or if he shall ask an egg, will he reach him a scorpion?

@c    11:13. If you then, being evil, know how to give good gifts to your
@c    children, how much more will your Father from heaven give the good
@c    Spirit to them that ask him?

@c    11:14. And he was casting out a devil:  and the same was dumb.  And when
@c    he had cast out the devil, the dumb spoke:  and the multitudes, were in
@c    admiration at it.

@c    11:15. But some of them said:  He casteth out devils by Beelzebub, the
@c    prince of devils.

@c    11:16. And others tempting, asked of him a sign from heaven.

@c    11:17. But he seeing their thoughts, said to them:  Every kingdom
@c    divided against itself shall be brought to desolation; and house upon
@c    house shall fall.

@c    11:18. And if Satan also be divided against himself, how shall his
@c    kingdom stand?  Because you say that through Beelzebub I cast out
@c    devils.

@c    11:19. Now if I cast out devils by Beelzebub, by whom do your children
@c    cast them out?  Therefore, they shall be your judges.

@c    11:20. But if I by the finger of God cast out devils, doubtless the
@c    kingdom of God is come upon you.

@c    11:21. When a strong man armed keepeth his court, those things are in
@c    peace which he possesseth.

@c    11:22. But if a stronger than he come upon him and overcome him, he
@c    will take away all his armour wherein he trusted and will distribute
@c    his spoils.

@c    11:23. He that is not with me is against me; and he that gathereth not
@c    with me scattereth.

@c    11:24. When the unclean spirit is gone out of a man, he walketh through
@c    places without water, seeking rest:  and not finding, he saith:  I will
@c    return into my house whence I came out.

@c    11:25. And when he is come, he findeth it swept and garnished.

@c    11:26. Then he goeth and taketh with him seven other spirits more
@c    wicked than himself:  and entering in they dwell there.  And the last
@c    state of that man becomes worse than the first.

@c    11:27. And it came to pass, as he spoke these things, a certain woman
@c    from the crowd, lifting up her voice, said to him:  Blessed is the womb
@c    that bore thee and the paps that gave thee suck.

@c    11:28. But he said:  Yea rather, blessed are they who hear the word of
@c    God and keep it.

@c    11:29. And the multitudes running together, he began to say:  This
@c    generation is a wicked generation.  It asketh a sign:  and a sign shall
@c    not be given it, but the sign of Jonas the prophet.

@c    11:30. For as Jonas was a sign to the Ninivites; so shall the Son of
@c    man also be to this generation.

@c    11:31. The queen of the south shall rise in the judgment with the men
@c    of this generation and shall condemn them:  because she came from the
@c    ends of the earth to hear the wisdom of Solomon.  And behold more than
@c    Solomon here.

@c    11:32. The men of Ninive shall rise in the judgment with this
@c    generation and shall condemn it; Because they did penance at the
@c    preaching of Jonas.  And behold more than Jonas here.

@c    11:33. No man lighteth a candle and putteth it in a hidden place, nor
@c    under a bushel:  but upon a candlestick, that they that come in may see
@c    the light.

@c    11:34. The light of thy body is thy eye.  If thy eye be single, thy
@c    whole body will be lightsome:  but if it be evil, thy body also will be
@c    darksome.

@c    11:35. Take heed therefore that the light which is in thee be not
@c    darkness.

@c    11:36. If then thy whole body be lightsome, having no part of darkness:
@c    the whole shall be lightsome and, as a bright lamp, shall enlighten
@c    thee.

@c    11:37. And as he was speaking, a certain Pharisee prayed him that he
@c    would dine with him.  And he going in, sat down to eat.

@c    11:38. And the Pharisee began to say, thinking within himself, why he
@c    was not washed before dinner.

@c    11:39. And the Lord said to him:  Now you, Pharisees, make clean the
@c    outside of the cup and of the platter:  but your inside is full of
@c    rapine and iniquity.

@c    11:40. Ye fools, did not he that made that which is without make also
@c    that which is within?

@c    11:41. But yet that which remaineth, give alms:  and behold, all things
@c    are clean unto you.

@c    11:42. But woe to you, Pharisees, because you tithe mint and rue and
@c    every herb and pass over judgment and the charity of God.  Now these
@c    things you ought to have done, and not to leave the other undone.

@c    11:43. Woe to you, Pharisees, because you love the uppermost seats in
@c    the synagogues and salutations in the marketplace.

@c    11:44. Woe to you, because you are as sepulchres that appear not:  and
@c    men that walk over are not aware.

@c    11:45. And one of the lawyers answering, saith to him:  Master, in
@c    saying these things, thou reproachest us also.

@c    11:46. But he said:  Woe to you lawyers also, because you load men with
@c    burdens which they cannot bear and you yourselves touch not the packs
@c    with one of your fingers.

@c    Woe to you lawyers. . .He speaks of the doctors of the law of Moses,
@c    commonly called the scribes.

@c    11:47. Woe to you who build the monuments of the prophets:  and your
@c    fathers killed them.

@c    Woe to you who build, etc. . .Not that the building of the monuments of
@c    the prophets was in itself blameworthy, but only the intention of these
@c    unhappy men, who made use of this outward shew of religion and piety,
@c    as a means to carry on their wicked designs against the prince of
@c    prophets.

@c    11:48. Truly you bear witness that you consent to the doings of your
@c    fathers.  For they indeed killed them:  and you build their sepulchres.

@c    11:49. For this cause also the wisdom of God said:  I will send to them
@c    prophets and apostles:  and some of them they will kill and persecute.

@c    11:50. That the blood of all the prophets which was shed from the
@c    foundation of the world may be required of this generation,

@c    11:51. From the blood of Abel unto the blood of Zacharias, who was
@c    slain between the altar and the temple.  Yea I say to you:  It shall be
@c    required of this generation.

@c    11:52. Woe to you lawyers, for you have taken away the key of
@c    knowledge.  You yourselves have not entered in:  and those that were
@c    entering in, you have hindered.

@c    11:53. And as he was saying these things to them, the Pharisees and the
@c    lawyers began violently to urge him and to oppress his mouth about many
@c    things,

@c    11:54. Lying in wait for him and seeking to catch something from his
@c    mouth, that they might accuse him.



@c    Luke Chapter 12


@c    Christ warns us against hypocrisy, the fear of the world and
@c    covetousness.  He admonishes all to watch.

@c    12:1. And when great multitudes stood about him, so that they trod one
@c    upon another, he began to say to his disciples:  Beware ye of the leaven
@c    of the Pharisees, which is hypocrisy.

@c    12:2. For there is nothing covered that shall not be revealed:  nor
@c    hidden that shall not be known.

@c    12:3. For whatsoever things you have spoken in darkness shall be
@c    published in the light:  and that which you have spoken in the ear in
@c    the chambers shall be preached on the housetops.

@c    12:4. And I say to you, my friends:  Be not afraid of them who kill the
@c    body and after that have no more that they can do.

@c    12:5. But I will shew you whom you shall fear:  Fear ye him who, after
@c    he hath killed, hath power to cast into hell.  Yea, I say to you:  Fear
@c    him.

@c    12:6. Are not five sparrows sold for two farthings, and not one of them
@c    is forgotten before God?

@c    12:7. Yea, the very hairs of your head are all numbered.  Fear not
@c    therefore:  you are of more value than many sparrows.

@c    12:8. And I say to you:  Whosoever shall confess me before men, him
@c    shall the Son of man also confess before the angels of God.

@c    12:9. But he that shall deny me before men shall be denied before the
@c    angels of God.

@c    12:10. And whosoever speaketh a word against the Son of man, it shall
@c    be forgiven him:  but to him that shall blaspheme against the Holy
@c    Ghost, it shall not be forgiven.

@c    12:11. And when they shall bring you into the synagogues and to
@c    magistrates and powers, be not solicitous how or what you shall answer,
@c    or what you shall say.

@c    12:12. For the Holy Ghost shall teach you in the same hour what you
@c    must say.

@c    12:13. And one of the multitude said to him:  Master, speak to my
@c    brother that he divide the inheritance with me.

@c    12:14. But he said to him:  Man, who hath appointed me judge or divider
@c    over you?

@c    12:15. And he said to them:  Take heed and beware of all covetousness:
@c    for a man's life doth not consist in the abundance of things which he
@c    possesseth.

@c    12:16. And he spoke a similitude to them, saying:  The land of a certain
@c    rich man brought forth plenty of fruits.

@c    12:17. And he thought within himself, saying:  What shall I do, because
@c    I have no room where to bestow my fruits?

@c    12:18. And he said:  This will I do:  I will pull down my barns and will
@c    build greater:  and into them will I gather all things that are grown to
@c    me and my goods.

@c    12:19. And I will say to my soul:  Soul, thou hast much goods laid up
@c    for many years.  Take thy rest:  eat, drink, make good cheer.

@c    12:20. But God said to him:  Thou fool, this night do they require thy
@c    soul of thee.  And whose shall those things be which thou hast provided?

@c    12:21. So is he that layeth up treasure for himself and is not rich
@c    towards God.

@c    12:22. And he said to his disciples:  Therefore I say to you:  Be not
@c    solicitous for your life, what you shall eat, nor for your body, what
@c    you shall put on.

@c    12:23. The life is more than the meat:  and the body is more than the
@c    raiment.

@c    12:24. Consider the ravens, for they sow not, neither do they reap,
@c    neither have they storehouse nor barn, and God feedeth them.  How much
@c    are you more valuable than they?

@c    12:25. And which of you by taking thought can add to his stature one
@c    cubit?

@c    12:26. If then ye be not able to do so much as the least thing, why are
@c    you solicitous for the rest?

@c    12:27. Consider the lilies, how they grow:  they labour not, neither do
@c    they spin.  But I say to you, not even Solomon in all his glory was
@c    clothed like one of these.

@c    12:28. Now, if God clothe in this manner the grass that is to-day in
@c    the field and to-morrow is cast into the oven:  how much more you, O ye
@c    of little faith?

@c    12:29. And seek not what you shall eat or what you shall drink:  and be
@c    not lifted up on high.

@c    12:30. For all these things do the nations of the world seek.  But your
@c    Father knoweth that you have need of these things.

@c    12:31. But seek ye first the kingdom of God and his justice:  and all
@c    these things shall be added unto you.

@c    12:32. Fear not, little flock, for it hath pleased your Father to give
@c    you a kingdom.

@c    12:33. Sell what you possess and give alms.  Make to yourselves bags
@c    which grow not old, a treasure in heaven which faileth not:  where no
@c    thief approacheth, nor moth corrupteth.

@c    12:34. For where your treasure is, there will your heart be also.

@c    12:35. Let your loins be girt and lamps burning in your hands.

@c    12:36. And you yourselves like to men who wait for their lord, when he
@c    shall return from the wedding; that when he cometh and knocketh, they
@c    may open to him immediately.

@c    12:37. Blessed are those servants whom the Lord, when he cometh, shall
@c    find watching.  Amen I say to you that he will gird himself and make
@c    them sit down to meat and passing will minister unto them.

@c    12:38. And if he shall come in the second watch or come in the third
@c    watch and find them so, blessed are those servants.

@c    12:39. But this know ye, that if the householder did know at what hour
@c    the thief would come, he would surely watch and would not suffer his
@c    house to be broken open.

@c    12:40. Be you then also ready:  for at what hour you think not the Son
@c    of man will come.

@c    12:41. And Peter said to him:  Lord, dost thou speak this parable to us,
@c    or likewise to all?

@c    12:42. And the Lord said:  Who thinkest thou is the faithful and wise
@c    steward, whom his lord setteth over his family, to give them their
@c    measure of wheat in due season?

@c    12:43. Blessed is that servant whom, when his lord shall come, he shall
@c    find so doing.

@c    12:44. Verily I say to you, he will set him over all that he
@c    possesseth.

@c    12:45. But if that servant shall say in his heart:  My Lord is long a
@c    coming; and shall begin to strike the men-servants and maid-servants,
@c    and to eat and to drink and be drunk:

@c    12:46. The lord of that servant will come in the day that he hopeth
@c    not, and at the hour that he knoweth not:  and shall separate him and
@c    shall appoint him his portion with unbelievers.

@c    12:47. And that servant, who knew the will of his lord and prepared not
@c    himself and did not according to his will, shall be beaten with many
@c    stripes.

@c    12:48. But he that knew not and did things worthy of stripes shall be
@c    beaten with few stripes.  And unto whomsoever much is given, of him much
@c    shall be required:  and to whom they have committed much, of him they
@c    will demand the more.

@c    12:49. I am come to cast fire on the earth.  And what will I, but that
@c    it be kindled?

@c    12:50. And I have a baptism wherewith I am to be baptized.  And how am I
@c    straitened until it be accomplished?

@c    12:51. Think ye, that I am come to give peace on earth?  I tell you, no;
@c    but separation.

@c    12:52. For there shall be from henceforth five in one house divided:
@c    three against two, and two against three.

@c    12:53. The father shall be divided against the son and the son against
@c    his father:  the mother against the daughter and the daughter against
@c    her mother:  the mother-in-law against the daughter-in-law and the
@c    daughter-in-law against her mother-in-law.

@c    12:54. And he said also to the multitudes:  When you see a cloud rising
@c    from the west, presently you say:  A shower is coming.  And so it
@c    happeneth.

@c    12:55. And when ye see the south wind blow, you say:  There will heat.
@c    And it cometh to pass.

@c    12:56. You hypocrites, you know how to discern the face of the heaven
@c    and of the earth:  but how is it that you do not discern this time?

@c    12:57. And why, even of yourselves, do you not judge that which is
@c    just?

@c    12:58. And when thou goest with thy adversary to the prince, whilst
@c    thou art in the way, endeavour to be delivered from him:  lest perhaps
@c    he draw thee to he judge, and the judge deliver thee to the exacter,
@c    and the exacter cast thee into prison.

@c    12:59. I say to thee, thou shalt not go out thence until thou pay the
@c    very last mite.



@c    Luke Chapter 13


@c    The necessity of penance.  The barren fig tree.  The cure of the infirm
@c    woman.  The journey to Jerusalem.

@c    13:1. And there were present, at that very time, some that told him of
@c    the Galileans, whose blood Pilate had mingled with their sacrifices.

@c    13:2. And he answering, said to them:  Think you that these Galileans
@c    were sinners above all the men of Galilee, because they suffered such
@c    things?

@c    13:3. No, I say to you:  but unless you shall do penance, you shall all
@c    likewise perish.

@c    13:4. Or those eighteen upon whom the tower fell in Siloe and slew
@c    them:  think you that they also were debtors above all the men that
@c    dwelt in Jerusalem?

@c    13:5. No, I say to you:  but except you do penance, you shall all
@c    likewise perish.

@c    13:6. He spoke also this parable:  A certain man had a fig tree planted
@c    in his vineyard:  and he came seeking fruit on it and found none.

@c    13:7. And he said to the dresser of the vineyard:  Behold, for these
@c    three years I come seeking fruit on this fig tree and I find none.  Cut
@c    it down therefore.  Why cumbereth it the ground?

@c    13:8. But he answering, said to him:  Lord, let it alone this year also,
@c    until I dig about it and dung it.

@c    13:9. And if happily it bear fruit:  but if not, then after that thou
@c    shalt cut it down.

@c    13:10. And he was teaching in their synagogue on their sabbath.

@c    13:11. And behold there was a woman who had a spirit of infirmity
@c    eighteen years.  And she was bowed together:  neither could she look
@c    upwards at all.

@c    13:12. Whom when Jesus saw, he called her unto him and said to her:
@c    Woman, thou art delivered from thy infirmity.

@c    13:13. And he laid his hands upon her:  and immediately she was made
@c    straight and glorified God.

@c    13:14. And the ruler of the synagogue being angry that Jesus had healed
@c    on the sabbath answering, said to the multitude:  Six days there are
@c    wherein you ought to work.  In them therefore come and be healed:  and
@c    not on the sabbath day.

@c    13:15. And the Lord answering him, said:  Ye hypocrites, doth not every
@c    one of you, on the sabbath day, loose his ox or his ass from the manger
@c    and lead them to water?

@c    13:16. And ought not this daughter of Abraham, whom Satan hath bound,
@c    lo, these eighteen years, be loosed from this bond on the sabbath day?

@c    13:17. And when he said these things, all his adversaries were ashamed:
@c    and all the people rejoiced for all the things that were gloriously
@c    done by him.

@c    13:18. He said therefore:  To what is the kingdom of God like, and
@c    whereunto shall I resemble it?

@c    13:19. It is like to a grain of mustard seed, which a man took and cast
@c    into his garden:  and it grew and became a great tree, and the birds of
@c    the air lodged in the branches thereof.

@c    13:20. And again he said:  Whereunto shall I esteem the kingdom of God
@c    to be like?

@c    13:21. It is like to leaven, which a woman took and hid in three
@c    measures of meal, till the whole was leavened.

@c    13:22. And he went through the cities and towns teaching and making his
@c    journey to Jerusalem.

@c    13:23. And a certain man said to him:  Lord, are they few that are
@c    saved?  But he said to them:

@c    13:24. Strive to enter by the narrow gate:  for many, I say to you,
@c    shall seek to enter and shall not be able.

@c    Shall seek, etc. . .Shall desire to be saved; but for want of taking
@c    sufficient pains, and being thoroughly in earnest, shall not attain to
@c    it.

@c    13:25. But when the master of the house shall be gone in and shall shut
@c    the door, you shall begin to stand without; and knock at the door,
@c    saying:  Lord, open to us.  And he answering, shall say to you:  I know
@c    you not, whence you are.

@c    13:26. Then you shall begin to say:  We have eaten and drunk in thy
@c    presence:  and thou hast taught in our streets.

@c    13:27. And he shall say to you:  I know you not, whence you are.  Depart
@c    from me, all ye workers of iniquity.

@c    13:28. There shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth; when you shall see
@c    Abraham and Isaac and Jacob and all the prophets, in the kingdom of
@c    God:  and you yourselves thrust out.

@c    13:29. And there shall come from the east and the west and the north
@c    and the south:  and shall sit down in the kingdom of God.

@c    13:30. And behold, they are last that shall be first:  and they are
@c    first that shall be last.

@c    13:31. The same day, there came some of the Pharisees, saying to him:
@c    Depart, and get thee hence, for Herod hath a mind to kill thee.

@c    13:32. And he said to them:  Go and tell that fox:  Behold, I cast out
@c    devils and do cures, to-day and to-morrow, and the third day I am
@c    consummated.

@c    13:33. Nevertheless, I must walk to-day and to-morrow and the day
@c    following, because it cannot be that a prophet perish, out of
@c    Jerusalem.

@c    13:34. Jerusalem, Jerusalem, that killest the prophets; and stonest
@c    them that are sent to thee, how often would I have gathered thy
@c    children as the bird doth her brood under her wings, and thou wouldest
@c    not?

@c    13:35. Behold your house shall be left to you desolate.  And I say to
@c    you that you shall not see me till the time come when you shall say:
@c    Blessed is he that cometh in the name of the Lord.



@c    Luke Chapter 14


@c    Christ heals the dropsical man.  The parable of the supper.  The
@c    necessity of renouncing all to follow Christ.

@c    14:1. And it came to pass, when Jesus went into the house of one of the
@c    Pharisees, on the sabbath day, that they watched him.

@c    14:2. And behold, there was a certain man before him that had the
@c    dropsy.

@c    14:3. And Jesus answering, spoke to the lawyers and Pharisees, saying:
@c    Is it lawful to heal on the sabbath day?

@c    14:4. But they held their peace.  But he taking him, healed him and sent
@c    him away.

@c    14:5. And answering them, he said:  Which of you shall have an ass or an
@c    ox fall into a pit and will not immediately draw him out, on the
@c    sabbath day?

@c    14:6. And they could not answer him to these things.

@c    14:7. And he spoke a parable also to them that were invited, marking
@c    how they chose the first seats at the table, saying to them:

@c    14:8. When thou art invited to a wedding, sit not down in the first
@c    place, lest perhaps one more honourable than thou be invited by him:

@c    14:9. And he that invited thee and him, come and say to thee:  Give this
@c    man place.  And then thou begin with shame to take the lowest place.

@c    14:10. But when thou art invited, go, sit down in the lowest place;
@c    that when he who invited thee cometh, he may say to thee:  Friend, go up
@c    higher.  Then shalt thou have glory before them that sit at table with
@c    thee.

@c    14:11. Because every one that exalteth himself shall be humbled:  and he
@c    that humbleth himself shall be exalted.

@c    14:12. And he said to him also that had invited him:  When thou makest a
@c    dinner or a supper, call not thy friends nor thy brethren nor thy
@c    kinsmen nor thy neighbours who are rich; lest perhaps they also invite
@c    thee again, and a recompense be made to thee.

@c    14:13. But when thou makest a feast, call the poor, the maimed, the
@c    lame and the blind.

@c    14:14. And thou shalt be blessed, because they have not wherewith to
@c    make thee recompense:  for recompense shall be made thee at the
@c    resurrection of the just.

@c    14:15. When one of them that sat at table with him had heard these
@c    things, he said to him:  Blessed is he that shall eat bread in the
@c    kingdom of God.

@c    14:16. But he said to him:  A certain man made a great supper and
@c    invited many.

@c    14:17. And he sent his servant at the hour of supper to say to them
@c    that were invited, that they should come:  for now all things are ready.

@c    14:18. And they began all at once to make excuse.  The first said to
@c    him:  I have bought a farm and I must needs go out and see it.  I pray
@c    thee, hold me excused.

@c    14:19. And another said:  I have bought five yoke of oxen and I go to
@c    try them.  I pray thee, hold me excused.

@c    14:20. And another said:  I have married a wife; and therefore I cannot
@c    come.

@c    14:21. And the servant returning, told these things to his lord.  Then
@c    the master of the house, being angry, said to his servant:  Go out
@c    quickly into the streets and lanes of the city; and bring in hither the
@c    poor and the feeble and the blind and the lame.

@c    14:22. And the servant said:  Lord, it is done as thou hast commanded;
@c    and yet there is room.

@c    14:23. And the Lord said to the servant:  Go out into the highways and
@c    hedges, and compel them to come in, that my house may be filled.

@c    14:24. But I say unto you that none of those men that were invited
@c    shall taste of my supper.

@c    14:25. And there went great multitudes with him.  And turning, he said
@c    to them:

@c    14:26. If any man come to me, and hate not his father and mother and
@c    wife and children and brethren and sisters, yea and his own life also,
@c    he cannot be my disciple.

@c    Hate not, etc. . .The law of Christ does not allow us to hate even our
@c    enemies, much less our parents:  but the meaning of the text is, that we
@c    must be in that disposition of soul, as to be willing to renounce, and
@c    part with every thing, how near or dear soever it may be to us, that
@c    would keep us from following Christ.

@c    14:27. And whosoever doth not carry his cross and come after me cannot
@c    be my disciple.

@c    14:28. For which of you, having a mind to build a tower, doth not first
@c    sit down and reckon the charges that are necessary, whether he have
@c    wherewithal to finish it:

@c    14:29. Lest, after he hath laid the foundation and is not able to
@c    finish it, all that see it begin to mock him,

@c    14:30. Saying:  This man began to build and was not able to finish.

@c    14:31. Or, what king, about to go to make war against another king,
@c    doth not first sit down and think whether he be able, with ten
@c    thousand, to meet him that, with twenty thousand, cometh against him?

@c    14:32. Or else, while the other is yet afar off, sending an embassy, he
@c    desireth conditions of peace.

@c    14:33. So likewise every one of you that doth not renounce all that he
@c    possesseth cannot be my disciple.

@c    14:34. Salt is good.  But if the salt shall lose its savour, wherewith
@c    shall it be seasoned?

@c    14:35. It is neither profitable for the land nor for the dunghill:  but
@c    shall be cast out.  He that hath ears to hear, let him hear.



@c    Luke Chapter 15


@c    The parables of the lost sheep and of the prodigal son.

@c    15:1. Now the publicans and sinners drew near unto him to hear him.

@c    15:2. And the Pharisees and the scribes murmured, saying:  This man
@c    receiveth sinners and eateth with them.

@c    15:3. And he spoke to them this parable, saying:

@c    15:4. What man of you that hath an hundred sheep, and if he shall lose
@c    one of them, doth he not leave the ninety-nine in the desert and go
@c    after that which was lost, until he find it?

@c    15:5. And when he hath found it, lay it upon his shoulders, rejoicing?

@c    15:6. And coming home, call together his friends and neighbours, saying
@c    to them:  Rejoice with me, because I have found my sheep that was lost?

@c    15:7. I say to you that even so there shall be joy in heaven upon one
@c    sinner that doth penance, more than upon ninety-nine just who need not
@c    penance.

@c    15:8. Or what woman having ten groats, if she lose one groat, doth not
@c    light a candle and sweep the house and seek diligently until she find
@c    it?

@c    15:9. And when she hath found it, call together her friends and
@c    neighbours, saying:  Rejoice with me, because I have found the groat
@c    which I had lost.

@c    15:10. So I say to you, there shall be joy before the angels of God
@c    upon one sinner doing penance.

@c    Before the angels. . .By this it is plain that the spirits in heaven
@c    have a concern for us below, and a joy at our repentance and
@c    consequently a knowledge of it.

@c    15:11. And he said:  A certain man had two sons.

@c    15:12. And the younger of them said to his father:  Father, give me the
@c    portion of substance that falleth to me.  And he divided unto them his
@c    substance.

@c    15:13. And not many days after, the younger son, gathering all
@c    together, went abroad into a far country:  and there wasted his
@c    substance, living riotously.

@c    15:14. And after he had spent all, there came a mighty famine in that
@c    country:  and he began to be in want.

@c    15:15. And he went and cleaved to one of the citizens of that country.
@c    And he sent him into his farm to feed swine.

@c    15:16. And he would fain have filled his belly with the husks the swine
@c    did eat:  and no man gave unto him.

@c    15:17. And returning to himself, he said:  How many hired servants in my
@c    father's house abound with bread, and I here perish with hunger!

@c    15:18. I will arise and will go to my father and say to him:  Father, I
@c    have sinned against heaven and before thee.

@c    15:19. I am not worthy to be called thy son:  make me as one of thy
@c    hired servants.

@c    15:20. And rising up, he came to his father.  And when he was yet a
@c    great way off, his father saw him and was moved with compassion and
@c    running to him fell upon his neck and kissed him.

@c    15:21. And the son said to him:  Father:  I have sinned against heaven
@c    and before thee I am not now worthy to be called thy son.

@c    15:22. And the father said to his servants:  Bring forth quickly the
@c    first robe and put it on him:  and put a ring on his hand and shoes on
@c    his feet.

@c    15:23. And bring hither the fatted calf, and kill it:  and let us eat
@c    and make merry:

@c    15:24. Because this my son was dead and is come to life again, was lost
@c    and is found.  And they began to be merry.

@c    15:25. Now his elder son was in the field and when he came and drew
@c    nigh to the house, he heard music and dancing.

@c    15:26. And he called one of the servants, and asked what these things
@c    meant.

@c    15:27. And he said to him:  Thy brother is come and thy father hath
@c    killed the fatted calf, because he hath received him safe.

@c    15:28. And he was angry and would not go in.  His father therefore
@c    coming out began to entreat him.

@c    15:29. And he answering, said to his father:  Behold, for so many years
@c    do I serve thee and I have never transgressed thy commandment:  and yet
@c    thou hast never given me a kid to make merry with my friends.

@c    15:30. But as soon as this thy son is come, who hath devoured his
@c    substance with harlots, thou hast killed for him the fatted calf.

@c    15:31. But he said to him:  Son, thou art always with me; and all I have
@c    is thine.

@c    15:32. But it was fit that we should make merry and be glad:  for this
@c    thy brother was dead and is come to life again; he was lost, and is
@c    found.



@c    Luke Chapter 16


@c    The parable of the unjust steward and of the rich man and Lazarus.

@c    16:1. And he said also to his disciples:  There was a certain rich man
@c    who had a steward:  and the same was accused unto him, that he had
@c    wasted his goods.

@c    16:2. And he called him and said to him:  How is it that I hear this of
@c    thee?  Give an account of thy stewardship:  for now thou canst be steward
@c    no longer.

@c    16:3. And the steward said within himself:  What shall I do, because my
@c    lord taketh away from me the stewardship?  To dig I am not able; to beg
@c    I am ashamed.

@c    16:4. I know what I will do, that when I shall be removed from the
@c    stewardship, they may receive me into their houses.

@c    16:5. Therefore, calling together every one of his lord's debtors, he
@c    said to the first:  How much dost thou owe my lord?

@c    16:6. But he said:  An hundred barrels of oil.  And he said to him:  Take
@c    thy bill and sit down quickly and write fifty.

@c    16:7. Then he said to another:  And how much dost thou owe?  Who said:
@c    An hundred quarters of wheat.  He said to him:  Take thy bill and write
@c    eighty.

@c    16:8. And the lord commended the unjust steward, forasmuch as he had
@c    done wisely:  for the children of this world are wiser in their
@c    generation than the children of light.

@c    16:9. And I say to you:  Make unto you friends of the mammon of
@c    iniquity:  that when you shall fail, they may receive you into
@c    everlasting dwellings.

@c    Mammon of iniquity. . .Mammon signifies riches.  They are here called the
@c    mammon of iniquity, because oftentimes ill gotten, ill bestowed, or an
@c    occasion of evil; and at the best are but worldly, and false; and not
@c    the true riches of a Christian.  They may receive. . .By this we see,
@c    that the poor servants of God, whom we have relieved by our alms, may
@c    hereafter, by their intercession, bring our souls to heaven.

@c    16:10. He that is faithful in that which is least is faithful also in
@c    that which is greater:  and he that is unjust in that which is little is
@c    unjust also in that which is greater.

@c    16:11. If then you have not been faithful in the unjust mammon, who
@c    will trust you with that which is the true?

@c    16:12. And if you have not been faithful in that which is another's,
@c    who will give you that which is your own?

@c    16:13. No servant can serve two masters:  for either he will hate the
@c    one and love the other:  or he will hold to the one and despise the
@c    other.  You cannot serve God and mammon.

@c    16:14. Now the Pharisees, who were covetous, heard all these things:
@c    and they derided him.

@c    16:15. And he said to them:  you are they who justify yourselves before
@c    men, but God knoweth your hearts.  For that which is high to men is an
@c    abomination before God.

@c    16:16. The law and the prophets were until John.  From that time the
@c    kingdom of God is preached:  and every one useth violence towards it.

@c    16:17. And it is easier for heaven and earth to pass than one tittle of
@c    the law to fall.

@c    16:18. Every one that putteth away his wife and marrieth another
@c    committeth adultery:  and he that marrieth her that is put away from her
@c    husband committeth adultery.

@c    16:19. There was a certain rich man who was clothed in purple and fine
@c    linen and feasted sumptuously every day.

@c    16:20. And there was a certain beggar, named Lazarus, who lay at his
@c    gate, full of sores,

@c    16:21. Desiring to be filled with the crumbs that fell from the rich
@c    man's table.  And no one did give him:  moreover the dogs came and licked
@c    his sores.

@c    16:22. And it came to pass that the beggar died and was carried by the
@c    angels into Abraham's bosom.  And the rich man also died:  and he was
@c    buried in hell.

@c    Abraham's bosom. . .The place of rest, where the souls of the saints
@c    resided, till Christ had opened heaven by his death.

@c    16:23. And lifting up his eyes when he was in torments, he saw Abraham
@c    afar off and Lazarus in his bosom:

@c    16:24. And he cried and said:  Father Abraham, have mercy on me and send
@c    Lazarus, that he may dip the tip of his finger in water to cool my
@c    tongue:  for I am tormented in this flame.

@c    16:25. And Abraham said to him:  Son, remember that thou didst receive
@c    good things in thy lifetime, and likewise Lazarus evil things:  but now
@c    he is comforted and thou art tormented.

@c    16:26. And besides all this, between us and you, there is fixed a great
@c    chaos:  so that they who would pass from hence to you cannot, nor from
@c    thence come hither.

@c    16:27. And he said:  Then, father, I beseech thee that thou wouldst send
@c    him to my father's house, for I have five brethren,

@c    16:28. That he may testify unto them, lest they also come into this
@c    place of torments.

@c    16:29. And Abraham said to him:  They have Moses and the prophets.  Let
@c    them hear them.

@c    16:30. But he said:  No, father Abraham:  but if one went to them from
@c    the dead, they will do penance.

@c    16:31. And he said to him:  If they hear not Moses and the prophets,
@c    neither will they believe, if one rise again from the dead.



@c    Luke Chapter 17


@c    Lessons of avoiding scandal and of the efficacy of faith.  The ten
@c    lepers.  The manner of the coming of Christ.

@c    17:1. And he said to his disciples:  It is impossible that scandals
@c    should not come.  But woe to him through whom they come!

@c    17:2. It were better for him that a millstone were hanged about his
@c    neck and he cast into the sea, than that he should scandalize one of
@c    these little ones.

@c    17:3. Take heed to yourselves.  If thy brother sin against thee, reprove
@c    him:  and if he do penance, forgive him.

@c    17:4. And if he sin against thee seven times in a day, and seven times
@c    in a day be converted unto thee, saying:  I repent:  forgive him.

@c    17:5. And the apostles said to the Lord:  Increase our faith.

@c    17:6. And the Lord said:  If you had faith like to a grain of mustard
@c    seed, you might say to this mulberry tree:  Be thou rooted up and be
@c    thou transplanted into the sea.  And it would obey you.

@c    17:7. But which of you, having a servant ploughing or feeding cattle,
@c    will say to him, when he is come from the field:  Immediately go.  Sit
@c    down to meat.

@c    17:8. And will not rather say to him:  Make ready my supper and gird
@c    thyself and serve me, whilst I eat and drink; and afterwards thou shalt
@c    eat and drink?

@c    17:9. Doth he thank that servant for doing the things which he
@c    commanded him?

@c    17:10. I think not.  So you also, when you shall have done all these
@c    things that are commanded you, say:  We are unprofitable servants; we
@c    have done that which we ought to do.

@c    Unprofitable servants. . .Because our service is of no profit to our
@c    master; and he justly claims it as our bounden duty.  But though we are
@c    unprofitable to him, our serving him is not unprofitable to us; for he
@c    is pleased to give by his grace a value to our good works, which, in
@c    consequence of his promise, entitles them to an eternal reward.

@c    17:11. And it came to pass, as he was going to Jerusalem, he passed
@c    through the midst of Samaria and Galilee.

@c    17:12. And as he entered into a certain town, there met him ten men
@c    that were lepers, who stood afar off.

@c    17:13. And lifted up their voice, saying:  Jesus, Master, have mercy on
@c    us.

@c    17:14. Whom when he saw, he said:  Go, shew yourselves to the priests.
@c    And it came to pass, as they went, they were made clean.

@c    17:15. And one of them, when he saw that he was made clean, went back,
@c    with a loud voice glorifying God.

@c    17:16. And he fell on his face before his feet, giving thanks.  And this
@c    was a Samaritan.

@c    17:17. And Jesus answering, said:  Were not ten made clean?  And where
@c    are the nine?

@c    17:18. There is no one found to return and give glory to God, but this
@c    stranger.

@c    17:19. And he said to him:  Arise, go thy way; for thy faith hath made
@c    thee whole.

@c    17:20. And being asked by the Pharisees when the kingdom of God should
@c    come, he answering them and said:  The kingdom of God cometh not with
@c    observation.

@c    17:21. Neither shall they say:  Behold here, or behold there.  For lo,
@c    the kingdom of God is within you.

@c    17:22. And he said to his disciples:  The days will come when you shall
@c    desire to see one day of the Son of man.  And you shall not see it.

@c    17:23. And they will say to you:  See here, and see there.  Go ye not
@c    after, nor follow them.

@c    17:24. For as the lightning that lighteneth from under heaven shineth
@c    unto the parts that are under heaven, so shall the Son of man be in his
@c    day.

@c    17:25. But first he must suffer many things and be rejected by this
@c    generation.

@c    17:26. And as it came to pass in the days of Noe, so shall it be also
@c    in the days of the Son of man.

@c    17:27. They did eat and drink, they married wives and were given in
@c    marriage, until the day that Noe entered into the ark and the flood
@c    came and destroyed them all.

@c    17:28. Likewise as it came to pass in the days of Lot.  They did eat and
@c    drink, they bought and sold, they planted and built.

@c    17:29. And in the day that Lot went out of Sodom, it rained fire and
@c    brimstone from heaven and destroyed them all.

@c    17:30. Even thus shall it be in the day when the Son of man shall be
@c    revealed.

@c    17:31. In that hour, he that shall be on the housetop, and his goods in
@c    the house, let him not go down to take them away:  and he that shall be
@c    in the field, in like manner, let him not return back.

@c    17:32. Remember Lot's wife.

@c    17:33. Whosoever shall seek to save his life shall lose it:  and
@c    whosoever shall lose it shall preserve it.

@c    17:34. I say to you:  In that night there shall be two men in one bed.
@c    The one shall be taken and the other shall be left.

@c    17:35. Two women shall be grinding together.  The one shall be taken and
@c    the other shall be left.  Two men shall be in the field.  The one shall
@c    be taken and the other shall be left.

@c    17:36. They answering, say to him:  Where, Lord?

@c    17:37. Who said to them:  Wheresoever the body shall be, thither will
@c    the eagles also be gathered together.



@c    Luke Chapter 18


@c    We must pray always.  The Pharisee and the publican.  The danger of
@c    riches.  The blind man is restored to sight.

@c    18:1. And he spoke also a parable to them, that we ought always to pray
@c    and not to faint,

@c    18:2. Saying:  There was a judge in a certain city, who feared not God
@c    nor regarded man.

@c    18:3. And there was a certain widow in that city; and she came to him,
@c    saying:  Avenge me of my adversary.

@c    Avenge. . .That is, do me justice.  It is a Hebraism.

@c    18:4. And he would not for a long time.  But afterwards he said within
@c    himself:  Although I fear not God nor regard man,

@c    18:5. Yet because this widow is troublesome to me, I will avenge her,
@c    lest continually coming she weary me.

@c    18:6. And the Lord said:  Hear what the unjust judge saith.

@c    18:7. And will not God revenge his elect who cry to him day and night?
@c    And will he have patience in their regard?

@c    18:8. I say to you that he will quickly revenge them.  But yet the Son
@c    of man, when he cometh, shall he find, think you, faith on earth?

@c    18:9. And to some who trusted in themselves as just and despised
@c    others, he spoke also this parable:

@c    18:10. Two men went up into the temple to pray:  the one a Pharisee and
@c    the other a publican.

@c    18:11. The Pharisee standing, prayed thus with himself:  O God, I give
@c    thee thanks that I am not as the rest of men, extortioners, unjust,
@c    adulterers, as also is this publican.

@c    18:12. I fast twice in a week:  I give tithes of all that I possess.

@c    18:13. And the publican, standing afar off, would not so much as lift
@c    up his eyes towards heaven; but struck his breast, saying:  O God, be
@c    merciful to me a sinner.

@c    18:14. I say to you, this man went down into his house justified rather
@c    than the other:  because every one that exalteth himself shall be
@c    humbled:  and he that humbleth himself shall be exalted.

@c    18:15. And they brought unto him also infants, that he might touch
@c    them.  Which when the disciples saw, they rebuked them.

@c    18:16. But Jesus, calling them together, said:  Suffer children to come
@c    to me and forbid them not:  for of such is the kingdom of God.

@c    18:17. Amen, I say to you:  Whosoever shall not receive the kingdom of
@c    God as a child shall not enter into it.

@c    18:18. And a certain ruler asked him, saying:  Good master, what shall I
@c    do to possess everlasting life?

@c    18:19. And Jesus said to him:  Why dost thou call me good?  None is good
@c    but God alone.

@c    18:20. Thou knowest the commandments:  Thou shalt not kill.  Thou shalt
@c    not commit adultery:  Thou shalt not steal:  Thou shalt not bear false
@c    witness:  Honour thy father and mother.

@c    18:21. Who said:  All these things have I kept from my youth.

@c    18:22. Which when Jesus had heard, he said to him:  Yet one thing is
@c    wanting to thee.  Sell all whatever thou hast and give to the poor:  and
@c    thou shalt have treasure in heaven.  And come, follow me.

@c    18:23. He having heard these things, became sorrowful:  for he was very
@c    rich.

@c    18:24. And Jesus seeing him become sorrowful, said:  How hardly shall
@c    they that have riches enter into the kingdom of God

@c    18:25. For it is easier for a camel to pass through the eye of a needle
@c    than for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of God.

@c    18:26. And they that heard it said:  Who then can be saved?

@c    18:27. He said to them:  The things that are impossible with men are
@c    possible with God.

@c    18:28. Then Peter said:  Behold, we have left all things and have
@c    followed thee.

@c    18:29. Who said to them:  Amen, I say to you, there is no man that hath
@c    left home or parents or brethren or wife or children, for the kingdom
@c    of God's sake,

@c    18:30. Who shall not receive much more in this present time, and in the
@c    world to come life everlasting.

@c    18:31. Then Jesus took unto him the twelve and said to them:  Behold, we
@c    go up to Jerusalem; and all things shall be accomplished which were
@c    written by the prophets concerning the Son of man.

@c    18:32. For he shall be delivered to the Gentiles and shall be mocked
@c    and scourged and spit upon.

@c    18:33. And after they have scourged him, they will put him to death.
@c    And the third day he shall rise again.

@c    18:34. And they understood none of these things, and this word was hid
@c    from them:  and they understood not the things that were said.

@c    18:35. Now it came to pass, when he drew nigh to Jericho, that a
@c    certain blind man sat by the way side, begging.

@c    18:36. And when he heard the multitude passing by, he asked what this
@c    meant.

@c    18:37. And they told him that Jesus of Nazareth was passing by.

@c    18:38. And he cried out, saying:  Jesus, Son of David, have mercy on me.

@c    18:39. And they that went before rebuked him, that he should hold his
@c    peace:  but he cried out much more:  Son of David, have mercy on me.

@c    18:40. And Jesus standing, commanded him to be brought unto him.  And
@c    when he was come near, he asked him,

@c    18:41. Saying; What wilt thou that I do to thee?  But he said:  Lord,
@c    that I may see.

@c    18:42. And Jesus said to him:  Receive thy sight:  thy faith hath made
@c    thee whole.

@c    18:43. And immediately he saw and followed him, glorifying God.  And all
@c    the people, when they saw it, gave praise to God.



@c    Luke Chapter 19


@c    Zacheus entertains Christ.  The parable of the pounds.  Christ rides upon
@c    an ass and weeps over Jerusalem.

@c    19:1. And entering he walked through Jericho.

@c    19:2. And behold, there was a man named Zacheus, who was the chief of
@c    the publicans:  and he was rich.

@c    19:3. And he sought to see Jesus who he was:  and he could not for the
@c    crowd, because he was low of stature.

@c    19:4. And running before, he climbed up into a sycamore tree, that he
@c    might see him:  for he was to pass that way.

@c    19:5. And when Jesus was come to the place, looking up, he saw him and
@c    said to him:  Zacheus, make haste and come down:  for this day I must
@c    abide in thy house.

@c    19:6. And he made haste and came down and received him with joy.

@c    19:7. And when all saw it, they murmured, saying, that he was gone to
@c    be a guest with a man that was a sinner.

@c    19:8. But Zacheus standing, said to the Lord:  Behold, Lord, the half of
@c    my goods I give to the poor; and if I have wronged any man of any
@c    thing, I restore him fourfold.

@c    19:9. Jesus said to him:  This day is salvation come to this house,
@c    because he also is a son of Abraham.

@c    19:10. For the Son of man is come to seek and to save that which was
@c    lost.

@c    19:11. As they were hearing these things, he added and spoke a parable,
@c    because he was nigh to Jerusalem and because they thought that the
@c    kingdom of God should immediately be manifested.

@c    19:12. He said therefore:  a certain nobleman went into a far country,
@c    to receive for himself a kingdom and to return.

@c    19:13. And calling his ten servants, he gave them ten pounds and said
@c    to them:  Trade till I come.

@c    He gave them ten pounds. . .In the original, what is here translated a
@c    pound, is in Latin, mina, in value of our coin, three pounds two
@c    shillings and sixpence.

@c    19:14. But his citizens hated him and they sent an embassage after him,
@c    saying:  We will not have this man to reign over us.

@c    19:15. And it came to pass that he returned, having received the
@c    kingdom:  and he commanded his servants to be called, to whom he had
@c    given the money, that he might know how much every man had gained by
@c    trading,

@c    19:16. And the first came saying:  Lord, thy pound hath gained ten
@c    pounds.

@c    19:17. And he said to him:  Well done, thou good servant, because thou
@c    hast been faithful in a little, thou shalt have power over ten cities.

@c    19:18. And the second came, saying:  Lord, thy pound hath gained five
@c    pounds.

@c    19:19. And he said to him:  Be thou also over five cities.

@c    19:20. And another came, saying:  Lord, behold here is thy pound, which
@c    I have kept laid up in a napkin.

@c    19:21. For I feared thee, because thou art an austere man:  thou takest
@c    up what thou didst not lay down:  and thou reapest that which thou didst
@c    not sow.

@c    19:22. He saith to him:  Out of thy own mouth I judge thee, thou wicked
@c    servant.  Thou knewest that I was an austere man, taking up what I laid
@c    not down and reaping that which I did not sow.

@c    19:23. And why then didst thou not give my money into the bank, that at
@c    my coming I might have exacted it with usury?

@c    19:24. And he said to them that stood by:  Take the pound away from him
@c    and give it to him that hath ten pounds.

@c    19:25. And they said to him:  Lord, he hath ten pounds.

@c    19:26. But I say to you that to every one that hath shall be given, and
@c    he shall abound:  and from him that hath not, even that which he hath
@c    shall be taken from him.

@c    19:27. But as for those my enemies, who would not have me reign over
@c    them, bring them hither and kill them before me.

@c    19:28. And having said these things, he went before, going up to
@c    Jerusalem.

@c    19:29. And it came to pass, when he was come nigh to Bethphage and
@c    Bethania, unto the mount called Olivet, he sent two of his disciples,

@c    19:30. Saying:  Go into the town which is over against you, at your
@c    entering into which you shall find the colt of an ass tied, on which no
@c    man ever hath sitten:  loose him and bring him hither.

@c    19:31. And if any man shall ask you:  Why do you loose him?  You shall
@c    say thus unto him:  Because the Lord hath need of his service.

@c    19:32. And they that were sent went their way and found the colt
@c    standing, as he said unto them.

@c    19:33. And as they were loosing the colt, the owners thereof said to
@c    them:  Why loose you the colt?

@c    19:34. But they said:  Because the Lord hath need of him.

@c    19:35. And they brought him to Jesus.  And casting their garments on the
@c    colt, they set Jesus thereon.

@c    19:36. And as he went, they spread their clothes underneath in the way.

@c    19:37. And when he was now coming near the descent of Mount Olivet, the
@c    whole multitude of his disciples began with joy to praise God with a
@c    loud voice, for all the mighty works they had seen,

@c    19:38. Saying:  Blessed be the king who cometh in the name of the Lord!
@c    Peace in heaven and glory on high!

@c    19:39. And some of the Pharisees, from amongst the multitude, said to
@c    him:  Master, rebuke thy disciples.

@c    19:40. To whom he said:  I say to you that if these shall hold their
@c    peace, the stones will cry out.

@c    19:41. And when he drew near, seeing the city, he wept over it, saying:

@c    19:42. If thou also hadst known, and that in this thy day, the things
@c    that are to thy peace:  but now they are hidden from thy eyes.

@c    19:43. For the days shall come upon thee:  and thy enemies shall cast a
@c    trench about thee and compass thee round and straiten thee on every
@c    side,

@c    19:44. And beat thee flat to the ground, and thy children who are in
@c    thee.  And they shall not leave in thee a stone upon a stone:  because
@c    thou hast not known the time of thy visitation.

@c    19:45. And entering into the temple, he began to cast out them that
@c    sold therein and them that bought.

@c    19:46. Saying to them:  It is written:  My house is the house of prayer.
@c    But you have made it a den of thieves.

@c    19:47. And he was teaching daily in the temple.  And the chief priests
@c    and the scribes and the rulers of the people sought to destroy him.

@c    19:48. And they found not what to do to him:  for all the people were
@c    very attentive to hear him.



@c    Luke Chapter 20


@c    The parable of the husbandmen.  Of paying tribute to Caesar and of the
@c    resurrection of the dead.

@c    20:1. And it came to pass that on one of the days, as he was teaching
@c    the people in the temple and preaching the gospel, the chief priests
@c    and the scribes, with the ancients, met together,

@c    20:2. And spoke to him, saying:  Tell us, by what authority dost thou
@c    these things?  Or, who is he that hath given thee this authority?

@c    20:3. And Jesus answering, said to them:  I will also ask you one thing.
@c    Answer me:

@c    20:4. The baptism of John, was it from heaven, or of men?

@c    20:5. But they thought within themselves, saying:  If we shall say, From
@c    heaven:  he will say:  Why then did you not believe in him?

@c    20:6. But if we say, of men:  the whole people will stone us.  For they
@c    are persuaded that John was a prophet.

@c    20:7. And they answered that they knew not whence it was.

@c    20:8. And Jesus said to them:  Neither do I tell you by what authority I
@c    do these things.

@c    20:9. And he began to speak to the people this parable:  A certain man
@c    planted a vineyard and let it out to husbandmen:  and he was abroad for
@c    a long time.

@c    20:10. And at the season he sent a servant to the husbandmen, that they
@c    should give him of the fruit of the vineyard.  Who, beating him, sent
@c    him away empty.

@c    20:11. And again he sent another servant.  But they beat him also and,
@c    treating him reproachfully, sent him away empty.

@c    20:12. And again he sent the third:  and they wounded him also and cast
@c    him out.

@c    20:13. Then the lord of the vineyard said:  What shall I do?  I will send
@c    my beloved son.  It may be, when they see him, they will reverence him.

@c    20:14. Whom, when the husbandmen saw, they thought within themselves,
@c    saying:  This is the heir.  Let us kill him, that the inheritance may be
@c    ours.

@c    20:15. So casting him out of the vineyard, they killed him.  What
@c    therefore will the lord of the vineyard do to them?

@c    20:16. He will come and will destroy these husbandmen and will give the
@c    vineyard to others.  Which they hearing, said to him:  God forbid.

@c    20:17. But he looking on them, said:  What is this then that is written,
@c    The stone, which the builders rejected, the same is become the head of
@c    the corner?

@c    20:18. Whosoever shall fall upon that stone shall be bruised:  and upon
@c    whomsoever it shall fall, it will grind him to powder.

@c    20:19. And the chief priests and the scribes sought to lay hands on him
@c    the same hour:  but they feared the people, for they knew that he spoke
@c    this parable to them.

@c    20:20. And being upon the watch, they sent spies, who should feign
@c    themselves just, that they might take hold of him in his words, that
@c    they might deliver him up to the authority and power of the governor.

@c    20:21. And they asked him, saying:  Master, we know that thou speakest
@c    and teachest rightly:  and thou dost not respect any person, but
@c    teachest the way of God in truth.

@c    20:22. Is it lawful for us to give tribute to Caesar, or no?

@c    20:23. But he, considering their guile, said to them:  Why tempt you me?

@c    20:24. Shew me a penny.  Whose image and inscription hath it?  They
@c    answering, said to him:  Caesar's.

@c    20:25. And he said to them:  Render therefore to Caesar the things, that
@c    are Caesar's:  and to God the things that are God's.

@c    20:26. And they could not reprehend his word before the people:  and
@c    wondering at his answer, they held their peace.

@c    20:27. And there came to him some of the Sadducees, who deny that there
@c    is any resurrection:  and they asked him,

@c    20:28. Saying:  Master, Moses wrote unto us:  If any man's brother die,
@c    having a wife, and he leave no children, that his brother should take
@c    her to wife and raise up seed unto his brother.

@c    20:29. There were therefore seven brethren:  and the first took a wife
@c    and died without children.

@c    20:30. And the next took her to wife:  and he also died childless.

@c    20:31. And the third took her.  And in like manner, all the seven:  and
@c    they left no children and died.

@c    20:32. Last of all the woman died also.

@c    20:33. In the resurrection therefore, whose wife of them shall she be?
@c    For all the seven had her to wife.

@c    20:34. And Jesus said to them:  The children of this world marry and are
@c    given in marriage:

@c    20:35. But they that shall be accounted worthy of that world and of the
@c    resurrection from the dead shall neither be married nor take wives.

@c    20:36. Neither can they die any more for they are equal to the angels
@c    and are the children of God, being the children of the resurrection.

@c    20:37. Now that the dead rise again, Moses also shewed at the bush,
@c    when he called the Lord:  The God of Abraham and the God of Isaac and
@c    the God of Jacob.

@c    20:38. For he is not the God of the dead, but of the living:  for all
@c    live to him.

@c    20:39. And some of the scribes answering, said to him:  Master, thou
@c    hast said well.

@c    20:40. And after that they durst not ask him any more questions.

@c    20:41. But he said to them:  How say they that Christ is the son of
@c    David?

@c    20:42. And David himself saith in the book of Psalms:  The Lord said to
@c    my Lord, sit thou on my right hand,

@c    20:43. Till I make thy enemies thy footstool.

@c    20:44. David then calleth him Lord.  And how is he his son?

@c    20:45. And in the hearing of all the people, he said to his disciples:

@c    20:46. Beware of the scribes, who desire to walk in long robes and love
@c    salutations in the market place and the first chairs in the synagogues
@c    and the chief rooms at feasts:

@c    20:47. Who devour the houses of widows, feigning long prayer.  These
@c    shall receive greater damnation.



@c    Luke Chapter 21


@c    The widow's mites.  The signs that should forerun the destruction of
@c    Jerusalem and the end of the world.

@c    21:1. And looking on, he saw the rich men cast their gifts into the
@c    treasury.

@c    21:2. And he saw also a certain poor widow casting in two brass mites.

@c    21:3. And he said:  Verily, I say to you that this poor widow hath cast
@c    in more than they all.

@c    21:4. For all these have of their abundance cast into the offerings of
@c    God:  but she of her want hath cast in all the living that she had.

@c    21:5. And some saying of the temple that it was adorned with goodly
@c    stones and gifts, he said:

@c    21:6. These things which you see, the days will come in which there
@c    shall not be left a stone upon a stone that shall not be thrown down.

@c    21:7. And they asked him, saying:  Master, when shall these things be?
@c    And what shall be the sign when they shall begin to come to pass?

@c    21:8. Who said:  Take heed you be not seduced:  for many will come in my
@c    name, saying:  I am he and the time is at hand.  Go ye not therefore
@c    after them.

@c    21:9. And when you shall hear of wars and seditions, be not terrified.
@c    These things must first come to pass:  but the end is not yet presently.

@c    21:10. Then he said to them:  Nation shall rise against nation, and
@c    kingdom against kingdom.

@c    21:11. And there shall be great earthquakes in divers places and
@c    pestilences and famines and terrors from heaven:  and there shall be
@c    great signs.

@c    21:12. But before all these things, they will lay their hands on you
@c    and persecute you, delivering you up to the synagogues and into
@c    prisons, dragging you before kings and governors, for my name's sake.

@c    21:13. And it shall happen unto you for a testimony.

@c    21:14. Lay it up therefore in your hearts, not to meditate before how
@c    you shall answer:

@c    21:15. For I will give you a mouth and wisdom, which all your
@c    adversaries shall not be able to resist and gainsay.

@c    21:16. And you shall be betrayed by your parents and brethren and
@c    kinsmen and friends:  and some of you they will put to death.

@c    21:17. And you shall be hated by all men for my name's sake.

@c    21:18. But a hair of your head shall not perish.

@c    21:19. In your patience you shall possess your souls.

@c    21:20. And when you shall see Jerusalem compassed about with an army,
@c    then know that the desolation thereof is at hand.

@c    21:21. Then let those who are in Judea flee to the mountains:  and those
@c    who are in the midst thereof depart out:  and those who are in the
@c    countries not enter into it.

@c    21:22. For these are the days of vengeance, that all things may be
@c    fulfilled, that are written.

@c    21:23. But woe to them that are with child and give suck in those days:
@c    for there shall be great distress in the land and wrath upon this
@c    people.

@c    21:24. And they shall fall by the edge of the sword and shall be led
@c    away captives into all nations:  and Jerusalem shall be trodden down by
@c    the Gentiles till the times of the nations be fulfilled.

@c    21:25. And there shall be signs in the sun and in the moon and in the
@c    stars; and upon the earth distress of nations, by reason of the
@c    confusion of the roaring of the sea, and of the waves:

@c    21:26. Men withering away for fear and expectation of what shall come
@c    upon the whole world.  For the powers of heaven shall be moved.

@c    21:27. And then they shall see the Son of man coming in a cloud, with
@c    great power and majesty.

@c    21:28. But when these things begin to come to pass, look up and lift up
@c    your heads, because your redemption is at hand.

@c    21:29. And he spoke to them a similitude.  See the fig tree and all the
@c    trees:

@c    21:30. When they now shoot forth their fruit, you know that summer is
@c    nigh;

@c    21:31. So you also, when you shall see these things come to pass, know
@c    that the kingdom of God is at hand.

@c    21:32. Amen, I say to you, this generation shall not pass away till all
@c    things be fulfilled.

@c    21:33. Heaven and earth shall pass away:  but my words shall not pass
@c    away.

@c    21:34. And take heed to yourselves, lest perhaps your hearts be
@c    overcharged with surfeiting and drunkenness and the cares of this life:
@c    and that day come upon you suddenly.

@c    21:35. For as a snare shall it come upon all that sit upon the face of
@c    the whole earth.

@c    21:36. Watch ye, therefore, praying at all times, that you may be
@c    accounted worthy to escape all these things that are to come and to
@c    stand before the Son of man.

@c    21:37. And in the daytime, he was teaching in the temple:  but at night
@c    going out, he abode in the mount that is called Olivet.

@c    21:38. And all the people came early in the morning to him in the
@c    temple, to hear him.



@c    Luke Chapter 22


@c    The treason of Judas.  The last supper.  The first part of the history of
@c    the passion.

@c    22:1. Now the feast of unleavened bread, which is called the pasch, was
@c    at hand.

@c    22:2. And the chief priests and the scribes sought how they might put
@c    Jesus to death:  but they feared the people.

@c    22:3. And Satan entered into Judas, who was surnamed Iscariot, one of
@c    the twelve.

@c    22:4. And he went and discoursed with the chief priests and the
@c    magistrates, how he might betray him to them.

@c    22:5. And they were glad and covenanted to give him money.

@c    22:6. And he promised.  And he sought opportunity to betray him in the
@c    absence of the multitude.

@c    22:7. And the day of the unleavened bread came, on which it was
@c    necessary that the pasch should be killed.

@c    22:8. And he sent Peter and John, saying:  Go, and prepare for us the
@c    pasch, that we may eat.

@c    22:9. But they said:  Where wilt thou that we prepare?

@c    22:10. And he said to them:  Behold, as you go into the city, there
@c    shall meet you a man carrying a pitcher of water:  follow him into the
@c    house where he entereth in.

@c    22:11. And you shall say to the goodman of the house:  The master saith
@c    to thee:  Where is the guest chamber, where I may eat the pasch with my
@c    disciples?

@c    22:12. And he will shew you a large dining room, furnished.  And there
@c    prepare.

@c    22:13. And they going, found as he had said to them and made ready the
@c    pasch.

@c    22:14. And when the hour was come, he sat down:  and the twelve apostles
@c    with him.

@c    22:15. And he said to them:  With desire I have desired to eat this
@c    pasch with you, before I suffer.

@c    22:16. For I say to you that from this time I will not eat it, till it
@c    be fulfilled in the kingdom of God.

@c    22:17. And having taken the chalice, he gave thanks and said:  Take and
@c    divide it among you.

@c    22:18. For I say to you that I will not drink of the fruit of the vine,
@c    till the kingdom of God come.

@c    22:19. And taking bread, he gave thanks and brake and gave to them,
@c    saying:  This is my body, which is given for you.  Do this for a
@c    commemoration of me.

@c    Do this for a commemoration of me. . .This sacrifice and sacrament is to
@c    be continued in the church, to the end of the world, to shew forth the
@c    death of Christ, until he cometh.  But this commemoration, or
@c    remembrance, is by no means inconsistent with the real presence of his
@c    body and blood, under these sacramental veils, which represent his
@c    death; on the contrary, it is the manner that he himself hath
@c    commanded, of commemorating and celebrating his death, by offering in
@c    sacrifice, and receiving in the sacrament, that body and blood by which
@c    we were redeemed.

@c    22:20. In like manner, the chalice also, after he had supped, saying:
@c    This is the chalice, the new testament in my blood, which shall be shed
@c    for you.

@c    22:21. But yet behold:  the hand of him that betrayeth me is with me on
@c    the table.

@c    22:22. And the Son of man indeed goeth, according to that which is
@c    determined:  but yet, woe to that man by whom he shall be betrayed.

@c    22:23. And they began to inquire among themselves, which of them it was
@c    that should do this thing.

@c    22:24. And there was also a strife amongst them, which of them should
@c    seem to be the greater.

@c    22:25. And he said to them:  The kings of the Gentiles lord it over
@c    them; and they that have power over them are called beneficent.

@c    22:26. But you not so:  but he that is the greater among you, let him
@c    become as the younger:  and he that is the leader, as he that serveth.

@c    22:27. For which is greater, he that sitteth at table or he that
@c    serveth?  Is not he that sitteth at table?  But I am in the midst of you,
@c    as he that serveth.

@c    22:28. And you are they who have continued with me in my temptations:

@c    22:29. And I dispose to you, as my Father hath disposed to me, a
@c    kingdom;

@c    22:30. That you may eat and drink at my table, in my kingdom:  and may
@c    sit upon thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel.

@c    22:31. And the Lord said:  Simon, Simon, behold Satan hath desired to
@c    have you, that he may sift you as wheat.

@c    22:32. But I have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not:  and thou,
@c    being once converted, confirm thy brethren.

@c    22:33. Who said to him:  Lord, I am ready to go with thee, both into
@c    prison and to death.

@c    22:34. And he said:  I say to thee, Peter, the cock shall not crow this
@c    day, till thou thrice deniest that thou knowest me.  And he said to
@c    them:

@c    22:35. When I sent you without purse and scrip and shoes, did you want
@c    anything?

@c    22:36. But they said:  Nothing.  Then said he unto them:  But now he that
@c    hath a purse, let him take it, and likewise a scrip:  and he that hath
@c    not, let him sell his coat and buy a sword.

@c    22:37. For I say to you that this that is written must yet be fulfilled
@c    in me.  And with the wicked was he reckoned.  For the things concerning
@c    me have an end.

@c    22:38. But they said:  Lord, behold, here are two swords.  And he said to
@c    them:  It is enough.

@c    22:39. And going out, he went, according to his custom, to the Mount of
@c    Olives.  And his disciples also followed him.

@c    22:40. And when he was come to the place, he said to them:  Pray, lest
@c    ye enter into temptation.

@c    22:41. And he was withdrawn away from them a stone's cast.  And kneeling
@c    down, he prayed.

@c    22:42. Saying:  Father, if thou wilt, remove this chalice from me:  but
@c    yet not my will, but thine be done.

@c    22:43. And there appeared to him an angel from heaven, strengthening
@c    him.  And being in an agony, he prayed the longer.

@c    22:44. And his sweat became as drops of blood, trickling down upon the
@c    ground.

@c    22:45. And when he rose up from prayer and was come to the disciples,
@c    he found them sleeping for sorrow.

@c    22:46. And he said to them:  Why sleep you?  Arise:  pray:  lest you
@c    enter into temptation.

@c    22:47. As he was yet speaking, behold a multitude; and he that was
@c    called Judas, one of the twelve, went before them and drew near to
@c    Jesus, for to kiss him.

@c    22:48. And Jesus said to him:  Judas, dost thou betray the Son of man
@c    with a kiss?

@c    22:49. And they that were about him, seeing what would follow, said to
@c    him:  Lord, shall we strike with the sword?

@c    22:50. And one of them struck the servant of the high priest and cut
@c    off his right ear.

@c    22:51. But Jesus answering, said:  Suffer ye thus far.  And when he had
@c    touched his ear, he healed him.

@c    22:52. And Jesus said to the chief priests and magistrates of the
@c    temple and the ancients, that were come unto him:  Are ye come out, as
@c    it were against a thief, with swords and clubs?

@c    22:53. When I was daily with you in the temple, you did not stretch
@c    forth your hands against me:  but this is your hour and the power of
@c    darkness.

@c    22:54. And apprehending him, they led him to the high priest's house.
@c    But Peter followed afar off.

@c    22:55. And when they had kindled a fire in the midst of the hall and
@c    were sitting about it, Peter was in the midst of them.

@c    22:56. Whom when a certain servant maid had seen sitting at the light
@c    and had earnestly beheld him, she said:  This man also was with him.

@c    22:57. But he denied him, saying:  Woman, I know him not.

@c    22:58. And after a little while, another seeing him, said:  Thou also
@c    art one of them.  But Peter said:  O man, I am not.

@c    Another, etc. . .Observe here, in order to reconcile the four
@c    Evangelists, that divers persons concurred in charging Peter with being
@c    Christ's disciple; till at length they brought him to deny him thrice.
@c    1. The porteress that let him in, and afterwards seeing him at the
@c    fire, first put the question to him; and then positively affirmed that
@c    he was with Christ.  2. Another maid accused him to the standers by; and
@c    gave occasion to the man here mentioned to renew the charge against
@c    him, which caused the second denial.  3. Others of the company took
@c    notice of his being a Galilean; and were seconded by the kinsman of
@c    Malchus, who affirmed he had seen him in the garden.  And this drew on
@c    the third denial.

@c    22:59. And after the space, as it were of one hour, another certain man
@c    affirmed, saying:  Of a truth, this man was also with him:  for he is
@c    also a Galilean.

@c    22:60. And Peter said:  Man, I know not what thou sayest.  And
@c    immediately, as he was yet speaking, the cock crew.

@c    22:61. And the Lord turning looked on Peter.  And Peter remembered the
@c    word of the Lord, as he had said:  Before the cock crow, thou shalt deny
@c    thrice.

@c    22:62. And Peter going out, wept bitterly.

@c    22:63. And the men that held him mocked him and struck him.

@c    22:64. And they blindfolded him and smote his face.  And they asked him
@c    saying:  Prophesy:  Who is it that struck thee?

@c    22:65. And blaspheming, many other things they said against him.

@c    22:66. And as soon as it was day, the ancients of the people and the
@c    chief priests and scribes came together.  And they brought him into
@c    their council saying:  If thou be the Christ, tell us.

@c    22:67. And he saith to them:  If I shall tell you, you will not believe
@c    me.

@c    22:68. And if I shall also ask you, you will not answer me, nor let me
@c    go.

@c    22:69. But hereafter the Son of man shall be sitting on the right hand
@c    of the power of God.

@c    22:70. Then said they all:  Art thou then the Son of God?  Who said:  You
@c    say that I am.

@c    22:71. And they said:  What need we any further testimony?  For we
@c    ourselves have heard it from his own mouth.



@c    Luke Chapter 23


@c    The continuation of the history of the passion.

@c    23:1. And the whole multitude of them, rising up, led him to Pilate.

@c    23:2. And they began to accuse him, saying:  We have found this man
@c    perverting our nation and forbidding to give tribute to Caesar and
@c    saying that he is Christ the king.

@c    23:3. And Pilate asked him, saying:  Art thou the king of the Jews?  But
@c    he answering, said:  Thou sayest it.

@c    23:4. And Pilate said to the chief priests and to the multitudes:  I
@c    find no cause in this man.

@c    23:5. But they were more earnest, saying:  He stirreth up the people,
@c    teaching throughout all Judea, beginning from Galilee to this place.

@c    23:6. But Pilate hearing Galilee, asked if the man were of Galilee?

@c    23:7. And when he understood that he was of Herod's jurisdiction, he
@c    sent him away to Herod, who was also himself at Jerusalem in those
@c    days.

@c    23:8. And Herod seeing Jesus, was very glad:  for he was desirous of a
@c    long time to see him, because he had heard many things of him; and he
@c    hoped to see some sign wrought by him.

@c    23:9. And he questioned him in many words.  But he answered him nothing.

@c    23:10. And the chief priests and the scribes stood by, earnestly
@c    accusing him.

@c    23:11. And Herod with his army set him at nought and mocked him,
@c    putting on him a white garment:  and sent him back to Pilate.

@c    23:12. And Herod and Pilate were made friends, that same day:  for
@c    before they were enemies one to another.

@c    23:13. And Pilate, calling together the chief priests and the
@c    magistrates and the people,

@c    23:14. Said to them:  You have presented unto me this man as one that
@c    perverteth the people.  And behold I, having examined him before you,
@c    find no cause in this man, in those things wherein you accuse him.

@c    23:15. No, nor Herod neither.  For, I sent you to him:  and behold,
@c    nothing worthy of death is done to him.

@c    23:16. I will chastise him therefore and release him.

@c    23:17. Now of necessity he was to release unto them one upon the feast
@c    day.

@c    23:18. But the whole multitude together cried out, saying:  Away with
@c    this man, and release unto us Barabbas:

@c    23:19. Who, for a certain sedition made in the city and for a murder,
@c    was cast into prison.

@c    23:20. And Pilate again spoke to them, desiring to release Jesus.

@c    23:21. But they cried again, saying:  Crucify him, Crucify him.

@c    23:22. And he said to them the third time:  Why, what evil hath this man
@c    done?  I find no cause of death in him.  I will chastise him therefore
@c    and let him go.

@c    23:23. But they were instant with loud voices, requiring that he might
@c    be crucified.  And their voices prevailed.

@c    23:24. And Pilate gave sentence that it should be as they required.

@c    23:25. And he released unto them him who for murder and sedition had
@c    been cast into prison, whom they had desired.  But Jesus he delivered up
@c    to their will.

@c    23:26. And as they led him away, they laid hold of one Simon of Cyrene,
@c    coming from the country; and they laid the cross on him to carry after
@c    Jesus.

@c    23:27. And there followed him a great multitude of people and of women,
@c    who bewailed and lamented him.

@c    23:28. But Jesus turning to them, said:  Daughters of Jerusalem, weep
@c    not over me; but weep for yourselves and for your children.

@c    23:29. For behold, the days shall come, wherein they will say:  Blessed
@c    are the barren and the wombs that have not borne and the paps that have
@c    not given suck.

@c    23:30. Then shall they begin to say to the mountains:  Fall upon us.  And
@c    to the hills:  Cover us.

@c    23:31. For if in the green wood they do these things, what shall be
@c    done in the dry?

@c    23:32. And there were also two other malefactors led with him to be put
@c    to death.

@c    23:33. And when they were come to the place which is called Calvary,
@c    they crucified him there:  and the robbers, one on the right hand, and
@c    the other on the left.

@c    23:34. And Jesus said:  Father, forgive them, for they know not what
@c    they do.  But they, dividing his garments, cast lots.

@c    23:35. And the people stood beholding.  And the rulers with them derided
@c    him, saying:  He saved others:  let him save himself, if he be Christ,
@c    the elect of God.

@c    23:36. And the soldiers also mocked him, coming to him and offering him
@c    vinegar,

@c    23:37. And saying:  If thou be the king of the Jews, save thyself.

@c    23:38. And there was also a superscription written over him in letters
@c    of Greek and Latin and Hebrew THIS IS THE KING OF THE JEWS.

@c    23:39. And one of those robbers who were hanged blasphemed him, saying:
@c    If thou be Christ, save thyself and us.

@c    23:40. But the other answering, rebuked him, saying:  Neither dost thou
@c    fear God, seeing; thou art under the same condemnation?

@c    23:41. And we indeed justly:  for we receive the due reward of our
@c    deeds.  But this man hath done no evil.

@c    23:42. And he said to Jesus:  Lord, remember me when thou shalt come
@c    into thy kingdom.

@c    23:43. And Jesus said to him:  Amen I say to thee:  This day thou shalt
@c    be with me in paradise.

@c    In paradise. . .That is, in the happy state of rest, joy, and peace
@c    everlasting.  Christ was pleased, by a special privilege, to reward the
@c    faith and confession of the penitent thief, with a full discharge of
@c    all his sins, both as to the guilt and punishment; and to introduce him
@c    immediately after death into the happy society of the saints, whose
@c    limbo, that is, the place of their confinement, was now made a paradise
@c    by our Lord's going thither.

@c    23:44. And it was almost the sixth hour:  and there was darkness over
@c    all the earth until the ninth hour.

@c    23:45. And the sun was darkened, and the veil of the temple was rent in
@c    the midst.

@c    23:46. And Jesus crying with a loud voice, said:  Father, into thy hands
@c    I commend my spirit.  And saying this, he gave up the ghost.

@c    23:47. Now, the centurion, seeing what was done, glorified God, saying:
@c    Indeed this was a just man.

@c    23:48. And all the multitude of them that were come together to that
@c    sight and saw the things that were done returned, striking their
@c    breasts.

@c    23:49. And all his acquaintance and the women that had followed him
@c    from Galilee stood afar off, beholding these things.

@c    23:50. And behold there was a man named Joseph who was a counsellor, a
@c    good and a just man,

@c    23:51. (The same had not consented to their counsel and doings) of
@c    Arimathea, a city of Judea:  who also himself looked for the kingdom of
@c    God.

@c    23:52. This man went to Pilate and begged the body of Jesus.

@c    23:53. And taking him down, he wrapped him in fine linen and laid him
@c    in a sepulchre that was hewed in stone, wherein never yet any man had
@c    been laid.

@c    23:54. And it was the day of the Parasceve:  and the sabbath drew on.

@c    Parasceve. . .That is, the eve, or day of preparation for the sabbath.

@c    23:55. And the women that were come with him from Galilee, following
@c    after, saw the sepulchre and how his body was laid.

@c    23:56. And returning, they prepared spices and ointments:  and on the
@c    sabbath day they rested, according to the commandment.



@c    Luke Chapter 24


@c    Christ's resurrection and manifestation of himself to his disciples.

@c    24:1. And on the first day of the week, very early in the morning, they
@c    came to the sepulchre, bringing the spices which they had prepared.

@c    24:2. And they found the stone rolled back from the sepulchre.

@c    24:3. And going in, they found not the body of the Lord Jesus.

@c    24:4. And it came to pass, as they were astonished in their mind at
@c    this, behold, two men stood by them, in shining apparel.

@c    24:5. And as they were afraid and bowed down their countenance towards
@c    the ground, they said unto them:  Why seek you the living with the dead?

@c    24:6. He is not here, but is risen.  Remember how he spoke unto you,
@c    when he was yet in Galilee,

@c    24:7. Saying:  The Son of man must be delivered into the hands of sinful
@c    men and be crucified and the third day rise again.

@c    24:8. And they remembered his words.

@c    24:9. And going back from the sepulchre, they told all these things to
@c    the eleven and to all the rest.

@c    24:10. And it was Mary Magdalen and Joanna and Mary of James and the
@c    other women that were with them, who told these things to the apostles.

@c    24:11. And these words seemed to them as idle tales:  and they did not
@c    believe them.

@c    24:12. But Peter rising up, ran to the sepulchre and, stooping down, he
@c    saw the linen cloths laid by themselves:  and went away wondering in
@c    himself at that which was come to pass.

@c    24:13. And behold, two of them went, the same day, to a town which was
@c    sixty furlongs from Jerusalem, named Emmaus.

@c    24:14. And they talked together of all these things which had happened.

@c    24:15. And it came to pass that while they talked and reasoned with
@c    themselves, Jesus himself also, drawing near, went with them.

@c    24:16. But their eyes were held, that they should not know him.

@c    24:17. And he said to them:  What are these discourses that you hold one
@c    with another as you walk and are sad?

@c    24:18. And the one of them, whose name was Cleophas, answering, said to
@c    him:  Art thou only a stranger in Jerusalem, and hast not known the
@c    things that have been done there in these days?

@c    24:19. To whom he said:  What things?  And they said:  Concerning Jesus
@c    of Nazareth, who was a prophet, mighty in work and word before God and
@c    all the people.

@c    24:20. And how our chief priests and princes delivered him to be
@c    condemned to death and crucified him.

@c    24:21. But we hoped that it was he that should have redeemed Israel.
@c    And now besides all this, to-day is the third day since these things
@c    were done.

@c    24:22. Yea and certain women also of our company affrighted us who,
@c    before it was light, were at the sepulchre,

@c    24:23. And not finding his body, came, saying that they had all seen a
@c    vision of angels, who say that he is alive.

@c    24:24. And some of our people went to the sepulchre and found it so as
@c    the women had said:  but him they found not.

@c    24:25. Then he said to them:  O foolish and slow of heart to believe in
@c    all things, Which the prophets have spoken.

@c    24:26. Ought not Christ to have suffered these things and so, to enter
@c    into his glory?

@c    24:27. And beginning at Moses and all the prophets, he expounded to
@c    them in all the scriptures the things that were concerning him.

@c    24:28. And they drew nigh to the town whither they were going:  and he
@c    made as though he would go farther.

@c    24:29. But they constrained him, saying:  Stay with us, because it is
@c    towards evening and the day is now far spent.  And he went in with them.

@c    24:30. And it came to pass, whilst he was at table with them, he took
@c    bread and blessed and brake and gave to them.

@c    24:31. And their eyes were opened:  and they knew him.  And he vanished
@c    out of their sight.

@c    24:32. And they said one to the other:  Was not our heart burning within
@c    us, whilst he spoke in the way and opened to us the scriptures?

@c    24:33. And rising up, the same hour, they went back to Jerusalem:  and
@c    they found the eleven gathered together, and those that were with them,

@c    24:34. Saying:  The Lord is risen indeed and hath appeared to Simon.

@c    24:35. And they told what things were done in the way:  and how they
@c    knew him in the breaking of bread.

@c    24:36. Now, whilst they were speaking these things, Jesus stood in the
@c    midst of them and saith to them:  Peace be to you.  It is I:  Fear not.

@c    24:37. But they being troubled and frightened, supposed that they saw a
@c    spirit.

@c    24:38. And he said to them:  Why are you troubled, and why do thoughts
@c    arise in your hearts?

@c    24:39. See my hands and feet, that it is I myself.  Handle, and see:  for
@c    a spirit hath not flesh and bones, as you see me to have.

@c    24:40. And when he had said this, he shewed them his hands and feet.

@c    24:41. But while they yet believed not and wondered for joy, he said:
@c    Have you here any thing to eat?

@c    24:42. And they offered him a piece of a broiled fish and a honeycomb.

@c    24:43. And when he had eaten before them, taking the remains, he gave
@c    to them.

@c    24:44. And he said to them:  These are the words which I spoke to you
@c    while I was yet with you, that all things must needs be fulfilled which
@c    are written in the law of Moses and in the prophets and in the psalms,
@c    concerning me.

@c    24:45. Then he opened their understanding, that they might understand
@c    the scriptures.

@c    24:46. And he said to them:  Thus it is written, and thus it behoved
@c    Christ to suffer and to rise again from the dead, the third day:

@c    24:47. And that penance and remission of sins should be preached in his
@c    name, unto all nations, beginning at Jerusalem.

@c    24:48. And you are witnesses of these things.

@c    24:49. And I send the promise of my Father upon you:  but stay you in
@c    the city till you be endued with power from on high.

@c    The promise of my Father. . .that is, the Holy Ghost, whom Christ had
@c    promised that his Father and he would send, John 14. 26, and 17. 7.

@c    24:50. And he led them out as far as Bethania:  and lifting up his
@c    hands, he blessed them.

@c    24:51. And it came to pass, whilst he blessed them, he departed from
@c    them and was carried up to heaven.

@c    24:52. And they adoring went back into Jerusalem with great joy.

@c    24:53. And they were always in the temple, praising and blessing God.
@c    Amen.
