@c    THE HOLY GOSPEL OF JESUS CHRIST ACCORDING TO ST. MARK



@c    St. Mark, the disciple and interpreter of St. Peter (saith St. Jerome),
@c    according to what he heard from Peter himself, wrote at Rome a brief
@c    Gospel at the request of the Brethren, about ten years after our lord's
@c    Ascension; which when Peter had heard, he approved of it and with his
@c    authority published it to the church to be read.  Baronius and others
@c    say that the original was written in Latin:  but the more general
@c    opinion is that the Evangelist wrote it in Greek.



@c    Mark Chapter 1


@c    The preaching of John the Baptist.  Christ is baptized by him.  He calls
@c    his disciples and works many miracles.

@c    1:1. The beginning of the gospel of Jesus Christ, the Son of God.

@c    1:2. As it is written in Isaias the prophet:  Behold I send my angel
@c    before thy face, who shall prepare the way before thee.

@c    1:3. A voice of one crying in the desert:  Prepare ye the way of the
@c    Lord; make straight his paths.

@c    1:4. John was in the desert, baptizing and preaching the baptism of
@c    penance, unto remission of sins.

@c    1:5. And there went out to him all the country of Judea and all they of
@c    Jerusalem and were baptized by him in the river of Jordan, confessing
@c    their sins.

@c    1:6. And John was clothed camel's hair, and a leathern girdle about his
@c    loins:  and he ate locusts and wild honey.

@c    1:7. And he preached, saying:  There cometh after me one mightier than
@c    I, the latchet of whose shoes I am not worthy to stoop down and loose.

@c    1:8. I have baptized you with water:  but he shall baptize you with the
@c    Holy Ghost.

@c    1:9. And it came to pass, in those days, Jesus came from Nazareth of
@c    Galilee and was baptized by John in Jordan.

@c    1:10. And forthwith coming up out of the water, he saw the heavens open
@c    and the Spirit as a dove descending and remaining on him.

@c    1:11. And there came a voice from heaven:  Thou art my beloved Son; in
@c    thee I am well pleased.

@c    1:12. And immediately the Spirit drove him out into the desert.

@c    1:13. And he was in the desert forty days and forty nights, and was
@c    tempted by Satan.  And he was with beasts:  and the angels ministered to
@c    him.

@c    1:14. And after that John was delivered up, Jesus came in Galilee,
@c    preaching the gospel of the kingdom of God,

@c    1:15. And saying:  The time is accomplished and the kingdom of God is at
@c    hand.  Repent and believe the gospel:

@c    1:16. And passing by the sea of Galilee, he saw Simon and Andrew his
@c    brother, casting nets into the sea for they were fishermen.

@c    1:17. And Jesus said to them:  Come after me; and I will make you to
@c    become fishers of men.

@c    1:18. And immediately leaving their nets, they followed him.

@c    1:19. And going on from thence a little farther, he saw James the son
@c    of Zebedee and John his brother, who also were mending their nets in
@c    the ship:

@c    1:20. And forthwith he called them.  And leaving their father Zebedee in
@c    the ship with his hired men, they followed him.

@c    1:21. And they entered into Capharnaum:  and forthwith upon the sabbath
@c    days going into the synagogue, he taught them.

@c    1:22. And they were astonished at his doctrine.  For he was teaching
@c    them as one having power, and not as the scribes.

@c    1:23. And there was in their synagogue a man with an unclean spirit;
@c    and he cried out,

@c    1:24. Saying:  What have we to do with thee, Jesus of Nazareth?  Art thou
@c    come to destroy us?  I know who thou art, the Holy One of God.

@c    1:25. And Jesus threatened him, saying:  Speak no more, and go out of
@c    the man.

@c    1:26. And the unclean spirit, tearing him and crying out with a loud
@c    voice, went out of him.

@c    1:27. And they were all amazed insomuch that they questioned among
@c    themselves, saying:  What thing is this?  What is this new doctrine?  For
@c    with power he commandeth even the unclean spirits:  and they obey him.

@c    1:28. And the fame of him was spread forthwith into all the country of
@c    Galilee.

@c    1:29. And immediately going out of the synagogue they came into the
@c    house of Simon and Andrew, with James and John.

@c    1:30. And Simon's wife's mother lay in a fit of a fever:  and forthwith
@c    they tell him of her.

@c    1:31. And coming to her, he lifted her up, taking her by the hand; and
@c    immediately the fever left her, and she ministered unto them.

@c    1:32. And when it was evening, after sunset, they brought to him all
@c    that were ill and that were possessed with devils.

@c    1:33. And all the city was gathered together at the door.

@c    1:34. And he healed many that were troubled with divers diseases.  And
@c    he cast out many devils:  and he suffered them not to speak, because
@c    they knew him.

@c    1:35. And rising very early, going out, he went into a desert place:
@c    and there he prayed.

@c    1:36. And Simon and they that were with him followed after him.

@c    1:37. And when they had found him, they said to him:  All seek for thee.

@c    1:38. And he saith to them:  Let us go into the neighbouring towns and
@c    cities, that I may preach there also; for to this purpose am I come.

@c    1:39. And he was preaching in their synagogues and in all Galilee and
@c    casting out devils.

@c    1:40. And there came a leper to him, beseeching him and kneeling down,
@c    said to him:  If thou wilt thou canst make me clean.

@c    1:41. And Jesus, having compassion on him, stretched forth his hand and
@c    touching him saith to him:  I will.  Be thou made clean.

@c    1:42. And when he had spoken, immediately the leprosy departed from
@c    him:  and he was made clean.

@c    1:43. And he strictly charged him and forthwith sent him away.

@c    1:44. And he saith to him:  See thou tell no one; but go, shew thyself
@c    to the high priest and offer for thy cleansing the things that Moses
@c    commanded, for a testimony to them.

@c    1:45. But he being gone out, began to publish and to blaze abroad the
@c    word:  so that he could not openly go into the city.  but was without in
@c    desert places.  And they flocked to him from all sides.



@c    Mark Chapter 2


@c    Christ heals the sick of the palsy.  He calls Matthew and excuses his
@c    disciples.

@c    2:1. And again he entered into Capharnaum after some days.

@c    2:2. And it was heard that he was in the house.  And many came together,
@c    so that there was no room:  no, not even at the door.  And he spoke to
@c    them the word.

@c    2:3. And they came to him, bringing one sick of the palsy, who was
@c    carried by four.

@c    2:4. And when they could not offer him unto him for the multitude, they
@c    uncovered the roof where he was:  and opening it, they let down the bed
@c    wherein the man sick of the palsy lay.

@c    2:5. And when Jesus had seen their faith, he saith to the sick of the
@c    palsy:  Son, thy sins are forgiven thee.

@c    2:6. And there were some of the scribes sitting there and thinking in
@c    their hearts:

@c    2:7. Why doth this man speak thus?  He blasphemeth.  Who can forgive
@c    sins, but God only?

@c    2:8. Which Jesus presently knowing in his spirit that they so thought
@c    within themselves, saith to them:  Why think you these things in your
@c    hearts?

@c    2:9. Which is easier, to say to the sick of the palsy:  Thy sins are
@c    forgiven thee; or to say:  Arise, take up thy bed and walk?

@c    2:10. But that you may know that the Son of man hath power on earth to
@c    forgive sins (he saith to the sick of the palsy):

@c    2:11. I say to thee:  Arise.  Take up thy bed and go into thy house.

@c    2:12. And immediately he arose and, taking up his bed, went his way in
@c    the sight of all:  so that all wondered and glorified God, saying:  We
@c    never saw the like.

@c    2:13. And he went forth again to the sea side:  and all the multitude
@c    came to him.  And he taught them.

@c    2:14. And when he was passing by, he saw Levi, the son of Alpheus,
@c    sitting at the receipt of custom; and he saith to him:  Follow me.  And
@c    rising up, he followed him.

@c    2:15. And it came to pass as he sat at meat in his house, many
@c    Publicans and sinners sat down together with Jesus and his disciples.
@c    For they, with Jesus who also followed him.  For they were many, who
@c    also followed him.

@c    2:16. And the scribes and the Pharisees, seeing that he ate with
@c    publicans and sinners, said to his disciples:  Why doth your master eat
@c    and drink with publicans and sinners?

@c    2:17. Jesus hearing this, saith to them:  They that are well have no
@c    need of a physician, but they that are sick.  For I came not to call the
@c    just, but sinners.

@c    2:18. And the disciples of John and the Pharisees used to fast.  And
@c    they come and say to him:  Why do the disciples of John and of the
@c    Pharisees fast; but thy disciples do not fast?

@c    2:19. And Jesus saith to them:  Can the children of the marriage fast,
@c    as long as the bridegroom is with them?  As long as they have the
@c    bridegroom with them, they cannot fast.

@c    2:20. But the days will come when the bridegroom shall be taken away
@c    from them:  and then they shall fast in those days.

@c    2:21. No man seweth a piece of raw cloth to an old garment:  otherwise
@c    the new piecing taketh away from the old, and there is made a greater
@c    rent.

@c    2:22. And no man putteth new wine into old bottles:  otherwise the wine
@c    will burst the bottles, and both the wine will be spilled and the
@c    bottles will be lost.  But new wine must be put into new bottles.

@c    2:23. And it came to pass again, as the Lord walked through the corn
@c    fields on the sabbath, that his disciples began to go forward and to
@c    pluck the ears of corn.

@c    2:24. And the Pharisees said to him:  Behold, why do they on the sabbath
@c    day that which is not lawful?

@c    2:25. And he said to them:  Have you never read what David did when he
@c    had need and was hungry, himself and they that were with him?

@c    2:26. How he went into the house of God, under Abiathar the high
@c    priest, and did eat the loaves of proposition, which was not lawful to
@c    eat but for the priests, and gave to them who were with him?

@c    2:27. And he said to them:  The sabbath was made for man, and not man
@c    for the sabbath.

@c    2:28. Therefore the Son of man is Lord of the sabbath also.



@c    Mark Chapter 3


@c    Christ heals the withered hand.  He chooses the twelve.  He confutes the
@c    blasphemy of the Pharisees.

@c    3:1. And he entered again into the synagogue:  and there was a man there
@c    who had a withered hand.

@c    3:2. And they watched him whether he would heal on the sabbath days,
@c    that they might accuse him.

@c    3:3. And he said to the man who had the withered hand:  Stand up in the
@c    midst.

@c    3:4. And he saith to them:  Is it lawful to do good on the sabbath days,
@c    or to do evil?  To save life, or to destroy?  But they held their peace.

@c    3:5. And looking round about on them with anger, being grieved for the
@c    blindness of their hearts, he saith to the man:  Stretch forth thy hand.
@c    And he stretched it forth:  and his hand was restored unto him.

@c    3:6. And the Pharisees going out, immediately made a consultation with
@c    the Herodians against him, how they might destroy him.

@c    3:7. But Jesus retired with his disciples to the sea; and a great
@c    multitude followed him from Galilee and Judea,

@c    3:8. And from Jerusalem, and from Idumea and from beyond the Jordan.
@c    And they about Tyre and Sidon, a great multitude, hearing the things
@c    which he did, came to him.

@c    3:9. And he spoke to his disciples that a small ship should wait on
@c    him, because of the multitude, lest they should throng him.

@c    3:10. For he healed many, so that they pressed upon him for to touch
@c    him, as many as had evils.

@c    3:11. And the unclean spirits, when they saw him, fell down before him:
@c    and they cried, saying:

@c    3:12. Thou art the Son of God.  And he strictly charged them that they
@c    should not make him known.

@c    3:13. And going up into a mountain, he called unto him whom he would
@c    himself:  and they came to him.

@c    3:14. And he made that twelve should be with him, and that he might
@c    send them to preach.

@c    3:15. And he gave them power to heal sicknesses, and to cast out
@c    devils.

@c    3:16. And to Simon he gave the name Peter:

@c    3:17. And James the son of Zebedee, and John the brother of James; and
@c    he named them Boanerges, which is, The sons of thunder.

@c    3:18. And Andrew and Philip, and Bartholomew and Matthew, and Thomas
@c    and James of Alpheus, and Thaddeus and Simon the Cananean:

@c    3:19. And Judas Iscariot, who also betrayed him.

@c    3:20. And they come to a house, and the multitude cometh together
@c    again, so that they could not so much as eat bread.

@c    3:21. And when his friends had heard of it, they went out to lay hold
@c    on him.  For they said:  He is become mad.

@c    3:22. And the scribes who were come down from Jerusalem, said:  He hath
@c    Beelzebub, and by the prince of devils he casteth out devils.

@c    3:23. And after he had called them together, he said to them in
@c    parables:  How can Satan cast out Satan?

@c    3:24. And if a kingdom be divided against itself, that kingdom cannot
@c    stand.

@c    3:25. And if a house be divided against itself, that house cannot
@c    stand.

@c    3:26. And if Satan be risen up against himself, he is divided, and
@c    cannot stand, but hath an end.

@c    3:27. No man can enter into the house of a strong man and rob him of
@c    his goods, unless he first bind the strong man, and then shall he
@c    plunder his house.

@c    3:28. Amen I say to you that all sins shall be forgiven unto the sons
@c    of men, and the blasphemies wherewith they shall blaspheme:

@c    3:29. But he that shall blaspheme against the Holy Ghost, shall never
@c    have forgiveness, but shall be guilty of an everlasting sin.

@c    3:30. Because they said:  He hath an unclean spirit.

@c    3:31. And his mother and his brethren came; and standing without, sent
@c    unto him, calling him.

@c    3:32. And the multitude sat about him; and they say to him:  Behold thy
@c    mother and thy brethren without seek for thee.

@c    3:33. And answering them, he said:  Who is my mother and my brethren?

@c    3:34. And looking round about on them who sat about him, he saith:
@c    Behold my mother and my brethren.

@c    3:35. For whosoever shall do the will of God, he is my brother, and my
@c    sister, and mother.



@c    Mark Chapter 4


@c    The parable of the sower.  Christ stills the tempest at sea.

@c    4:1. And again he began to teach by the sea side; and a great multitude
@c    was gathered together unto him, so that he went up into a ship and sat
@c    in the sea:  and all the multitude was upon the land by the sea side.

@c    4:2. And he taught them many things in parables, and said unto them in
@c    his doctrine:

@c    4:3. Hear ye:  Behold, the sower went out to sow.

@c    4:4. And whilst he sowed, some fell by the way side, and the birds of
@c    the air came and ate it up.

@c    4:5. And other some fell upon stony ground, where it had not much
@c    earth; and it shot up immediately, because it had no depth of earth.

@c    4:6. And when the sun was risen, it was scorched; and because it had no
@c    root, it withered away.

@c    4:7. And some fell among thorns; and the thorns grew up, and choked it,
@c    and it yielded no fruit.

@c    4:8. And some fell upon good ground; and brought forth fruit that grew
@c    up, and increased and yielded, one thirty, another sixty, and another a
@c    hundred.

@c    4:9. And he said:  He that hath ears to hear, let him hear.

@c    4:10. And when he was alone, the twelve that were with him asked him
@c    the parable.

@c    4:11. And he said to them:  To you it is given to know the mystery of
@c    the kingdom of God:  but to them that are without, all things are done
@c    in parables:

@c    4:12. That seeing they may see, and not perceive; and hearing they may
@c    hear, and not understand; lest at any time they should be converted,
@c    and their sins should be forgiven them.

@c    That seeing they may see, etc. . .in punishment of their wilfully
@c    shutting their eyes, (St. Matt. 13. 15,) God justly withdrew those
@c    lights and graces, which otherwise he would have given them, for their
@c    effectual conversion.

@c    4:13. And he saith to them:  Are you ignorant of this, parable?  and how
@c    shall you know all parables?

@c    4:14. He that soweth, soweth the word.

@c    4:15. And these are they by the way side, where the word is sown, and
@c    as soon as they have heard, immediately Satan cometh and taketh away
@c    the word that was sown in their hearts.

@c    4:16. And these likewise are they that are sown on the stony ground:
@c    who when they have heard the word, immediately receive it with joy.

@c    4:17. And they have no root in themselves, but are only for a time:  and
@c    then when tribulation and persecution ariseth for the word they are
@c    presently scandalized.

@c    4:18. And others there are who are sown among thorns:  these are they
@c    that hear the word,

@c    4:19. And the cares of the world, and the deceitfulness of riches, and
@c    the lusts after other things entering in choke the word, and it is made
@c    fruitless.

@c    4:20. And these are they who are sown upon the good ground, who hear
@c    the word, and receive it, and yield fruit, the one thirty, another
@c    sixty, and another a hundred.

@c    4:21. And he said to them:  Doth a candle come in to be put under a
@c    bushel, or under a bed?  and not to be set on a candlestick?

@c    4:22. For there is nothing hid, which shall not be made manifest:
@c    neither was it made secret, but that it may come abroad.

@c    4:23. If any man have ears to hear, let him hear.

@c    4:24. And he said to them:  Take heed what you hear.  In what measure you
@c    shall mete, it shall be measured to you again, and more shall be given
@c    to you.

@c    4:25. For he that hath, to him shall be given:  and he that hath not,
@c    that also which he hath shall be taken away from him.

@c    4:26. And he said:  So is the kingdom of God, as if a man should cast
@c    seed into the earth,

@c    4:27. And should sleep, and rise, night and day, and the seed should
@c    spring, and grow up whilst he knoweth not.

@c    4:28. For the earth of itself bringeth forth fruit, first the blade,
@c    then the ear, afterwards the full corn in the ear.

@c    4:29. And when the fruit is brought forth, immediately he putteth in
@c    the sickle, because the harvest is come.

@c    4:30. And he said:  To what shall we liken the kingdom of God?  or to
@c    what parable shall we compare it?

@c    4:31. It is as a grain of mustard seed:  which when it is sown in the
@c    earth, is less than all the seeds that are in the earth:

@c    4:32. And when it is sown, it groweth up, and becometh greater than all
@c    herbs, and shooteth out great branches, so that the birds of the air
@c    may dwell under the shadow thereof.

@c    4:33. And with many such parables, he spoke to them the word, according
@c    as they were able to hear.

@c    4:34. And without parable he did not speak unto them; but apart, he
@c    explained all things to his disciples.

@c    4:35. And he saith to them that day, when evening was come:  Let us pass
@c    over to the other side.

@c    4:36. And sending away the multitude, they take him even as he was in
@c    the ship:  and there were other ships with him.

@c    4:37. And there arose a great storm of wind, and the waves beat into
@c    the ship, so that the ship was filled.

@c    4:38. And he was in the hinder part of the ship, sleeping upon a
@c    pillow; and they awake him, and say to him:  Master, doth, it not
@c    concern thee that we perish?

@c    4:39. And rising up, he rebuked the wind, and said to the sea:  Peace,
@c    be still.  And the wind ceased:  and there was made a great calm.

@c    4:40. And he said to them:  Why are you fearful?  have you not faith yet?
@c    And they feared exceedingly:  and they said one to another:  Who is this
@c    (thinkest thou) that both wind and sea obey him?



@c    Mark Chapter 5


@c    Christ casts out a legion of devils:  he heals the issue of blood, and
@c    raises the daughter of Jairus to life.

@c    5:1. And they came over the strait of the sea, into the country of the
@c    Gerasens.

@c    5:2. And as he went out of the ship, immediately there met him out of
@c    the monuments a man with an unclean spirit,

@c    5:3. Who had his dwelling in the tombs, and no man now could bind him,
@c    not even with chains.

@c    5:4. For having been often bound with fetters and chains, he had burst
@c    the chains, and broken the fetters in pieces, and no one could tame
@c    him.

@c    5:5. And he was always day and night in the monuments and in the
@c    mountains, crying and cutting himself with stones.

@c    5:6. And seeing Jesus afar off, he ran and adored him.

@c    5:7. And crying with a loud voice, he said:  What have I to do with
@c    thee, Jesus the Son of the most high God?  I adjure thee by God that
@c    thou torment me not.

@c    5:8. For he said unto him:  Go out of the man, thou unclean spirit.

@c    5:9. And he asked him:  What is thy name?  And he saith to him:  My name
@c    is Legion, for we are many.

@c    5:10. And he besought him much, that he would not drive him away out of
@c    the country.

@c    5:11. And there was there near the mountain a great herd of swine,
@c    feeding.

@c    5:12. And the spirits besought him, saying:  Send us into the swine,
@c    that we may enter into them.

@c    5:13. And Jesus immediately gave them leave.  And the unclean spirits
@c    going out, entered into the swine:  and the herd with great violence was
@c    carried headlong into the sea, being about two thousand, were stifled
@c    in the sea.

@c    5:14. And they that fed them fled, and told it in the city and in the
@c    fields.  And they went out to see what was done:

@c    5:15. And they came to Jesus, and they see him that was troubled with
@c    the devil, sitting, clothed, and well in his wits, and they were
@c    afraid.

@c    5:16. And they that had seen it, told them, in what manner he had been
@c    dealt with who had the devil; and concerning the swine.

@c    5:17. And they began to pray him that he would depart from their
@c    coasts.

@c    5:18. And when he went up into the ship, he that had been troubled with
@c    the devil, began to beseech him that he might be with him.

@c    5:19. And he admitted him not, but saith him:  Go into thy house to thy
@c    friends, and tell them how great things the Lord hath done for thee,
@c    and hath had mercy thee.

@c    5:20. And he went his way, and began to publish in Decapolis how great
@c    things Jesus had done for him:  and all men wondered.

@c    5:21. And when Jesus had passed again in the ship over the strait, a
@c    great multitude assembled together unto him, and he was nigh unto the
@c    sea.

@c    5:22. And there cometh one of the rulers of the synagogue named Jairus:
@c    and seeing him, falleth down at his feet.

@c    5:23. And he besought him much, saying:  My daughter is at the point of
@c    death, come, lay thy hand upon her, that she may be safe, and may live.

@c    5:24. And he went with him, and a great multitude followed him, and
@c    they thronged him.

@c    5:25. And a woman who was under an issue of blood twelve years,

@c    5:26. And had suffered many things from many physicians; and had spent
@c    all that she had, and was nothing the better, but rather worse,

@c    5:27. When she had heard of Jesus, came in the crowd behind him, and
@c    touched his garment.

@c    5:28. For she said:  If I shall touch but his garment, I shall be whole.

@c    5:29. And forthwith the fountain of her blood was dried up, and she
@c    felt in her body that she was healed of the evil.

@c    5:30. And immediately Jesus knowing in himself the virtue that had
@c    proceeded from him, turning to the multitude, said:  Who hath touched my
@c    garments?

@c    5:31. And his disciples said to him:  Thou seest the multitude thronging
@c    thee, and sayest thou who hath touched me?

@c    5:32. And he looked about to see her who had done this.

@c    5:33. But the woman fearing and trembling, knowing what was done in
@c    her, came and fell down before him, and told him all the truth.

@c    5:34. And he said to her:  Daughter, thy faith hath made thee whole:  go
@c    in peace, and be thou whole of thy disease.

@c    5:35. While he was yet speaking, some come from the ruler of the
@c    synagogue's house, saying:  Thy daughter is dead:  why dost thou trouble
@c    the master any further?

@c    5:36. But Jesus having heard the word that was spoken, saith to the
@c    ruler of the synagogue:  Fear not, only believe.

@c    5:37. And he admitted not any man to follow him, but Peter, and James,
@c    and John the brother of James.

@c    5:38. And they cone to the house of the ruler of the synagogue; and he
@c    seeth a tumult, and people weeping and wailing much.

@c    5:39. And going in, he saith to them Why make you this ado, and weep?
@c    the damsel is not dead, but sleepeth.

@c    5:40. And they laughed him to scorn.  But he having put them all out,
@c    taketh the father and the mother of the damsel, and them that were with
@c    him, and entereth in where the damsel was lying.

@c    5:41. And taking the damsel by the hand, he saith to her:  Talitha cumi,
@c    which is, being interpreted:  Damsel (I say to thee) arise.

@c    5:42. And immediately the damsel rose up, and walked:  and she was
@c    twelve years old:  and they were astonished with a great astonishment.

@c    5:43. And he charged them strictly that no man should know it:  and
@c    commanded that something should be given her to eat.



@c    Mark Chapter 6


@c    Christ teaches at Nazareth:  he sends forth the twelve apostles:  he
@c    feeds five thousand with five loaves; and walks upon the sea.

@c    6:1. And going out from thence, he went into his own country; and his
@c    disciples followed him.

@c    6:2. And when the Sabbath was come, he began to teach in the synagogue:
@c    and many hearing him were in admiration at his doctrine, saying:  How
@c    came this man by all these things?  and what wisdom is this that is
@c    given to him, and such mighty works as are wrought by his hands?

@c    6:3. Is not this the carpenter, the son of Mary, the brother of James,
@c    and Joseph, and Jude, and Simon?  are not also his sisters here with us?
@c    And they were scandalized in regard of him.

@c    6:4. And Jesus said to them:  A prophet is not without honour, but in
@c    his own country, and in his own house, and among his own kindred.

@c    6:5. And he could not do any miracles there, only that he cured a few
@c    that were sick, laying his hands upon them.

@c    He could not. . .Not for want of power, but because he would not work
@c    miracles in favour of obstinate and incredulous people, who were
@c    unworthy of such favours.

@c    6:6. And he wondered because of their unbelief, and he went through the
@c    villages round about teaching.

@c    6:7. And he called the twelve; and began to send them two and two, and
@c    gave them power over unclean spirits.

@c    6:8. And he commanded them that they should take nothing for the way,
@c    but a staff only; no scrip, no bread, nor money in their purse,

@c    6:9. But to be shod with sandals, and that they should not put on two
@c    coats.

@c    6:10. And he said to them:  Wheresoever you shall enter into an house,
@c    there abide till you depart from that place.

@c    6:11. And whosoever shall not receive you, nor hear you; going forth
@c    from thence, shake off the dust from your feet for a testimony to them.

@c    6:12. And going forth they preached men should do penance:

@c    6:13. And they cast out many devils, and anointed with oil many that
@c    were sick, and healed them.

@c    6:14. And king Herod heard, (for his name was made manifest,) and he
@c    said:  John the Baptist is risen again from dead, and therefore mighty
@c    works shew forth themselves in him.

@c    6:15. And others said:  It is Elias.  But others said:  It is a prophet,
@c    as one of the prophets.

@c    6:16. Which Herod hearing, said:  John whom I beheaded, he is risen
@c    again from the dead.

@c    6:17. For Herod himself had sent and apprehended John, and bound him
@c    prison for the sake of Herodias the wife of Philip his brother, because
@c    he had married her.

@c    6:18. For John said to Herod:  It is not lawful for thee to have thy
@c    brother's wife.

@c    6:19. Now Herodias laid snares for him:  and was desirous to put him to
@c    death and could not.

@c    6:20. For Herod feared John, knowing him to be a just and holy man:  and
@c    kept him, and when he heard him, did many things:  and he heard him
@c    willingly.

@c    And kept him. . .That is, from the designs of Herodias; and for fear of
@c    the people, would not put him to death, though she sought it; and
@c    through her daughter she effected her wish.

@c    6:21. And when a convenient day was come, Herod made a supper for his
@c    birthday, for the princes, and tribunes, and chief men of Galilee.

@c    6:22. And when the daughter of the same Herodias had come in, and had
@c    danced, and pleased Herod, and them that were at table with him, the
@c    king said to the damsel:  Ask of me what thou wilt, and I will give it
@c    thee.

@c    6:23. And he swore to her:  Whatsoever thou shalt ask I will give thee,
@c    though it be the half of my kingdom.

@c    6:24. Who when she was gone out, said to her mother, What shall I ask?
@c    But her mother said:  The head of John the Baptist.

@c    6:25. And when she was come in immediately with haste to the king, she
@c    asked, saying:  I will that forthwith thou give me in a dish, the head
@c    of John the Baptist.

@c    6:26. And the king was struck sad.  Yet because of his oath, and because
@c    of them that were with him at table, he would not displease her:

@c    6:27. But sending an executioner, he commanded that his head should be
@c    brought in a dish.

@c    6:28. And he beheaded him in the prison, and brought his head in a
@c    dish:  and gave to the damsel, and the damsel gave it her mother.

@c    6:29. Which his disciples hearing came, and took his body, and laid it
@c    in a tomb.

@c    6:30. And the apostles coming together unto Jesus, related to him all
@c    things that they had done and taught.

@c    6:31. And he said to them:  Come apart into a desert place, and rest a
@c    little.  For there were many coming and going:  and they had not so much
@c    as time to eat.

@c    6:32. And going up into a ship, they went into a desert place apart.

@c    6:33. And they saw them going away, and many knew:  and they ran
@c    flocking thither foot from all the cities, and were there before them.

@c    6:34. And Jesus going out saw a great multitude:  and he had compassion
@c    on them, because they were as sheep not having a shepherd, and he began
@c    to teach them many things.

@c    6:35. And when the day was now far spent, his disciples came to him,
@c    saying:  This is a desert place, and the hour is now past:

@c    6:36. Send them away, that going into the next villages and towns, they
@c    may buy themselves meat to eat.

@c    6:37. And he answering said to them:  Give you them to eat.  And they
@c    said to him:  Let us go and buy bread for two hundred pence, and we will
@c    give them to eat.

@c    6:38. And he saith to them:  How many loaves have you?  go and see.  And
@c    when they knew, they say:  Five, and two fishes.

@c    6:39. And he commanded them that they should make them all sit down by
@c    companies upon the green grass.

@c    6:40. And they sat down in ranks, by hundreds and by fifties.

@c    6:41. And when he had taken the five loaves, and the two fishes:
@c    looking up to heaven, he blessed, and broke the loaves, and gave to his
@c    disciples to set before them:  and the two fishes he divided among them
@c    all.

@c    6:42. And they all did eat, and had their fill.

@c    6:43. And they took up the leavings, twelve full baskets of fragments,
@c    and of the fishes.

@c    6:44. And they that did eat, were five thousand men.

@c    6:45. And immediately he obliged his disciples to go up into the ship,
@c    that they might go before him over the water to Bethsaida, whilst he
@c    dismissed the people.

@c    6:46. And when he had dismissed them, he went up to the mountain to
@c    pray,

@c    6:47. And when it was late, the ship was in the midst of the sea, and
@c    himself alone on the land.

@c    6:48. And seeing them labouring in rowing, (for the wind was against
@c    them,) and about the fourth watch of the night, he cometh to them
@c    walking upon the sea, and he would have passed by them.

@c    6:49. But they seeing him walking upon the sea, thought it was an
@c    apparition, and they cried out.

@c    6:50. For they all saw him, and were troubled bled.  And immediately he
@c    spoke with them, and said to them:  Have a good heart, it is I, fear ye
@c    not.

@c    6:51. And he went up to them into the ship, and the wind ceased:  and
@c    they were far more astonished within themselves:

@c    6:52. For they understood not concerning the loaves; for their heart
@c    was blinded.

@c    6:53. And when they had passed over, they came into the land of
@c    Genezareth, and set to the shore.

@c    6:54. And when they were gone out of the ship, immediately they knew
@c    him:

@c    6:55. And running through that whole country, they began to carry about
@c    in beds those that were sick, where they heard he was.

@c    6:56. And whithersoever he entered, into towns or into villages or
@c    cities, they laid the sick in the streets, and besought him that they
@c    might touch but the hem of his garment:  and as many as touched him were
@c    made whole.



@c    Mark Chapter 7


@c    Christ rebukes the Pharisees.  He heals the daughter of the woman of
@c    Chanaan; and the man that was deaf and dumb.

@c    7:1. And there assembled together unto him the Pharisees and some of
@c    the scribes, coming from Jerusalem.

@c    7:2. And when they had seen some of his disciples eat bread with
@c    common, that is, with unwashed hands, they found fault.

@c    7:3. For the Pharisees and all the Jews eat not without often washing
@c    their hands, holding the tradition of the ancients.

@c    7:4. And when they come from the market, unless they be washed, they
@c    eat not:  and many other things there are that have been delivered to
@c    them to observe, the washings of cups and of pots and of brazen vessels
@c    and of beds.

@c    7:5. And the Pharisees and scribes asked him:  Why do not thy disciples
@c    walk according to the tradition of the ancients, but they eat bread
@c    with common hands?

@c    7:6. But he answering, said to them:  Well did Isaias prophesy of you
@c    hypocrites, as it is written:  This people honoureth me with their lips,
@c    but their heart is far from me.

@c    7:7. And in vain do they worship me, teaching doctrines and precepts of
@c    men.

@c    Doctrines and precepts of men. . .See the annotations, Matt. 15. 9, 11.

@c    7:8. For leaving the commandment of God, you hold the tradition of men,
@c    the washing of pots and of cups:  and many other things you do like to
@c    these.

@c    7:9. And he said to them:  Well do you make void the commandment of God,
@c    that you may keep your own tradition.

@c    7:10. For Moses said:  Honour thy father and thy mother.  And He that
@c    shall curse father or mother, dying let him die.

@c    7:11. But you say:  If a man shall say to his father or mother, Corban
@c    (which is a gift) whatsoever is from me shall profit thee.

@c    7:12. And further you suffer him not to do any thing for his father or
@c    mother,

@c    7:13. Making void the word of God by your own tradition, which you have
@c    given forth.  And many other such like things you do.

@c    7:14. And calling again the multitude unto him, he said to them:  Hear
@c    ye me all and understand.

@c    7:15. There is nothing from without a man that entering into him can
@c    defile him.  But the things which come from a man, those are they that
@c    defile a man.

@c    7:16. If any man have ears to hear, let him hear.

@c    7:17. And when he was come into the house from the multitude, his
@c    disciples asked him the parable.

@c    7:18. And he saith to them:  So are you also without knowledge?
@c    Understand you not that every thing from without entering into a man
@c    cannot defile him:

@c    7:19. Because it entereth not into his heart but goeth into his belly
@c    and goeth out into the privy, purging all meats?

@c    7:20. But he said that the things which come out from a man, they
@c    defile a man.

@c    7:21. For from within, out of the heart of men, proceed evil thoughts,
@c    adulteries, fornications, murders,

@c    7:22. Thefts, covetousness, wickedness, deceit, lasciviousness, an evil
@c    eye, blasphemy, pride, foolishness.

@c    7:23. All these evil things come from within and defile a man.

@c    7:24. And rising from thence he went into the coasts of Tyre and Sidon:
@c    and entering into a house, he would that no man should know it.  And he
@c    could not be hid.

@c    7:25. For a woman as soon as she heard of him, whose daughter had an
@c    unclean spirit, came in and fell down at his feet.

@c    7:26. For the woman was a Gentile, a Syrophenician born.  And she
@c    besought him that he would cast forth the devil out of her daughter.

@c    7:27. Who said to her:  suffer first the children to be filled:  for it
@c    is not good to take the bread of the children and cast it to the dogs.

@c    7:28. But she answered and said to him:  Yea, Lord; for the whelps also
@c    eat under the table of the crumbs of the children.

@c    7:29. And he said to her:  For this saying, go thy way.  The devil is
@c    gone out of thy daughter.

@c    7:30. And when she was come into her house, she found the girl lying
@c    upon the bed and that the devil was gone out.

@c    7:31. And again going out of the coasts of Tyre, he came by Sidon to
@c    the sea of Galilee, through the midst the of the coasts of Decapolis.

@c    7:32. And they bring to him one deaf and dumb:  and they besought him
@c    that he would lay his hand upon him.

@c    7:33. And taking him from the multitude apart, he put his fingers into
@c    his ears:  and spitting, he touched his tongue.

@c    7:34. And looking up to heaven, he groaned and said to him:  Ephpheta,
@c    which is, Be thou opened.

@c    7:35. And immediately his ears were opened and the string of his tongue
@c    was loosed and he spoke right.

@c    7:36. And he charged them that they should tell no man.  But the more he
@c    charged them, so much the more a great deal did they publish it.

@c    7:37. And so much the more did they wonder, saying:  He hath done all
@c    things well.  He hath made both the deaf to hear and the dumb to speak.



@c    Mark Chapter 8


@c    Christ feeds four thousand.  He gives sight to a blind man.  He foretells
@c    his passion.

@c    8:1. In those days again, when there was great multitude and they had
@c    nothing to eat; calling his disciples together, he saith to them:

@c    8:2. I have compassion on the multitude, for behold they have now been
@c    with me three days and have nothing to eat.

@c    8:3. And if I shall send them away fasting to their home, they will
@c    faint in the way:  for some of them came from afar off.

@c    8:4. And his disciples answered him:  From whence can any one fill them
@c    here with bread in the wilderness?

@c    8:5. And he asked them:  How many loaves have ye?  Who said:  Seven.

@c    8:6. And he commanded the people to sit down on the ground.  And taking
@c    the seven loaves, giving thanks, he broke and gave to his disciples for
@c    to set before them.  And they set them before the people.

@c    8:7. And they had a few little fishes:  and he blessed them and
@c    commanded them to be set before them.

@c    8:8. And they did eat and were filled:  and they took up that which was
@c    left of the fragments, seven baskets.

@c    8:9. And they that had eaten were about four thousand.  And he sent them
@c    away.

@c    8:10. And immediately going up into a ship with his disciples, he came
@c    into the parts of Dalmanutha.

@c    8:11. And the Pharisees came forth and began to question with him,
@c    asking him a sign from heaven, tempting him.

@c    8:12. And sighing deeply in spirit, he saith:  Why doth this generation
@c    seek a sign?  Amen, I say to you, a sign shall not be given to this
@c    generation.

@c    8:13. And leaving them, he went up again into the ship and passed to
@c    the other side of the water.

@c    8:14. And they forgot to take bread:  and they had but one loaf with
@c    them in the ship.

@c    8:15. And he charged them saying:  Take heed and beware of the leaven of
@c    the Pharisees and of the leaven of Herod.

@c    8:16. And they reasoned among themselves, saying:  Because we have no
@c    bread.

@c    8:17. Which Jesus knowing, saith to them:  Why do you reason, because
@c    you have no bread?  Do you not yet know nor understand?  Have you still
@c    your heart blinded?

@c    8:18. Having eyes, see you not?  And having ears, hear you not?  Neither
@c    do you remember?

@c    8:19. When I broke the five loves among five thousand, how many baskets
@c    full of fragments took you up?  They say to him:  Twelve.

@c    8:20. When also the seven loaves among four thousand, how many baskets
@c    of fragments took you up?  And they say to him:  Seven.

@c    8:21. And he said to them:  How do you not yet understand?

@c    8:22. And they came to Bethsaida:  and they bring to him a blind man.
@c    And they besought him that he would touch him.

@c    8:23. And taking the blind man by the hand, he led him out of the town.
@c    And spitting upon his eyes, laying his hands on him, he asked him if he
@c    saw any thing.

@c    8:24. And looking up, he said:  I see men, as it were trees, walking.

@c    8:25. After that again he laid his hands upon his eyes:  and he began to
@c    see and was restored, so that he saw all things clearly.

@c    8:26. And he sent him into his house, saying:  Go into thy house, and if
@c    thou enter into the town, tell nobody.

@c    8:27. And Jesus went out, and his disciples into the towns of Caesarea
@c    Philippi.  And in the way, he asked his disciples, saying to them:  Whom
@c    do men say that I am?

@c    8:28. Who answered him, saying:  John the Baptist; but some Elias, and
@c    others as one of the prophets.

@c    8:29. Then he saith to them:  But whom do you say that I am?  Peter
@c    answering said to him:  Thou art the Christ.

@c    8:30. And he strictly charged them that they should not tell any man of
@c    him.

@c    8:31. And he began to teach them that the Son of man must suffer many
@c    things and be rejected by the ancients and by the high priests and the
@c    scribes:  and be killed and after three days rise again.

@c    8:32. And he spoke the word openly.  And Peter taking him began to
@c    rebuke him.

@c    8:33. Who turning about and seeing his disciples, threatened Peter,
@c    saying:  Go behind me, Satan, because thou savourest not the things that
@c    are of God but that are of men.

@c    8:34. And calling the multitude together with his disciples, he said to
@c    them:  If any man will follow me, let him deny himself and take up his
@c    cross and follow me.

@c    8:35. For whosoever will save his life shall lose it:  and whosoever
@c    shall lose his life for my sake and the gospel shall save it.

@c    8:36. For what shall it profit a man, if he gain the whole world and
@c    suffer the loss of his soul?

@c    8:37. Or what shall a man give in exchange for his soul:

@c    8:38. For he that shall be ashamed of me and of my words, in this
@c    adulterous and sinful generation:  the Son of man also will be ashamed
@c    of him, when he shall come in the glory of his Father with the holy
@c    angels.

@c    8:39. And he said to them:  Amen f say to you that there are some of
@c    them that stand here who shall not taste death till they see the
@c    kingdom of God coming in power.



@c    Mark Chapter 9


@c    Christ is transfigured.  He casts out the dumb spirit.  He teaches
@c    humility and to avoid scandal.

@c    9:1. And after six days, Jesus taketh with him Peter and James and
@c    John, and leadeth them up into an high mountain apart by themselves,
@c    and was transfigured before them.

@c    9:2. And his garments became shining and exceeding white as snow, so as
@c    no fuller upon earth can make white.

@c    9:3. And there appeared to them Elias with Moses:  and they were talking
@c    with Jesus.

@c    9:4. And Peter answering, said to Jesus:  Rabbi, it is good for us to be
@c    here.  And let us make three tabernacles, one for thee, and one for
@c    Moses, and one for Elias.

@c    9:5. For he knew not what he said:  for they were struck with fear.

@c    9:6. And there was a cloud overshadowing them.  And a voice came out of
@c    the cloud, saying:  This is my most beloved Son.  Hear ye him.

@c    9:7. And immediately looking about, they saw no man any more, but Jesus
@c    only with them.

@c    9:8. And as they came down from the mountain, he charged them not to
@c    tell any man what things they had seen, till the Son of man shall be
@c    risen again from the dead.

@c    9:9. And they kept the word to themselves; questioning together what
@c    that should mean, when he shall be risen from the dead.

@c    9:10. And they asked him, saying:  Why then do the Pharisees and scribes
@c    say that Elias must come first?

@c    9:11. Who answering, said to then:  Elias, when he shall come first,
@c    shall restore all things; and as it is written of the Son of man that
@c    he must suffer many things and be despised.

@c    9:12. But I say to you that Elias also is come (and they have done to
@c    him whatsoever they would), as it is written of him.

@c    9:13. And coming to his disciples he saw a great multitude about them
@c    and the scribes disputing with them.

@c    9:14. And presently all the people, seeing Jesus, were astonished and
@c    struck with fear:  and running to him, they saluted him.

@c    9:15. And he asked them:  What do you question about among you?

@c    9:16. And one of the multitude, answering, said:  Master, I have brought
@c    my son to thee, having a dumb spirit.

@c    9:17. Who, wheresoever he taketh him, dasheth him:  and he foameth and
@c    gnasheth with the teeth and pineth away.  And I spoke to thy disciples
@c    to cast him out:  and they could not.

@c    9:18. Who answering them, said:  O incredulous generation, how long
@c    shall I be with you?  How long shall I suffer you?  Bring him unto me.

@c    9:19. And they brought him.  And when he had seen him, immediately the
@c    spirit troubled him and being thrown down upon the ground, he rolled
@c    about foaming.

@c    9:20. And he asked his father:  How long time is it since this hath
@c    happened unto him?  But he sad:  From his infancy.

@c    9:21. And oftentimes hath he cast him into the fire and into the waters
@c    to destroy him.  But if thou canst do any thing, help us, having
@c    compassion on us.

@c    9:22. And Jesus saith to him:  If thou canst believe, all things are
@c    possible to him that believeth.

@c    9:23. And immediately the father of the boy crying out, with tears
@c    said:  I do believe, Lord.  Help my unbelief.

@c    9:24. And when Jesus saw the multitude running together, he threatened
@c    the unclean spirit, saying to him:  Deaf and dumb spirit, I command
@c    thee, go out of him and enter not any more into him.

@c    9:25. And crying out and greatly tearing him, he went our of him.  And
@c    he became as dead, so that many said:  He is dead.

@c    9:26. But Jesus taking him by the hand, lifted him up.  And he arose.

@c    9:27. And when he was come into the house, his disciples secretly asked
@c    him:  Why could not we cast him out?

@c    9:28. And he said to them:  This kind can go out by nothing, but by
@c    prayer and fasting.

@c    9:29. And departing from thence, they passed through Galilee:  and he
@c    would not that any man should know it.

@c    9:30. And he taught his disciples and said to them:  The Son of man
@c    shall be betrayed into the hands of men, and they shall kill him; and
@c    after that he is killed, he shall rise again the third day.

@c    9:31. But they understood not the word:  and they were afraid to ask
@c    him.

@c    9:32. And they came to Capharnaum.  And when they were in the house, he
@c    asked them:  What did you treat of in the way?

@c    9:33. But they held their peace, for in the way they had disputed among
@c    themselves, which of them should be the greatest.

@c    9:34. And sitting down, he called the twelve and saith to them:  If any
@c    man desire to be first, he shall be the last of all and be minister of
@c    all.

@c    9:35. And taking a child, he set him in the midst of them.  Whom when he
@c    had embraced, he saith to them:

@c    9:36. Whosoever shall receive one such child as this in my name
@c    receiveth me.  And whosoever shall receive me receiveth not me but him
@c    that sent me.

@c    9:37. John answered him, saying:  Master, we saw one casting out devils
@c    in thy name, who followeth not us:  and we forbade him.

@c    9:38. But Jesus said:  Do not forbid him.  For there is no man that doth
@c    a miracle in my name and can soon speak ill of me.

@c    9:39. For he that is not against you is for you.

@c    9:40. For whosoever shall give you to drink a cup of water in my name,
@c    because you belong to Christ:  amen I say to you, he shall not lose his
@c    reward.

@c    9:41. And whosoever shall scandalize one of these little ones that
@c    believe in me:  it were better for him that a millstone were hanged
@c    about his neck and he were cast into the sea.

@c    9:42. And if thy hand scandalize thee, cut it off:  it is better for
@c    thee to enter into life, maimed, than having two hands to go into hell,
@c    into unquenchable fire:

@c    9:43. Where their worm dieth not, and the fire is not extinguished.

@c    9:44. And if thy foot scandalize thee, cut it off:  it is better for
@c    thee to enter lame into life everlasting than having two feet to be
@c    cast into the hell of unquenchable fire:

@c    9:45. Where their worm dieth not, and the fire is not extinguished.

@c    9:46. And if thy eye scandalize thee, pluck it out:  it is better for
@c    thee with one eye to enter into the kingdom of God than having two eyes
@c    to be cast into the hell of fire:

@c    9:47. Where their worm dieth not, and the fire is not extinguished.

@c    9:48. For every one shall be salted with fire:  and every victim shall
@c    be salted with salt.

@c    9:49. Salt is good.  But if the salt become unsavoury, wherewith will
@c    you season it?  Have salt in you:  and have peace among you.



@c    Mark Chapter 10


@c    Marriage is not to be dissolved.  The danger of riches.  The ambition of
@c    the sons of Zebedee.  A blind man is restored to his sight.

@c    10:1. And rising up from thence, he cometh into the coast of Judea
@c    beyond the Jordan:  and the multitude flocked to him again.  And as he
@c    was accustomed, he taught them again.

@c    10:2. And the Pharisees coming to him asked him, tempting him:  Is it
@c    lawful for a man to put away his wife?

@c    10:3. But he answering, saith to them:  What did Moses command you?

@c    10:4. Who said:  Moses permitted to write a bill of divorce and to put
@c    her away.

@c    10:5. To whom Jesus answering, said:  Because of the hardness of your
@c    heart, he wrote you that precept.

@c    10:6. But from the beginning of the creation, God made them male and
@c    female.

@c    10:7. For this cause, a man shall leave his father and mother and shall
@c    cleave to his wife.

@c    10:8. And they two shall be in one flesh.  Therefore now they are not
@c    two, but one flesh.

@c    10:9. What therefore God hath joined together, let no man put asunder.

@c    10:10. And in the house again his disciples asked him concerning the
@c    same thing.

@c    10:11. And he saith to them:  Whosoever shall put away his wife and
@c    marry another committeth adultery against her.

@c    10:12. And if the wife shall put away her husband and be married to
@c    another, she committeth adultery.

@c    10:13. And they brought to him young children, that he might touch
@c    them.  And the disciples rebuked them that brought them.

@c    10:14. Whom when Jesus saw, he was much displeased and saith to them:
@c    Suffer the little children to come unto me and forbid them not:  for of
@c    such is the kingdom of God.

@c    10:15. Amen I say to you, whosoever shall not receive the kingdom of
@c    God as a little child shall not enter into it.

@c    10:16. And embracing them and laying his hands upon them, he blessed
@c    them.

@c    10:17. And when he was gone forth into the way, a certain man, running
@c    up and kneeling before him, asked him:  Good Master, what shall I do
@c    that I may receive life everlasting?

@c    10:18. And Jesus said to him:  Why callest thou me good?  None is good
@c    but one, that is God.

@c    None is good. . .Of himself entirely and essentially, but God alone; men
@c    may be good also, but only by participation of God's goodness.

@c    10:19. Thou knowest the commandments:  Do not commit adultery, do not
@c    kill, do not steal, bear not false witness, do no fraud, honour thy
@c    father and mother.

@c    10:20. But he answering, said to him:  Master, all these things I have
@c    observed from my youth.

@c    10:21. And Jesus, looking on him, loved him and said to him:  One thing
@c    is wanting unto thee.  Go, sell whatsoever thou hast and give to the
@c    poor:  and thou shalt have treasure in heaven.  And come, follow me.

@c    10:22. Who being struck sad at that saying, went away sorrowful:  for he
@c    had great possessions.

@c    10:23. And Jesus looking round about, saith to his disciples:  How
@c    hardly shall they that have riches enter into the kingdom of God!

@c    10:24. And the disciples were astonished at his words.  But Jesus again
@c    answering, saith to them:  Children, how hard is it for them that trust
@c    in riches to enter into the kingdom of God?

@c    10:25. It is easier for a camel to pass through the eye of a needle
@c    than for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of God.

@c    10:26. Who wondered the more, saying among themselves:  Who then can be
@c    saved?

@c    10:27. And Jesus looking on them, saith with men it is impossible; but
@c    not with God.  For all things are possible with God.

@c    10:28. And Peter began to say unto him:  Behold, we have left all things
@c    and have followed thee.

@c    10:29. Jesus answering said:  Amen I say to you, there is no man who
@c    hath left house or brethren or sisters or father or mother or children
@c    or lands, for my sake and for the gospel,

@c    10:30. Who shall not receive an hundred times as much, now in this
@c    time:  houses and brethren and sisters and mothers and children and
@c    lands, with persecutions:  and in the world to come life everlasting.

@c    10:31. But many that are first shall be last:  and the last, first.

@c    10:32. And they were in the way going up to Jerusalem:  and Jesus went
@c    before them.  And they were astonished and following were afraid.  And
@c    taking again the twelve, he began to tell them the things that should
@c    befall him.

@c    10:33. Saying:  Behold we go up to Jerusalem, and the Son of man shall
@c    be betrayed to the chief priests and to the scribes and ancients.  And
@c    they shall condemn him to death and shall deliver him to the Gentiles.

@c    10:34. And they shall mock him and spit on him and scourge him and kill
@c    him:  and the third day he shall rise again.

@c    10:35. And James and John, the sons of Zebedee, come to him, saying:
@c    Master, we desire that whatsoever we shall ask, thou wouldst do it for
@c    us.

@c    10:36. But he said to them:  What would you that I should do for you?

@c    10:37. And they said:  Grant to us that we may sit, one on thy right
@c    hand and the other on thy left hand, in thy glory.

@c    10:38. And Jesus said to them:  You know not what you ask.  Can you drink
@c    of the chalice that I drink of or be baptized with the baptism
@c    wherewith I am baptized?

@c    10:39. But they said to him:  We can.  And Jesus saith to them:  You
@c    shall indeed drink of the chalice that I drink of; and with the baptism
@c    wherewith I am baptized you shall be baptized.

@c    10:40. But to sit on my right hand or on my left is not mine to give to
@c    you, but to them for whom it is prepared.

@c    10:41. And the ten, hearing it, began to be much displeased at James
@c    and John.

@c    10:42. But Jesus calling them, saith to them:  You know that they who
@c    seem to rule over the Gentiles lord it over them:  and their princes
@c    have power over them.

@c    10:43. But it is not so among you:  but whosoever will be greater shall
@c    be your minister.

@c    10:44. And whosoever will be first among you shall be the servant of
@c    all.

@c    10:45. For the Son of man also is not come to be ministered unto:  but
@c    to minister and to give his life a redemption for many.

@c    10:46. And they came to Jericho.  And as he went out of Jericho with his
@c    disciples and a very great multitude, Bartimeus the blind man, the son
@c    of Timeus, sat by the way side begging.

@c    10:47. Who when he had heard that it was Jesus of Nazareth, began to
@c    cry out and to say:  Jesus, Son of David, have mercy on me.

@c    10:48. And many rebuked him, that he might hold his peace; but he cried
@c    a great deal the more:  Son of David, have mercy on me.

@c    10:49. And Jesus, standing still, commanded him to be called.  And they
@c    call the blind man, saying to him:  Be of better comfort.  Arise, he
@c    calleth thee.

@c    10:50. Who casting off his garment leaped up and came to him.

@c    10:51. And Jesus answering, said to him:  What wilt thou that I should
@c    do to thee?  And the blind man said to him:  Rabboni.  That I may see.

@c    10:52. And Jesus saith to him:  Go thy way.  Thy faith hath made thee
@c    whole.  And immediately he saw and followed him in the way.



@c    Mark Chapter 11


@c    Christ enters into Jerusalem upon an ass.  He curses the barren fig tree
@c    and drives the buyers and sellers out of the temple.

@c    11:1. And when they were drawing near to Jerusalem and to Bethania, at
@c    the mount of Olives, he sendeth two of his disciples,

@c    11:2. And saith to them:  Go into the village that is over against you,
@c    and immediately at your coming in thither, you shall find a colt tied,
@c    upon which no man yet hath sat.  Loose him and bring him.

@c    11:3. And if any man shall say to you:  What are you doing?  Say ye that
@c    the Lord hath need of him.  And immediately he will let him come hither.

@c    11:4. And going their way, they found the colt tied before the gate
@c    without, in the meeting of two ways.  And they loose him.

@c    11:5. And some of them that stood there said to them:  What do you
@c    loosing the colt?

@c    11:6. Who said to them as Jesus had commanded them.  And they let him go
@c    with them.

@c    11:7. And they brought the colt to Jesus.  And they lay their garments
@c    on him:  and he sat upon him.

@c    11:8. And many spread their garments in the way:  and others cut down
@c    boughs from the trees and strewed them in the way.

@c    11:9. And they that went before and they that followed cried, saying:
@c    Hosanna:  Blessed is he that cometh in the name of the Lord.

@c    11:10. Blessed be the kingdom of our father David that cometh:  Hosanna
@c    in the highest.

@c    11:11. And he entered into Jerusalem, into the temple:  and having
@c    viewed all things round about, when now the eventide was come, he went
@c    out to Bethania with the twelve.

@c    11:12. And the next day when they came out from Bethania, he was
@c    hungry.

@c    11:13. And when he had seen afar off a fig tree having leaves, he came,
@c    if perhaps he might find any thing on it.  And when he was come to it,
@c    he found nothing but leaves.  For it was not the time for figs.

@c    11:14. And answering he said to it:  May no man hereafter eat fruit of
@c    thee any more for ever!  And his disciples heard it.

@c    11:15. And they came to Jerusalem.  And when he was entered into the
@c    temple, he began to cast out them that sold and bought in the temple:
@c    and over threw the tables of the moneychangers and the chairs of them
@c    that sold doves.

@c    11:16. And he suffered not that any man should carry a vessel through
@c    the temple.

@c    11:17. And he taught, saying to them:  Is it not written:  My house shall
@c    be called the house of prayer to all nations, but you have made it a
@c    den of thieves.

@c    11:18. Which when the chief priests and the scribes had heard, they
@c    sought how they might destroy him.  For they feared him, because the
@c    whole multitude was in admiration at his doctrine.

@c    11:19. And when evening was come, he went forth out of the city.

@c    11:20. And when they passed by in the morning they saw the fig tree
@c    dried up from the roots.

@c    11:21. And Peter remembering, said to him:  Rabbi, behold the fig tree
@c    which thou didst curse is withered away.

@c    11:22. And Jesus answering, saith to them:  Have the faith of God.

@c    11:23. Amen I say to you that whosoever shall say to this mountain, Be
@c    thou removed and be cast into the sea, and shall not stagger in his
@c    heart, but be believe that whatsoever he saith shall be done; it shall
@c    be done unto him.

@c    11:24. Therefore I say unto you, all things, whatsoever you ask when ye
@c    pray, believe that you shall receive:  and they shall come unto you.

@c    11:25. And when you shall stand to pray, forgive, if you have aught
@c    against any man:  that your Father also, who is in heaven, may forgive
@c    you your sins.

@c    11:26. But if you will not forgive, neither will your father that is in
@c    heaven forgive you your sins.

@c    11:27. And they come again to Jerusalem.  And when he was walking in the
@c    temple, there come to him the chief priests and the scribes and the
@c    ancients.

@c    11:28. And they say to him:  By what authority dost thou these things?
@c    And who hath given thee this authority that thou shouldst do these
@c    things?

@c    11:29. And Jesus answering, said to them:  I will also ask you one word.
@c    And answer you me:  and I will tell you by what authority I do these
@c    things.

@c    11:30. The baptism of John, was it from heaven or from men?  Answer me.

@c    11:31. But they thought with themselves, saying:  If we say, From
@c    heaven; he will say, Why then did you not believe him?

@c    11:32. If we say, From men, we fear the people.  For all men counted
@c    John that he was a prophet indeed.

@c    11:33. And they answering, say to Jesus:  We know not.  And Jesus
@c    answering, saith to them:  Neither do I tell you by what authority I do
@c    these things.



@c    Mark Chapter 12


@c    The parable of the vineyard and husbandmen.  Caesar's right to tribute.
@c    The Sadducees are confuted.  The first commandment.  The widow's mite.

@c    12:1. And he began to speak to them in parables:  A certain man planted
@c    a vineyard and made a hedge about it and dug a place for the winefat
@c    and built a tower and let it to husbandmen:  and went into a far
@c    country.

@c    12:2. And at the season he sent to the husbandmen a servant to receive
@c    of the husbandmen of the fruit of the vineyard.

@c    12:3. Who, having laid hands on him, beat and sent him away empty.

@c    12:4. And again he sent to them another servant:  and him they wounded
@c    in the head and used him reproachfully.

@c    12:5. And again he sent another, and him they killed:  and many others,
@c    of whom some they beat, and others they killed.

@c    12:6. Therefore, having yet one son, most dear to him, he also sent him
@c    unto them last of all, saying:  They will reverence my son.

@c    12:7. But the husbandmen said one to another:  This is the heir.  Come
@c    let us kill him and the inheritance shall be ours.

@c    12:8. And laying hold on him, they killed him and cast him out of the
@c    vineyard.

@c    12:9. What therefore will the lord of the vineyard do?  He will come and
@c    destroy those husbandmen and will give the vineyard to others.

@c    12:10. And have you not read this scripture, The stone which the
@c    builders rejected, the same is made the head of the corner:

@c    12:11. By the Lord has this been done, and it is wonderful in our eyes.

@c    12:12. And they sought to lay hands on him:  but they feared the people.
@c    For they knew that he spoke this parable to them.  And leaving him, they
@c    went their way.

@c    12:13. And they sent to him some of the Pharisees and of the Herodians:
@c    that they should catch him in his words.

@c    12:14. Who coming, say to him:  Master, we know that thou art a true
@c    speaker and carest not for any man; for thou regardest not the person
@c    of men, but teachest the way of God in truth.  Is it lawful to give
@c    tribute to Caesar?  Or shall we not give it?

@c    12:15. Who knowing their wiliness, saith to them:  Why tempt you me?
@c    Bring me a penny that I may see it.

@c    12:16. And they brought it him.  And he saith to them:  Whose is this
@c    image and inscription?  They say to him, Caesar's.

@c    12:17. And Jesus answering, said to them:  Render therefore to Caesar
@c    the things that are Caesar's and to God the things that are God's.  And
@c    they marvelled at him.

@c    12:18. And there came to him the Sadducees, who say there is no
@c    resurrection.  And they asked him, saying:

@c    12:19. Master, Moses wrote unto us that if any man's brother die and
@c    leave his wife behind him and leave no children, his brother should
@c    take his wife and raise up seed to his brother.

@c    12:20. Now there were seven brethren:  and the first took a wife and
@c    died leaving no issue.

@c    12:21. And the second took her and died:  and neither did he leave any
@c    issue.  And the third in like manner.

@c    12:22. And the seven all took her in like manner and did not leave
@c    issue.  Last of all the woman also died.

@c    12:23. In the resurrection therefore, when they shall rise again, whose
@c    wife shall she be of them?  For the seven had her to wife.

@c    12:24. And Jesus answering, saith to them:  Do ye not therefore err,
@c    because you know not the scriptures nor the power of God?

@c    12:25. For when they shall rise again from the dead, they shall neither
@c    marry, nor be married, but are as the angels in heaven.

@c    12:26. And as concerning the dead that they rise again have you not
@c    read in the book of Moses, how in the bush God spoke to him, saying:  I
@c    am the God of Abraham and the God of Isaac and the God of Jacob?

@c    12:27. He is not the God of the dead, but of the living.  You therefore
@c    do greatly err.

@c    12:28. And there came one of the scribes that had heard them reasoning
@c    together, and seeing that he had answered them well, asked him which
@c    was the first commandment of all.

@c    12:29. And Jesus answered him:  The first commandment of all is, Hear, O
@c    Israel:  the Lord thy God is one God.

@c    12:30. And thou shalt love the Lord thy God with thy whole heart and
@c    with thy whole soul and with thy whole mind and with thy whole
@c    strength.  This is the first commandment.

@c    12:31. And the second is like to it:  Thou shalt love thy neighbour as
@c    thyself.  There is no other commandment greater than these.

@c    12:32. And the scribe said to him:  Well, Master, thou hast said in
@c    truth that there is one God and there is no other besides him.

@c    12:33. And that he should be loved with the whole heart and with the
@c    whole understanding and with the whole soul and with the whole
@c    strength.  And to love one's neighbour as one's self is a greater thing
@c    than all holocausts and sacrifices.

@c    12:34. And Jesus seeing that he had answered wisely, said to him:  Thou
@c    art not far from the kingdom of God.  And no man after that durst ask
@c    him any question.

@c    12:35. And Jesus answering, said, teaching in the temple:  How do the
@c    scribes say that Christ is the son of David?

@c    12:36. For David himself saith by the Holy Ghost:  The Lord said to my
@c    Lord:  Sit on my right hand, until I make thy enemies thy footstool.

@c    12:37. David therefore himself calleth him Lord.  And whence is he then
@c    his son?  And a great multitude heard him gladly.

@c    12:38. And he said to them in his doctrine:  Beware of the scribes, who
@c    love to walk in long robes and to be saluted in the marketplace,

@c    12:39. And to sit in the first chairs in the synagogues and to have the
@c    highest places at suppers:

@c    12:40. Who devour the houses of widows under the pretence of long
@c    prayer.  These shall receive greater judgment.

@c    12:41. And Jesus sitting over against the treasury, beheld how the
@c    people cast money into the treasury.  And many that were rich cast in
@c    much.

@c    12:42. And there came a certain poor widow:  and she cast in two mites,
@c    which make a farthing.

@c    12:43. And calling his disciples together, he saith to them:  Amen I say
@c    to you, this poor widow hath cast in more than all they who have cast
@c    into the treasury.

@c    12:44. For all they did cast in of their abundance; but she of her want
@c    cast in all she had, even her whole living.



@c    Mark Chapter 13


@c    Christ foretells the destruction of the temple and the signs that shall
@c    forerun the day of judgment.

@c    13:1. And as he was going out of the temple, one of his disciples said
@c    to him:  Master, behold what manner of stones and what buildings are
@c    here.

@c    13:2. And Jesus answering, said to him:  Seest thou all these great
@c    buildings?  There shall not be left a stone upon a stone, that shall not
@c    be thrown down.

@c    13:3. And as he sat on the mount of Olivet over against the temple,
@c    Peter and James and John and Andrew asked him apart:

@c    13:4. Tell us, when shall these things be and what shall be the sign
@c    when all these things shall begin to be fulfilled?

@c    13:5. And Jesus answering, began to say to them:  Take heed lest any man
@c    deceive you.

@c    13:6. For many shall come in my name saying, I am he:  and they shall
@c    deceive many.

@c    13:7. And when you shall hear of wars and rumours of wars, fear ye not.
@c    For such things must needs be:  but the end is not yet.

@c    13:8. For nation shall rise against nation and kingdom against kingdom:
@c    and there shall be earthquakes in divers places and famines.  These
@c    things are the beginning of sorrows.

@c    13:9. But look to yourselves.  For they shall deliver you Up to
@c    councils:  and in the synagogues you shall be beaten:  and you shall
@c    stand before governors and kings for my sake, for a testimony unto
@c    them.

@c    13:10. And unto all nations the gospel must first be preached.

@c    13:11. And when they shall lead you and deliver you up, be not
@c    thoughtful beforehand what you shall speak:  but whatsoever shall be
@c    given you in that hour, that speak ye.  For it is not you that speak,
@c    but the Holy Ghost.

@c    13:12. And the brother shall betray his brother unto death, and the
@c    father his son; and children shall rise up against their parents and
@c    shall work their death.

@c    13:13. And you shall be hated by all men for my name's sake.  But he
@c    that shall endure unto the end, he shall be saved.

@c    13:14. And when you shall see the abomination of desolation, standing
@c    where it ought not (he that readeth let him understand):  then let them
@c    that are in Judea flee unto the mountains.

@c    13:15. And let him that is on the housetop not go down into the house
@c    nor enter therein to take any thing out of the house.

@c    13:16. And let him that shall be in the field not turn back to take up
@c    his garment.

@c    13:17. And woe to them that are with child and that give suck in those
@c    days.

@c    13:18. But pray ye that these things happen not in winter.

@c    13:19. For in those days shall be such tribulations as were not from
@c    the beginning of the creation which God created until now:  neither
@c    shall be.

@c    13:20. And unless the Lord had shortened the days, no flesh should be
@c    saved:  but, for the sake of the elect which he hath chosen, he hath
@c    shortened the days.

@c    13:21. And then if any man shall say to you:  Lo, here is Christ.  Lo, he
@c    is here:  do not believe.

@c    13:22. For there will rise up false Christs and false prophets:  and
@c    they shall shew signs and wonders, to seduce (if it were possible) even
@c    the elect.

@c    13:23. Take you heed therefore:  behold, I have foretold you all things.

@c    13:24. But in those days, after that tribulation, the sun shall be
@c    darkened and the moon shall not give her light.

@c    13:25. And the stars of heaven shall be falling down and the powers
@c    that are in heaven shall be moved.

@c    13:26. And then shall they see the Son of man coming in the clouds,
@c    with great power and glory.

@c    13:27. And then shall he send his angels and shall gather together his
@c    elect from the four winds, from the uttermost part of the earth to the
@c    uttermost part of heaven.

@c    13:28. Now of the fig tree learn ye a parable.  When the branch thereof
@c    is now tender and the leaves are come forth, you know that summer is
@c    very near.

@c    13:29. So you also when you shall see these things come to pass, know
@c    ye that it is very nigh, even at the doors.

@c    13:30. Amen, I say to you that this generation shall not pass until all
@c    these things be done.

@c    13:31. Heaven and earth shall pass away:  but my word shall not pass
@c    away.

@c    13:32. But of that day or hour no man knoweth, neither the angels in
@c    heaven, nor the Son, but the Father.

@c    Nor the Son. . .Not that the Son of God is absolutely ignorant of the
@c    day of judgment, but that he knoweth it not, as our teacher; that is,
@c    he knoweth it not so as to teach it to us, as not being expedient.

@c    13:33. Take ye heed, watch and pray.  For ye know not when the time is.

@c    13:34. Even as a man who, going into a far country, left his house and
@c    gave authority to his servants over every work and commanded the porter
@c    to watch.

@c    13:35. Watch ye therefore (for you know not when the lord of the house
@c    cometh, at even, or at midnight, or at the cock crowing, or in the
@c    morning):

@c    13:36. Lest coming on a sudden, he find you sleeping.

@c    13:37. And what I say to you, I say to all:  Watch.



@c    Mark Chapter 14


@c    The first part of the history of the passion of Christ.

@c    14:1. Now the feast of the pasch and of the Azymes was after two days:
@c    and the chief priests and the scribes sought how they might by some
@c    wile lay hold on him and kill him.

@c    Azymes. . .That is, the feast of the unleavened bread.

@c    14:2. But they said:  Not on the festival day, lest there should be a
@c    tumult among the people.

@c    14:3. And when he was in Bethania, in the house of Simon the leper, and
@c    was at meat, there came a woman having an alabaster box of ointment of
@c    precious spikenard.  And breaking the alabaster box, she poured it out
@c    upon his head.

@c    14:4. Now there were some that had indignation within themselves and
@c    said:  Why was this waste of the ointment made?

@c    14:5. For this ointment might have been sold for more than three
@c    hundred pence and given to the poor.  And they murmured against her.

@c    14:6. But Jesus said:  Let her alone.  Why do You molest her?  She hath
@c    wrought a good work upon me.

@c    14:7. For the poor you have always with you:  and whensoever you will,
@c    you may do them good:  but me you have not always.

@c    14:8. She hath done what she could:  she is come beforehand to anoint my
@c    body for the burial.

@c    14:9. Amen, I say to you, wheresoever this gospel shall be preached in
@c    the whole world, that also which she hath done shall be told for a
@c    memorial of her.

@c    14:10. And Judas Iscariot, one of the twelve, went to the chief
@c    priests, to betray him to them.

@c    14:11. Who hearing it were glad:  and they promised him they would give
@c    him money.  And he sought how he might conveniently betray him.

@c    14:12. Now on the first day of the unleavened bread, when they
@c    sacrificed the pasch, the disciples say to him:  Whither wilt thou that
@c    we go and prepare for thee to eat the pasch?

@c    14:13. And he sendeth two of his disciples and saith to them:  Go ye
@c    into the city; and there shall meet you a man carrying a pitcher of
@c    water.  Follow him.

@c    14:14. And whithersoever he shall go in, say to the master of the
@c    house, The master saith, Where is my refectory, where I may eat the
@c    pasch with my disciples?

@c    14:15. And he will shew you a large dining room furnished.  And there
@c    prepare ye for us.

@c    14:16. And his disciples went their way and came into the city.  And
@c    they found as he had told them:  and they prepared the pasch.

@c    14:17. And when evening was come, he cometh with the twelve.

@c    14:18. And when they were at table and eating, Jesus saith:  Amen I say
@c    to you, one of you that eateth with me shall betray me.

@c    14:19. But they began to be sorrowful and to say to him, one by one:  Is
@c    it I?

@c    14:20. Who saith to them:  One of the twelve, who dippeth with me his
@c    hand in the dish.

@c    14:21. And the Son of man indeed goeth, as it is written of him:  but
@c    woe to that man by whom the Son of man shall be betrayed.  It were
@c    better for him, if that man had not been born.

@c    14:22. And whilst they were eating, Jesus took bread; and blessing,
@c    broke and gave to them and said:  Take ye.  This is my body.

@c    14:23. And having taken the chalice, giving thanks, he gave it to them.
@c    And they all drank of it.

@c    14:24. And he said to them:  This is my blood of the new testament,
@c    which shall be shed for many.

@c    14:25. Amen I say to you that I will drink no more of the fruit of the
@c    vine until that day when I shall drink it new in the kingdom of God.

@c    14:26. And when they had sung an hymn, they went forth to the mount of
@c    Olives.

@c    14:27. And Jesus saith to them:  You will all be scandalized in my
@c    regard this night.  For it is written:  I will strike the shepherd, and
@c    the sheep shall be dispersed.

@c    14:28. But after I shall be risen again, I will go before you into
@c    Galilee.

@c    14:29. But Peter saith to him:  Although all shall be scandalized in
@c    thee, yet not I.

@c    14:30. And Jesus saith to him:  Amen I say to thee, to-day, even in this
@c    night, before the cock crow twice, thou shalt deny me thrice.

@c    Crow twice. . .The cocks crow at two different times of the night; viz.,
@c    about midnight for the first time; and then about the time commonly
@c    called the cock crowing; and this was the cock crowing our Saviour
@c    spoke of; and therefore the other Evangelists take no notice of the
@c    first crowing.

@c    14:31. But he spoke the more vehemently:  Although I should die together
@c    with thee, I will not deny thee.  And in like manner also said they all.

@c    14:32. And they came to a farm called Gethsemani.  And he saith to his
@c    disciples:  Sit you here, while I pray.

@c    14:33. And he taketh Peter and James and John with him:  and he began to
@c    fear and to be heavy.

@c    14:34. And he saith to them:  My soul is sorrowful even unto death.  Stay
@c    you here and watch.

@c    14:35. And when he was gone forward a little, he fell flat on the
@c    ground:  and he prayed that, if it might be, the hour might pass from
@c    him.

@c    14:36. And he saith:  Abba, Father, all things are possible to thee:
@c    remove this chalice from me; but not what I will, but what thou wilt.

@c    14:37. And he cometh and findeth them sleeping.  And he saith to Peter:
@c    Simon, sleepest thou?  Couldst thou not watch one hour?

@c    14:38. Watch ye:  and pray that you enter not into temptation.  The
@c    spirit indeed is willing, but the flesh is weak.

@c    14:39. And going away again, he prayed, saying the same words.

@c    14:40. And when he returned, he found them again asleep (for their eyes
@c    were heavy):  and they knew not what to answer him.

@c    14:41. And he cometh the third time and saith to them:  Sleep ye now and
@c    take your rest.  It is enough.  The hour is come:  behold the Son of man
@c    shall be betrayed into the hands of sinners.

@c    14:42. Rise up:  let us go.  Behold, he that will betray me is at hand.

@c    14:43. And while he was yet speaking, cometh Judas Iscariot, one of the
@c    twelve:  and with him a great multitude with swords and staves, from the
@c    chief priests and the scribes and the ancients.

@c    14:44. And he that betrayed him had given them a sign, saying:
@c    Whomsoever I shall kiss, that is he.  Lay hold on him:  and lead him away
@c    carefully.

@c    14:45. And when he was come, immediately going up to him he saith:
@c    Hail, Rabbi!  And he kissed him.

@c    14:46. But they laid hands on him and held him.

@c    14:47. And one of them that stood by, drawing a sword, struck a servant
@c    of the chief priest and cut off his ear.

@c    14:48. And Jesus answering, said to them:  Are you come out as to a
@c    robber, with swords and staves to apprehend me?

@c    14:49. I was daily with you in the temple teaching:  and you did not lay
@c    hands on me.  But that the scriptures may be fulfilled.

@c    14:50. Then his disciples, leaving him, all fled away.

@c    14:51. And a certain young man followed him, having a linen cloth cast
@c    about his naked body.  And they laid hold on him.

@c    14:52. But he, casting off the linen cloth, fled from them naked.

@c    14:53. And they brought Jesus to the high priest.  And all the priests
@c    and the scribes and the ancients assembled together.

@c    14:54. And Peter followed him afar off, even into the court of the high
@c    priest.  And he sat with the servants at the fire and warmed himself.

@c    14:55. And the chief priests and all the council sought for evidence
@c    against Jesus, that they might put him to death:  and found none.

@c    14:56. For many bore false witness against him:  and their evidences
@c    were not agreeing.

@c    14:57. And some rising up, bore false witness against him, saying:

@c    14:58. We heard him say, I Will destroy this temple made with hands and
@c    within three days I will build another not made with hands.

@c    14:59. And their witness did not agree.

@c    14:60. And the high priest rising up in the midst, asked Jesus, saying:
@c    Answerest thou nothing to the things that are laid to thy charge by
@c    these men?

@c    14:61. But he held his peace and answered nothing.  Again the high
@c    priest asked him and said to him:  Art thou the Christ, the Son of the
@c    Blessed God?

@c    14:62. And Jesus said to him:  I am.  And you shall see the Son of man
@c    sitting on the right hand of the power of God and coming with the
@c    clouds of heaven.

@c    14:63. Then the high priest rending his garments, saith:  What need we
@c    any further witnesses?

@c    14:64. You have heard the blasphemy.  What think you?  Who all condemned
@c    him to be guilty of death.

@c    14:65. And some began to spit on him and to cover his face and to
@c    buffet him and to say unto him:  Prophesy.  And the servants struck him
@c    with the palms their hands.

@c    14:66. Now when Peter was in the court below, there cometh one of the
@c    maidservants of the high priest.

@c    14:67. And when she had seen Peter warming himself looking on him, she
@c    saith:  Thou also wast with Jesus of Nazareth.

@c    14:68. But he denied, saying:  I neither know nor understand what thou
@c    sayest.  And he went forth before the court; and the cock crew.

@c    14:69. And again a maidservant seeing him, began to say to the standers
@c    by:  This is one of them.

@c    14:70. But he denied again.  And after a, while they that stood by said
@c    again to Peter:  Surely thou art one of them; for thou art also a
@c    Galilean.

@c    14:71. But he began o curse and to swear, saying:  I know not this man
@c    of whom you speak.

@c    14:72. And immediately the cock crew again.  And Peter remembered the
@c    word that Jesus had said unto him:  Before the cock crow twice, thou
@c    shalt thrice deny me.  And he began to weep,



@c    Mark Chapter 15


@c    The continuation of the history of the passion.

@c    15:1. And straightway in the morning, the chief priests holding a
@c    consultation with the ancients and the scribes and the whole council,
@c    binding Jesus, led him away and delivered him to Pilate.

@c    15:2. And Pilate asked him:  Art thou the king of the Jews?  But he
@c    answering, saith to him:  Thou sayest it.

@c    15:3. And the chief priests accused him in many things.

@c    15:4. And Pilate again asked him, saying:  Answerest thou nothing?
@c    Behold in how many things they accuse thee.

@c    15:5. But Jesus still answered nothing:  so that Pilate wondered.

@c    15:6. Now on the festival day he was wont to release unto them one of
@c    the prisoners, whomsoever they demanded.

@c    15:7. And there was one called Barabbas, who was put in prison with
@c    some seditious men, who in the sedition had committed murder.

@c    15:8. And when the multitude was come up, they began to desire that he
@c    would do as he had ever done unto them.

@c    15:9. And Pilate answered them and said:  Will you that I release to you
@c    the king of the Jews?

@c    15:10. For he knew that the chief priests had delivered him up out of
@c    envy.

@c    15:11. But the chief priests moved the people, that he should rather
@c    release Barabbas to them.

@c    15:12. And Pilate again answering, saith to them:  What will you then
@c    that I do to the king of the Jews?

@c    15:13. But they again cried out:  Crucify him.

@c    15:14. And Pilate saith to them:  Why, what evil hath he done?  But they
@c    cried out the more:  Crucify him.

@c    15:15. And so Pilate being willing to satisfy the people, released to
@c    them Barabbas:  and delivered up Jesus, when he had scourged him, to be
@c    crucified.

@c    15:16. And the soldiers led him away into the court of the palace:  and
@c    they called together the whole band.

@c    15:17. And they clothed him with purple:  and, platting a crown of
@c    thorns, they put it upon him.

@c    15:18. And they began to salute him:  Hail, king of the Jews.

@c    15:19. And they struck his head with a reed:  and they did spit on him.
@c    And bowing their knees, they adored him.

@c    15:20. And after they had mocked him, they took off the purple from him
@c    and put his own garments on him:  and they led him out to crucify him.

@c    15:21. And they forced one Simon a Cyrenian, who passed by coming out
@c    of the country, the father of Alexander and of Rufus, to take up his
@c    cross.

@c    15:22. And they bring him into the place called Golgotha, which being
@c    interpreted is, The place of Calvary.

@c    15:23. And they gave him to drink wine mingled with myrrh.  But he took
@c    it not.

@c    15:24. And crucifying him, they divided his garments, casting lots upon
@c    them, what every man should take.

@c    15:25. And it was the third hour:  and they crucified him.

@c    The third hour. . .The ancient account divided the day into four parts,
@c    which were named from the hour from which they began; the first, third,
@c    sixth, and ninth hour.  Our Lord was crucified a little before noon;
@c    before the third hour had quite expired; but when the sixth hour was
@c    near at hand.

@c    15:26. And the inscription of his cause was written over:  THE KING OF
@c    THE JEWS.

@c    15:27. And with him they crucify two thieves:  the one on his right
@c    hand, and the other on his left.

@c    15:28. And the scripture was fulfilled, which saith:  And with the
@c    wicked he was reputed.

@c    15:29. And they that passed by blasphemed him, wagging their heads and
@c    saying:  Vah, thou that destroyest the temple of God and in three days
@c    buildest it up again:

@c    15:30. Save thyself, coming down from the cross.

@c    15:31. In like manner also the chief priests, mocking, said with the
@c    scribes one to another:  He saved others; himself he cannot save.

@c    15:32. Let Christ the king of Israel come down now from the cross, that
@c    we may see and believe.  And they that were crucified with him, reviled
@c    him.

@c    15:33. And when the sixth hour was come, there was darkness over the
@c    whole earth until the ninth hour.

@c    15:34. And at the ninth hour, Jesus cried out with a loud voice,
@c    saying:  Eloi, Eloi, lamma sabacthani?  Which is, being interpreted:  My
@c    God, My God, Why hast thou forsaken me?

@c    15:35. And some of the standers by hearing, said:  Behold he calleth
@c    Elias.

@c    15:36. And one running and filling a sponge with vinegar and putting it
@c    upon a reed, gave him to drink, saying:  Stay, let us see if Elias come
@c    to take him down.

@c    15:37. And Jesus, having cried out with a loud voice, gave up the
@c    ghost.

@c    15:38. And the veil of the temple was rent in two, from the top to the
@c    bottom.

@c    15:39. And the centurion who stood over against him, seeing that crying
@c    out in this manner he had given up the ghost.  said:  Indeed this man was
@c    the son of God.

@c    15:40. And there were also women looking on afar off:  among whom was
@c    Mary Magdalen and Mary the mother of James the Less and of Joseph and
@c    Salome,

@c    15:41. Who also when he was in Galilee followed him and ministered to
@c    him, and many other women that came up with him to Jerusalem.

@c    15:42. And when evening was now come (because it was the Parasceve,
@c    that is, the day before the sabbath),

@c    15:43. Joseph of Arimathea, a noble counsellor, who was also himself
@c    looking for the kingdom of God, came and went in boldly to Pilate and
@c    begged the body of Jesus.

@c    15:44. But Pilate wondered that he should be already dead.  And sending
@c    for the centurion, he asked him if he were already dead.

@c    15:45. And when he had understood it by the centurion, he gave the body
@c    to Joseph.

@c    15:46. And Joseph, buying fine linen and taking him down, wrapped him
@c    up in the fine linen and laid him in a sepulchre which was hewed out of
@c    a rock.  And he rolled a stone to the door of the sepulchre.

@c    15:47. And Mary Magdalen and Mary the mother of Joseph, beheld where he
@c    was laid.



@c    Mark Chapter 16


@c    Christ's resurrection and ascension.

@c    16:1. And when the sabbath was past, Mary Magdalen and Mary the mother
@c    of James and Salome bought sweet spices, that coming, they might anoint
@c    Jesus.

@c    16:2. And very early in the morning, the first day of the week, they
@c    come to the sepulchre, the sun being now risen.

@c    The sun being now risen. . .They set out before it was light, to go to
@c    the sepulchre; but the sun was risen when they arrived there.  Or,
@c    figuratively, the sun here spoken of is the sun of justice, Christ
@c    Jesus our Lord, who was risen before their coming.

@c    16:3. And they said one to another:  Who shall roll us back the stone
@c    from the door of the sepulchre?

@c    16:4. And looking, they saw the stone rolled back.  For it was very
@c    great.

@c    16:5. And entering into the sepulchre, they saw a young man sitting on
@c    the right side, clothed with a white robe:  and they were astonished.

@c    16:6. Who saith to them:  Be not affrighted.  you seek Jesus of Nazareth,
@c    who was crucified.  He is risen:  he is not here.  Behold the place where
@c    they laid him.

@c    16:7. But go, tell his disciples and Peter that he goeth before you
@c    into Galilee.  There you shall see him, as he told you.

@c    16:8. But they going out, fled from the sepulchre:  for a trembling and
@c    fear had seized them.  And they said nothing to any man:  for they were
@c    afraid.

@c    16:9. But he rising early the first day of the week, appeared first to
@c    Mary Magdalen; out of whom he had cast seven devils.

@c    16:10. She went and told them that had been with him, who were mourning
@c    and weeping.

@c    16:11. And they hearing that he was alive and had been seen by her, did
@c    not believe.

@c    16:12. And after that he appeared in another shape to two of them
@c    walking, as they were going into the country.

@c    16:13. And they going told it to the rest:  neither did they believe
@c    them.

@c    16:14. At length he appeared to the eleven as they were at table:  and
@c    he upbraided them with their incredulity and hardness of heart, because
@c    they did not believe them who had seen him after he was risen again.

@c    16:15. And he said to them:  Go ye into the whole world and preach the
@c    gospel to every creature.

@c    16:16. He that believeth and is baptized shall be saved:  but he that
@c    believeth not shall he condemned.

@c    16:17. And these signs shall follow them that believe:  In my name they
@c    shall cast out devils.  They shall speak with new tongues.

@c    16:18. They shall take up serpents:  and if they shall drink any deadly
@c    thing, it shall not hurt them.  They shall lay their hand upon the sick:
@c    and they shall recover.

@c    16:19. And the Lord Jesus, after he had spoken to them, was taken up
@c    into heaven and sitteth on the right hand of God.

@c    16:20. But they going forth preached every where:  the Lord working
@c    withal, and confirming the word with signs that followed.
