@c    THE HOLY GOSPEL OF JESUS CHRIST ACCORDING TO SAINT MATTHEW



@c    Saint Matthew, one of the twelve Apostles, who from being a publican,
@c    that is, a taxgatherer, was called by our Saviour to the Apostleship:
@c    in that profession his name is Levi.  (Luke 5.27, and Mark 2.14.)  He was
@c    the first of the Evangelists that wrote the Gospel, and that in Hebrew
@c    or Syro-Chaldaic which the Jews in Palestine spoke at that time.  The
@c    original is not now extant; but it was translated in the time of the
@c    Apostles into Greek, that version was of equal authority.  He wrote
@c    about six years after the Lord's Ascension.



@c    Matthew Chapter 1


@c    The genealogy of Christ:  he is conceived and born of a virgin.

@c    1:1. The book of the generation of Jesus Christ, the son of David, the
@c    son of Abraham:

@c    1:2. Abraham begot Isaac.  And Isaac begot Jacob.  And Jacob begot Judas
@c    and his brethren.

@c    1:3. And Judas begot Phares and Zara of Thamar.  And Phares begot Esron.
@c    And Esron begot Aram.

@c    1:4. And Aram begot Aminadab.  And Aminadab begot Naasson.  And Naasson
@c    begot Salmon.

@c    1:5. And Salmon begot Booz of Rahab.  And Booz begot Obed of Ruth.  And
@c    Obed begot Jesse.

@c    1:6. And Jesse begot David the king.  And David the king begot Solomon,
@c    of her that had been the wife of Urias.

@c    1:7. And Solomon begot Roboam.  And Roboam begot Abia.  And Abia begot
@c    Asa.

@c    1:8. And Asa begot Josaphat.  And Josaphat begot Joram.  And Joram begot
@c    Ozias.

@c    1:9. And Ozias begot Joatham.  And Joatham begot Achaz.  And Achaz begot
@c    Ezechias.

@c    1:10. And Ezechias begot Manasses.  And Manasses begot Amon.  And Amon
@c    begot Josias.

@c    1:11. And Josias begot Jechonias and his brethren in the transmigration
@c    of Babylon.

@c    1:12. And after the transmigration of Babylon, Jechonias begot
@c    Salathiel.  And Salathiel begot Zorobabel.

@c    1:13. And Zorobabel begot Abiud.  And Abiud begot Eliacim.  And Eliacim
@c    begot Azor.

@c    1:14. And Azor begot Sadoc.  And Sadoc begot Achim.  And Achim begot
@c    Eliud.

@c    1:15. And Eliud begot Eleazar.  And Eleazar begot Mathan.  And Mathan
@c    begot Jacob.

@c    1:16. And Jacob begot Joseph the husband of Mary, of whom was born
@c    Jesus, who is called Christ.

@c    The husband of Mary. . .The Evangelist gives us rather the pedigree of
@c    St. Joseph, than that of the blessed Virgin, to conform to the custom
@c    of the Hebrews, who in their genealogies took no notice of women; but
@c    as they were near akin, the pedigree of the one sheweth that of the
@c    other.

@c    1:17. So all the generations from Abraham to David, are fourteen
@c    generations.  And from David to the transmigration of Babylon, are
@c    fourteen generations:  and from the transmigration of Babylon to Christ
@c    are fourteen generations.

@c    1:18. Now the generation of Christ was in this wise.  When as his mother
@c    Mary was espoused to Joseph, before they came together, she was found
@c    with child, of the Holy Ghost.

@c    1:19. Whereupon Joseph her husband, being a just man, and not willing
@c    publicly to expose her, was minded to put her away privately.

@c    1:20. But while he thought on these things, behold the Angel of the
@c    Lord appeared to him in his sleep, saying:  Joseph, son of David, fear
@c    not to take unto thee Mary thy wife, for that which is conceived in
@c    her, is of the Holy Ghost.

@c    1:21. And she shall bring forth a son:  and thou shalt call his name
@c    Jesus.  For he shall save his people from their sins.

@c    1:22. Now all this was done that it might be fulfilled which the Lord
@c    spoke by the prophet, saying:

@c    1:23. Behold a virgin shall be with child, and bring forth a son, and
@c    they shall call his name Emmanuel, which being interpreted is, God with
@c    us.

@c    1:24. And Joseph rising up from sleep, did as the angel of the Lord had
@c    commanded him, and took unto him his wife.

@c    1:25. And he knew her not till she brought forth her first born son:
@c    and he called his name Jesus.

@c    Till she brought forth her firstborn son. . .From these words Helvidius
@c    and other heretics most impiously inferred that the blessed Virgin Mary
@c    had other children besides Christ; but St. Jerome shews, by divers
@c    examples, that this expression of the Evangelist was a manner of
@c    speaking usual among the Hebrews, to denote by the word until, only
@c    what is done, without any regard to the future.  Thus it is said,
@c    Genesis 8. 6 and 7, that Noe sent forth a raven, which went forth, and
@c    did not return till the waters were dried up on the earth.  That is, did
@c    not return any more.  Also Isaias 46. 4, God says:  I am till you grow
@c    old.  Who dare infer that God should then cease to be:  Also in the first
@c    book of Machabees 5. 54, And they went up to mount Sion with joy and
@c    gladness, and offered holocausts, because not one of them was slain
@c    till they had returned in peace.  That is, not one was slain before or
@c    after they had returned.  God saith to his divine Son:  Sit on my right
@c    hand till I make thy enemies thy footstool.  Shall he sit no longer
@c    after his enemies are subdued?  Yea and for all eternity.  St. Jerome
@c    also proves by Scripture examples, that an only begotten son, was also
@c    called firstborn, or first begotten:  because according to the law, the
@c    firstborn males were to be consecrated to God; Sanctify unto me, saith
@c    the Lord, every firstborn that openeth the womb among the children of
@c    Israel, etc.  Ex. 13. 2.



@c    Matthew Chapter 2


@c    The offerings of the wise men:  the flight into Egypt:  the massacre of
@c    the Innocents.

@c    2:1. When Jesus therefore was born in Bethlehem of Juda, in the days of
@c    king Herod, behold, there came wise men from the East to Jerusalem,

@c    2:2. Saying:  Where is he that is born king of the Jews?  For we have
@c    seen his star in the East, and are come to adore him.

@c    2:3. And king Herod hearing this, was troubled, and all Jerusalem with
@c    him.

@c    2:4. And assembling together all the chief priests and the scribes of
@c    the people, he inquired of them where Christ should be born.

@c    2:5. But they said to him:  In Bethlehem of Juda.  For so it is written
@c    by the prophet:

@c    2:6. And thou Bethlehem the land of Juda art not the least among the
@c    princes of Juda:  for out of thee shall come forth the captain that
@c    shall rule my people Israel.

@c    2:7. Then Herod, privately calling the wise men learned diligently of
@c    them the time of the star which appeared to them;

@c    2:8. And sending them into Bethlehem, said:  Go and diligently inquire
@c    after the child, and when you have found him, bring me word again, that
@c    I also may come and adore him.

@c    2:9. Who having heard the king, went their way; and behold the star
@c    which they had seen in the East, went before them, until it came and
@c    stood over where the child was.

@c    2:10. And seeing the star they rejoiced with exceeding great joy.

@c    2:11. And entering into the house, they found the child with Mary his
@c    mother, and falling down they adored him:  and opening their treasures,
@c    they offered him gifts; gold, frankincense, and myrrh.

@c    2:12. And having received an answer in sleep that they should not
@c    return to Herod, they went back another way into their country.

@c    2:13. And after they were departed, behold an angel of the Lord
@c    appeared in sleep to Joseph, saying:  Arise, and take the child and his
@c    mother, and fly into Egypt:  and be there until I shall tell thee.  For
@c    it will come to pass that Herod will seek the child to destroy him.

@c    2:14. Who arose, and took the child and his mother by night, and
@c    retired into Egypt:  and he was there until the death of Herod:

@c    2:15. That it might be fulfilled which the Lord spoke by the prophet,
@c    saying:  Out of Egypt have I called my son.

@c    2:16. Then Herod perceiving that he was deluded by the wise men, was
@c    exceeding angry:  and sending killed all the menchildren that were in
@c    Bethlehem, and in all the borders thereof, from two years old and
@c    under, according to the time which he had diligently inquired of the
@c    wise men.

@c    2:17. Then was fulfilled that which was spoken by Jeremias the prophet,
@c    saying:

@c    2:18. A voice in Rama was heard, lamentation and great mourning; Rachel
@c    bewailing her children, and would not be comforted, because they are
@c    not.

@c    2:19. But when Herod was dead, behold an angel of the Lord appeared in
@c    sleep to Joseph in Egypt,

@c    2:20. Saying:  Arise, and take the child and his mother, and go into the
@c    land of Israel.  For they are dead that sought the life of the child.

@c    2:21. Who arose, and took the child and his mother, and came into the
@c    land of Israel.

@c    2:22. But hearing that Archclaus reigned in Judea in the room of Herod
@c    his father, he was afraid to go thither:  and being warned in sleep
@c    retired into the quarters of Galilee.

@c    2:23. And coming he dwelt in a city called Nazareth:  that it might be
@c    fulfilled which was said by the prophets:  That he shall be called a
@c    Nazarene.



@c    Matthew Chapter 3


@c    The preaching of John:  Christ is baptized.

@c    3:1. And in those days cometh John the Baptist preaching in the desert
@c    of Judea.

@c    3:2. And saying:  Do penance:  for the kingdom of heaven is at hand.

@c    Do penance. . .Paenitentiam agite.  Which word, according to the use of
@c    the scriptures and the holy fathers, does not only signify repentance
@c    and amendment of life, but also punishing past sins by fasting, and
@c    such like penitential exercises.

@c    3:3. For this is he that was spoken of by Isaias the prophet, saying:  A
@c    voice of one crying in the desert, Prepare ye the way of the Lord, make
@c    straight his paths.

@c    3:4. And the same John had his garment of camel's hair, and a leathern
@c    girdle about his loins:  and his meat was locusts and wild honey.

@c    3:5. Then went out to him Jerusalem and all Judea, and all the country
@c    about Jordan:

@c    3:6. And were baptized by him in the Jordan, confessing their sins.

@c    3:7. And seeing many of the Pharisees and Sadducees coming to his
@c    baptism, he said to them:  Ye brood of vipers, who hath shewed you to
@c    flee from the wrath to come?

@c    Pharisees and Sadducees. . .These were two sects among the Jews:  of
@c    which the former were for the most part notorious hypocrites; the
@c    latter, a kind of freethinkers in matters of religion.

@c    3:8. Bring forth therefore fruit worthy of penance.

@c    3:9. And think not to say within yourselves, We have Abraham for our
@c    father.  For I tell you that God is able of these stones to raise up
@c    children to Abraham.

@c    3:10. For now the axe is laid to the root of the trees.  Every tree
@c    therefore that doth not yield good fruit, shall be cut down, and cast
@c    into the fire.

@c    3:11. I indeed baptize you in water unto penance, but he that shall
@c    come after me, is mightier than I, whose shoes I am not worthy to bear:
@c    he shall baptize you in the Holy Ghost and fire.

@c    3:12. Whose fan is in his hand, and he will thoroughly cleanse his
@c    floor and gather his wheat into the barn; but the chaff he will burn
@c    with unquenchable fire.

@c    3:13. Then cometh Jesus from Galilee to the Jordan, unto John, to be
@c    baptized by him.

@c    3:14. But John stayed him, saying:  I ought to be baptized by thee, and
@c    comest thou to me?

@c    3:15. And Jesus answering, said to him:  Suffer it to be so now.  For so
@c    it becometh us to fulfil all justice.  Then he suffered him.

@c    3:16. And Jesus being baptized, forthwith came out of the water:  and
@c    lo, the heavens were opened to him:  and he saw the Spirit of God
@c    descending as a dove, and coming upon him.

@c    3:17. And behold a voice from heaven saying:  This is my beloved Son, in
@c    whom I am well pleased.



@c    Matthew Chapter 4


@c    Christ's fast of forty days:  He is tempted.  He begins to preach, to
@c    call disciples to him, and to work miracles.

@c    4:1. Then Jesus was led by the spirit into the desert, to be tempted by
@c    the devil.

@c    4:2. And when he had fasted forty days and forty nights, afterwards he
@c    was hungry.

@c    4:3. And the tempter coming said to him:  If thou be the Son of God,
@c    command that these stones be made bread.

@c    4:4. Who answered and said:  It is written, Not in bread alone doth man
@c    live, but in every word that proceedeth from the mouth of God.

@c    4:5. Then the devil took him up into the holy city, and set him upon
@c    the pinnacle of the temple,

@c    4:6. And said to him:  If thou be the Son of God, cast thyself down, for
@c    it is written:  That he hath given his angels charge over thee, and in
@c    their hands shall they bear thee up, lest perhaps thou dash thy foot
@c    against a stone.

@c    4:7. Jesus said to him:  It is written again:  Thou shalt not tempt the
@c    Lord thy God.

@c    4:8. Again the devil took him up into a very high mountain, and shewed
@c    him all the kingdoms of the world, and the glory of them,

@c    Shewed him, etc. . .That is, pointed out to him where each kingdom lay;
@c    and set forth in words what was most glorious and admirable in each of
@c    them.  Or also set before his eyes, as it were in a large map, a lively
@c    representation of all those kingdoms.

@c    4:9. And said to him:  All these will I give thee, if falling down thou
@c    wilt adore me.

@c    4:10. Then Jesus saith to him:  Begone, Satan:  for it is written:  The
@c    Lord thy God shalt thou adore, and him only shalt thou serve.

@c    4:11. Then the devil left him; and behold angels came and ministered to
@c    him.

@c    4:12. And when Jesus had heard that John was delivered up, he retired
@c    into Galilee:

@c    4:13. And leaving the city Nazareth, he came and dwelt in Capharnaum on
@c    the sea coast, in the borders of Zabulon and of Nephthalim;

@c    4:14. That it might be fulfilled which was said by Isaias the prophet:

@c    4:15. Land of Zabulon and land of Nephthalim, the way of the sea beyond
@c    the Jordan, Galilee of the Gentiles:

@c    4:16. The people that sat in darkness, hath seen great light:  and to
@c    them that sat in the region of the shadow of death, light is sprung up.

@c    4:17. From that time Jesus began to preach, and to say:  Do penance, for
@c    the kingdom of heaven is at hand.

@c    4:18. And Jesus walking by the sea of Galilee, saw two brethren, Simon
@c    who is called Peter, and Andrew his brother, casting a net into the sea
@c    (for they were fishers).

@c    4:19. And he saith to them:  Come ye after me, and I will make you to be
@c    fishers of men.

@c    4:20. And they immediately leaving their nets, followed him.

@c    4:21. And going on from thence, he saw other two brethren, James the
@c    son of Zebedee, and John his brother, in a ship with Zebedee their
@c    father, mending their nets:  and he called them.

@c    4:22. And they forthwith left their nets and father, and followed him.

@c    4:23. And Jesus went about all Galilee, teaching in their synagogues,
@c    and preaching the gospel of the kingdom:  and healing all manner of
@c    sickness and every infirmity, among the people.

@c    4:24. And his fame went throughout all Syria, and they presented to him
@c    all sick people that were taken with divers diseases and torments, and
@c    such as were possessed by devils, and lunatics, and those that had the
@c    palsy, and he cured them:

@c    4:25. And much people followed him from Galilee, and from Decapolis,
@c    and from Jerusalem, and from Judea, and from beyond the Jordan.



@c    Matthew Chapter 5


@c    Christ's sermon upon the mount.  The eight beatitudes.

@c    5:1. And seeing the multitudes, he went up into a mountain, and when he
@c    was set down, his disciples came unto him.

@c    5:2. And opening his mouth he taught them, saying:

@c    5:3. Blessed are the poor in spirit:  for theirs is the kingdom of
@c    heaven.

@c    The poor in spirit. . .That is, the humble; and they whose spirit is not
@c    set upon riches.

@c    5:4. Blessed are the meek:  for they shall possess the land.

@c    5:5. Blessed are they that mourn:  for they shall be comforted.

@c    5:6. Blessed are they that hunger and thirst after justice:  for they
@c    shall have their fill.

@c    5:7. Blessed are the merciful:  for they shall obtain mercy.

@c    5:8. Blessed are the clean of heart:  they shall see God.

@c    5:9. Blessed are the peacemakers:  for they shall be called the children
@c    of God.

@c    5:10. Blessed are they that suffer persecution for justice' sake:  for
@c    theirs is the kingdom of heaven.

@c    5:11. Blessed are ye when they shall revile you, and persecute you, and
@c    speak all that is evil against you, untruly, for my sake:

@c    5:12. Be glad and rejoice for your reward is very great in heaven.  For
@c    so they persecuted the prophets that were before you.

@c    5:13. You are the salt of the earth.  But if the salt lose its savour,
@c    wherewith shall it be salted?  It is good for nothing anymore but to be
@c    cast out, and to be trodden on by men.

@c    5:14. You are the light of the world.  A city seated on a mountain
@c    cannot be hid.

@c    5:15. Neither do men light a candle and put it under a bushel, but upon
@c    a candlestick, that it may shine to all that are in the house.

@c    5:16. So let your light shine before men, that they may see your good
@c    works, and glorify your Father who is in heaven.

@c    5:17. Do not think that I am come to destroy the law, or the prophets.
@c    I am not come to destroy, but to fulfil.

@c    To fulfil. . .By accomplishing all the figures and prophecies; and
@c    perfecting all that was imperfect.

@c    5:18. For amen I say unto you, till heaven and earth pass, one jot, or
@c    one tittle shall not pass of the law, till all be fulfilled.

@c    Amen. . .That is, assuredly of a truth. . .This Hebrew word, amen, is
@c    here retained by the example and authority of all the four Evangelists.
@c    It is used by our Lord as a strong asseveration, and affirmation of the
@c    truth.

@c    5:19. He therefore that shall break one of these least commandments,
@c    and shall so teach men shall be called the least in the kingdom of
@c    heaven.  But he that shall do and teach, he shall be called great in the
@c    kingdom of heaven.

@c    5:20. For I tell you, that unless your justice abound more than that of
@c    the scribes and Pharisees, you shall not enter into the kingdom of
@c    heaven.

@c    The scribes and Pharisees. . .The scribes were the doctors of the law of
@c    Moses:  the Pharisees were a precise set of men, making profession of a
@c    more exact observance of the law:  and upon that account greatly
@c    esteemed among the people.

@c    5:21. You have heard that it was said to them of old:  Thou shalt not
@c    kill.  And whosoever shall kill, shall be in danger of the judgment.

@c    Shall be in danger of the judgment. . .That is, shall deserve to be
@c    punished by that lesser tribunal among the Jews, called the Judgment,
@c    which took cognizance of such crimes.

@c    5:22. But I say to you, that whosoever is angry with his brother, shall
@c    be in danger of the judgment.  And whosoever shall say to his brother,
@c    Raca, shall be in danger of the council.  And whosoever shall say, Thou
@c    fool, shall be in danger of hell fire.

@c    Raca. . .A word expressing great indignation or contempt.  Shall be in
@c    danger of the council. . .That is, shall deserve to be punished by the
@c    highest court of judicature, called the Council, or Sanhedrim,
@c    consisting of seventy-two persons, where the highest causes were tried
@c    and judged, which was at Jerusalem.  Thou fool. . .This was then looked
@c    upon as a heinous injury, when uttered with contempt, spite, or malice:
@c    and therefore is here so severely condemned.  Shall be in danger of hell
@c    fire. . .literally, according to the Greek, shall deserve to be cast
@c    into the Gehenna of fire.  Which words our Saviour made use of to
@c    express the fire and punishments of hell.

@c    5:23. If therefore thou offer thy gift at the altar, and there thou
@c    remember that thy brother hath anything against thee;

@c    5:24. Leave there thy offering before the altar, and go first to be
@c    reconciled to thy brother, and then coming thou shalt offer thy gift.

@c    5:25. Be at agreement with thy adversary betimes, whilst thou art in
@c    the way with him:  lest perhaps the adversary deliver thee to the judge,
@c    and the judge deliver thee to the officer, and thou be cast into
@c    prison.

@c    5:26. Amen I say to thee, thou shalt not go out from thence till thou
@c    repay the last farthing.

@c    5:27. You have heard that it was said to them of old:  Thou shalt not
@c    commit adultery.

@c    5:28. But I say to you, that whosoever shall look on a woman to lust
@c    after her, hath already committed adultery with her in his heart.

@c    5:29. And if thy right eye scandalize thee, pluck it out and cast it
@c    from thee.  For it is expedient for thee that one of thy members should
@c    perish, rather than thy whole body be cast into hell.

@c    Scandalize thee. . .That is, if it be a stumblingblock, or occasion of
@c    sin to thee.  By which we are taught to fly the immediate occasions of
@c    sin, though they be as dear to us, or as necessary as a hand or an eye.

@c    5:30. And if thy right hand scandalize thee, cut it off, and cast it
@c    from thee:  for it is expedient for thee that one of thy members should
@c    perish, rather than that thy whole body go into hell.

@c    5:31. And it hath been said, Whosoever shall put away his wife, let him
@c    give her a bill of divorce.

@c    5:32. But I say to you, that whosoever shall put away his wife,
@c    excepting the cause of fornication, maketh her to commit adultery:  and
@c    he that shall marry her that is put away, committeth adultery.

@c    5:33. Again you have heard that it was said to them of old, thou shalt
@c    not forswear thyself:  but thou shalt perform thy oaths to the Lord.

@c    5:34. But I say to you not to swear at all, neither by heaven for it is
@c    the throne of God:

@c    Not to swear at all. . .It is not forbid to swear in truth, justice and
@c    judgment; to the honour of God, or our own or neighbour's just defence:
@c    but only to swear rashly, or profanely, in common discourse, and
@c    without necessity.

@c    5:35. Nor by the earth, for it is his footstool:  nor by Jerusalem, for
@c    it is the city of the great king:

@c    5:36. Neither shalt thou swear by thy head, because thou canst not make
@c    one hair white or black.

@c    5:37. But let your speech be yea, yea:  no, no:  and that which is over
@c    and above these, is of evil.

@c    5:38. You have heard that it hath been said:  An eye for an eye, and a
@c    tooth for a tooth.

@c    5:39. But I say to you not to resist evil:  but if one strike thee on
@c    thy right cheek, turn to him also the other:

@c    Not to resist evil, etc. . .What is here commanded, is a Christian
@c    patience under injuries and affronts, and to be willing even to suffer
@c    still more, rather than to indulge the desire of revenge:  but what is
@c    further added does not strictly oblige according to the letter, for
@c    neither did Christ nor St. Paul turn the other cheek.  St. John 18., and
@c    Acts 23.

@c    5:40. And if a man will contend with thee in judgment, and take away
@c    thy coat, let go thy cloak also unto him.

@c    5:41. And whosoever will force thee one mile, go with him other two.

@c    5:42. Give to him that asketh of thee, and from him that would borrow
@c    of thee turn not away.

@c    5:43. You have heard that it hath been said, Thou shalt love thy
@c    neighbour, and hate thy enemy.

@c    5:44. But I say to you, Love your enemies:  do good to them that hate
@c    you:  and pray for them that persecute and calumniate you:

@c    5:45. That you may be the children of your Father who is in heaven, who
@c    maketh his sun to rise upon the good, and bad, and raineth upon the
@c    just and the unjust.

@c    5:46. For if you love them that love you, what reward shall you have?
@c    do not even the publicans this?

@c    The publicans. . .These were the gatherers of the public taxes:  a set of
@c    men, odious and infamous among the Jews, for their extortions and
@c    injustice.

@c    5:47. And if you salute your brethren only, what do you more?  do not
@c    also the heathens this?

@c    5:48. Be you therefore perfect, as also your heavenly Father is
@c    perfect.



@c    Matthew Chapter 6


@c    A continuation of the sermon on the mount.

@c    6:1. Take heed that you do not your justice before men, to be seen by
@c    them:  otherwise you shall not have a reward of your Father who is in
@c    heaven.

@c    Your justice. . .that is, works of justice; viz., fasting, prayer, and
@c    almsdeeds; which ought to be performed not out of ostentation, or a
@c    view to please men, but solely to please God.

@c    6:2. Therefore when thou dost an alms-deed, sound not a trumpet before
@c    thee, as the hypocrites do in the synagogues and in the streets, that
@c    they may be honoured by men.  Amen I say to you, they have received
@c    their reward.

@c    6:3. But when thou dost alms, let not thy left hand know what thy right
@c    hand doth.

@c    6:4. That thy alms may be in secret, and thy Father who seeth in secret
@c    will repay thee.

@c    6:5. And when ye pray, you shall not be as the hypocrites, that love to
@c    stand and pray in the synagogues and corners of the streets, that they
@c    may be seen by men:  Amen I say to you, they have received their reward.

@c    6:6. But thou when thou shalt pray, enter into thy chamber, and having
@c    shut the door, pray to thy Father in secret, and thy father who seeth
@c    in secret will repay thee.

@c    6:7. And when you are praying, speak not much, as the heathens.  For
@c    they think that in their much speaking they may be heard.

@c    6:8. Be not you therefore like to them for your Father knoweth what is
@c    needful for you, before you ask him.

@c    6:9. Thus therefore shall you pray:  Our Father who art in heaven,
@c    hallowed be thy name.

@c    6:10. Thy kingdom come.  Thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven.

@c    6:11. Give us this day our supersubstantial bread.

@c    Supersubstantial bread. . .In St. Luke the same word is rendered daily
@c    bread.  It is understood of the bread of life, which we receive in the
@c    Blessed Sacrament.

@c    6:12. And forgive us our debts, as we also forgive our debtors.

@c    6:13. And lead us not into temptation.  But deliver us from evil.  Amen.

@c    Lead us not into temptation. . .That is, suffer us not to be overcome by
@c    temptation.

@c    6:14. For if you will forgive men their offences, your heavenly Father
@c    will forgive you also your offences.

@c    6:15. But if you will not forgive men, neither will your Father forgive
@c    you your offences.

@c    6:16. And when you fast, be not as the hypocrites, sad.  For they
@c    disfigure their faces, that they may appear unto men to fast.  Amen I
@c    say to you, they have received their reward.

@c    6:17. But thou, when thou fastest anoint thy head, and wash thy face;

@c    6:18. That thou appear not to men to fast, but to thy Father who is in
@c    secret:  and thy Father who seeth in secret, will repay thee.

@c    6:19. Lay not up to yourselves treasures on earth:  where the rust, and
@c    moth consume, and where thieves break through, and steal.

@c    6:20. But lay up to yourselves treasures in heaven:  where neither the
@c    rust nor moth doth consume, and where thieves do not break through, nor
@c    steal.

@c    6:21. For where thy treasure is, there is thy heart also.

@c    6:22. The light of thy body is thy eye.  If thy eye be single, thy whole
@c    body shall be lightsome.

@c    6:23. But if thy eye be evil thy whole body shall be darksome.  If then
@c    the light that is in thee, be darkness:  the darkness itself how great
@c    shall it be!

@c    6:24. No man can serve two masters.  For either he will hate the one,
@c    and love the other:  or he will sustain the one, and despise the other.
@c    You cannot serve God and mammon.

@c    Mammon. . .That is, riches, worldly interest.

@c    6:25. Therefore I say to you, be not solicitous for your life, what you
@c    shall eat, nor for your body, what you shall put on.  Is not the life
@c    more than the meat:  and the body more than the raiment?

@c    6:26. Behold the birds of the air, for they neither sow, nor do they
@c    reap, nor gather into barns:  and your heavenly Father feedeth them.  Are
@c    not you of much more value than they?

@c    6:27. And which of you by taking thought, can add to his stature one
@c    cubit?

@c    6:28. And for raiment why are you solicitous?  Consider the lilies of
@c    the field, how they grow:  they labour not, neither do they spin.

@c    6:29. But I say to you, that not even Solomon in all his glory was
@c    arrayed as one of these.

@c    6:30. And if the grass of the field, which is to day, and to morrow is
@c    cast into the oven, God doth so clothe:  how much more you, O ye of
@c    little faith?

@c    6:31. Be not solicitous therefore, saying:  What shall we eat:  or what
@c    shall we drink, or wherewith shall we be clothed?

@c    6:32. For after all these things do the heathens seek.  For your Father
@c    knoweth that you have need of all these things.

@c    6:33. Seek ye therefore first the kingdom of God, and his justice, and
@c    all these things shall be added unto you.

@c    6:34. Be not therefore solicitous for to morrow; for the morrow will be
@c    solicitous for itself.  Sufficient for the day is the evil thereof.



@c    Matthew Chapter 7


@c    The third part of the sermon on the mount.

@c    7:1. Judge not, that you may not be judged.

@c    7:2. For with what judgment you judge, you shall be judged:  and with
@c    what measure you mete, it shall be measured to you again.

@c    7:3. And why seest thou the mote that is in thy brother's eye; and
@c    seest not the beam that is in thy own eye?

@c    7:4. Or how sayest thou to thy brother:  Let me cast the mote out of thy
@c    eye; and behold a beam is in thy own eye?

@c    7:5. Thou hypocrite, cast out first the beam out of thy own eye, and
@c    then shalt thou see to cast out the mote out of thy brother's eye.

@c    7:6. Give not that which is holy to dogs; neither cast ye your pearls
@c    before swine, lest perhaps they trample them under their feet, and
@c    turning upon you, they tear you.

@c    7:7. Ask, and it shall be given you:  seek, and you shall find:  knock,
@c    and it shall be opened to you.

@c    7:8. For every one that asketh, receiveth:  and he that seeketh,
@c    findeth:  and to him that knocketh, it shall be opened.

@c    7:9. Or what man is there among you, of whom if his son shall ask
@c    bread, will he reach him a stone?

@c    7:10. Or if he shall ask him a fish, will he reach him a serpent?

@c    7:11. If you then being evil, know how to give good gifts to your
@c    children:  how much more will your Father who is in heaven, give good
@c    things to them that ask him?

@c    7:12. All things therefore whatsoever you would that men should do to
@c    you, do you also to them.  For this is the law and the prophets.

@c    7:13. Enter ye in at the narrow gate:  for wide is the gate, and broad
@c    is the way that leadeth to destruction, and many there are who go in
@c    thereat.

@c    7:14. How narrow is the gate, and strait is the way that leadeth to
@c    life:  and few there are that find it!

@c    7:15. Beware of false prophets, who come to you in the clothing of
@c    sheep, but inwardly they are ravening wolves.

@c    7:16. By their fruits you shall know them.  Do men gather grapes of
@c    thorns, or figs of thistles?

@c    7:17. Even so every good tree bringeth forth good fruit, and the evil
@c    tree bringeth forth evil fruit.

@c    7:18. A good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit, neither can an evil
@c    tree bring forth good fruit.

@c    7:19. Every tree that bringeth not forth good fruit, shall be cut down,
@c    and shall be cast into the fire.

@c    7:20. Wherefore by their fruits you shall know them.

@c    7:21. Not every one that saith to me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the
@c    kingdom of heaven:  but he that doth the will of my Father who is in
@c    heaven, he shall enter into the kingdom of heaven.

@c    7:22. Many will say to me in that day:  Lord, Lord, have not we
@c    prophesied in thy name, and cast out devils in thy name, and done many
@c    miracles in thy name?

@c    7:23. And then will I profess unto them, I never knew you:  depart from
@c    me, you that work iniquity.

@c    7:24. Every one therefore that heareth these my words, and doth them,
@c    shall be likened to a wise man that built his house upon a rock,

@c    7:25. And the rain fell, and the floods came, and the winds blew, and
@c    they beat upon that house, and it fell not, for it was founded on a
@c    rock.

@c    7:26. And every one that heareth these my words and doth them not,
@c    shall be like a foolish man that built his house upon the sand,

@c    7:27. And the rain fell, and the floods came, and the winds blew, and
@c    they beat upon that house, and it fell, and great was the fall thereof.

@c    7:28. And it came to pass when Jesus had fully ended these words, the
@c    people were in admiration at his doctrine.

@c    7:29. For he was teaching them as one having power, and not as the
@c    scribes and Pharisees.



@c    Matthew Chapter 8


@c    Christ cleanses the leper, heals the centurion's servant, Peter's
@c    mother-in-law, and many others:  he stills the storm at sea, drives the
@c    devils out of two men possessed, and suffers them to go into the swine.

@c    8:1. And when he was come down from the mountain, great multitudes
@c    followed him:

@c    8:2. And behold a leper came and adored him, saying:  Lord, if thou
@c    wilt, thou canst make me clean.

@c    8:3. And Jesus stretching forth his hand, touched him, saying:  I will,
@c    be thou made clean.  And forthwith his leprosy was cleansed.

@c    8:4. And Jesus saith to him:  See thou tell no man:  but go, shew thyself
@c    to the priest, and offer the gift which Moses commanded, for a
@c    testimony unto them.

@c    8:5. And when he had entered into Capharnaum, there came to him a
@c    centurion, beseeching him,

@c    8:6. And saying, Lord, my servant lieth at home sick of the palsy, and
@c    is grievously tormented.

@c    8:7. And Jesus saith to him:  I will come and heal him.

@c    8:8. And the centurion, making answer, said:  Lord, I am not worthy that
@c    thou shouldst enter under my roof; but only say the word, and my
@c    servant shall be healed.

@c    8:9. For I also am a man subject to authority, having under me
@c    soldiers; and I say to this, Go, and he goeth, and to another Come, and
@c    he cometh, and to my servant, Do this, and he doeth it.

@c    8:10. And Jesus hearing this, marvelled; and said to them that followed
@c    him.  Amen I say to you, I have not found so great faith in Israel.

@c    8:11. And I say to you that many shall come from the east and the west,
@c    and shall sit down with Abraham, and Isaac and Jacob in the kingdom of
@c    heaven:

@c    8:12. But the children of the kingdom shall be cast out into the
@c    exterior darkness:  there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.

@c    8:13. And Jesus said to the centurion:  Go, and as thou hast believed,
@c    so be it done to thee.  And the servant was healed at the same hour.

@c    8:14. And when Jesus was come into Peter's house, he saw his wife's
@c    mother lying, and sick of a fever;

@c    8:15. And he touched her hand, and the fever left her, and she arose
@c    and ministered to them.

@c    8:16. And when evening was come, they brought to him many that were
@c    possessed with devils:  and he cast out the spirits with his word:  and
@c    all that were sick he healed:

@c    8:17. That it might be fulfilled, which was spoken by the prophet
@c    Isaias, saying:  He took our infirmities, and bore our diseases.

@c    8:18. And Jesus seeing great multitudes about him, gave orders to pass
@c    over the water.

@c    8:19. And a certain scribe came and said to him:  Master, I will follow
@c    thee whithersoever thou shalt go.

@c    8:20. And Jesus saith to him:  The foxes have holes, and the birds of
@c    the air nests; but the Son of man hath not where to lay his head.

@c    8:21. And another of his disciples said to him:  Lord, suffer me first
@c    to go and bury my father.

@c    8:22. But Jesus said to him:  Follow me, and let the dead bury their
@c    dead.

@c    8:23. And when he entered into the boat, his disciples followed him:

@c    8:24. And behold a great tempest arose in the sea, so that the boat was
@c    covered with waves, but he was asleep.

@c    8:25. And they came to him, and awaked him, saying:  Lord, save us, we
@c    perish.

@c    8:26. And Jesus saith to them:  Why are you fearful, O ye of little
@c    faith?  Then rising up, he commanded the winds, and the sea, and there
@c    came a great calm.

@c    8:27. But the men wondered, saying:  What manner of man is this, for the
@c    winds and the sea obey him?

@c    8:28. And when he was come on the other side of the water, into the
@c    country of the Gerasens, there met him two that were possessed with
@c    devils, coming out of the sepulchres, exceeding fierce, so that none
@c    could pass by that way.

@c    8:29. And behold they cried out, saying:  What have we to do with thee,
@c    Jesus Son of God?  art thou come hither to torment us before the time?

@c    8:30. And there was, not far from them, a herd of many swine feeding.

@c    8:31. And the devils besought him, saying:  If thou cast us out hence,
@c    send us into the herd of swine.

@c    8:32. And he said to them:  Go.  But they going out went into the swine,
@c    and behold the whole herd ran violently down a steep place into the
@c    sea:  and they perished in the waters.

@c    8:33. And they that kept them fled:  and coming into the city, told
@c    every thing, and concerning them that had been possessed by the devils.

@c    8:34. And behold the whole city went out to meet Jesus, and when they
@c    saw him, they besought him that he would depart from their coast.



@c    Matthew Chapter 9


@c    Christ heals one sick of palsy:  calls Matthew:  cures the issue of
@c    blood:  raises to life the daughter of Jairus:  gives sight to two blind
@c    men:  and heals a dumb man possessed by the devil.

@c    9:1. And entering into a boat, he passed over the water and came into
@c    his own city.

@c    9:2. And behold they brought to him one sick of the palsy lying in a
@c    bed.  And Jesus, seeing their faith, said to the man sick of the palsy:
@c    Be of good heart, son, thy sins are forgiven thee.

@c    9:3. And behold some of the scribes said within themselves:  He
@c    blasphemeth.

@c    9:4. And Jesus seeing their thoughts, said:  Why do you think evil in
@c    your hearts?

@c    9:5. Whether is easier, to say, Thy sins are forgiven thee:  or to say,
@c    Arise, and walk?

@c    9:6. But that you may know that the Son of man hath power on earth to
@c    forgive sins, (then said he to the man sick of the palsy,) Arise, take
@c    up thy bed, and go into thy house.

@c    9:7. And he arose, and went into his house.

@c    9:8. And the multitude seeing it, feared, and glorified God that gave
@c    such power to men.

@c    9:9. And when Jesus passed on from thence, he saw a man sitting in the
@c    custom house, named Matthew; and he saith to him:  Follow me.  And he
@c    arose up and followed him.

@c    9:10. And it came to pass as he was sitting at meat in the house,
@c    behold many publicans and sinners came, and sat down with Jesus and his
@c    disciples.

@c    9:11. And the Pharisees seeing it, said to his disciples:  Why doth your
@c    master eat with publicans and sinners?

@c    9:12. But Jesus hearing it, said:  They that are in health need not a
@c    physician, but they that are ill.

@c    9:13. Go then and learn what this meaneth, I will have mercy and not
@c    sacrifice.  For I am not come to call the just, but sinners.

@c    9:14. Then came to him the disciples of John, saying:  Why do we and the
@c    Pharisees, fast often, but thy disciples do not fast?

@c    9:15. And Jesus said to them:  Can the children of the bridegroom mourn,
@c    as long as the bridegroom is with them?  But the days will come, when
@c    the bridegroom shall be taken away from them, and then they shall fast.

@c    Can the children of the bridegroom. . .This, by a Hebraism, signifies
@c    the friends or companions of the bridegroom.

@c    9:16. And nobody putteth a piece of raw cloth unto an old garment.  For
@c    it taketh away the fulness thereof from the garment, and there is made
@c    a greater rent.

@c    9:17. Neither do they put new wine into old bottles.  Otherwise the
@c    bottles break, and the wine runneth out, and the bottles perish.  But
@c    new wine they put into new bottles:  and both are preserved.

@c    9:18. As he was speaking these things unto them, behold a certain ruler
@c    came up, and adored him, saying:  Lord, my daughter is even now dead;
@c    but come, lay thy hand upon her, and she shall live.

@c    9:19. And Jesus rising up followed him, with his disciples.

@c    9:20. And behold a woman who was troubled with an issue of blood twelve
@c    years, came behind him, and touched the hem of his garment.

@c    9:21. For she said within herself:  If I shall touch only his garment, I
@c    shall be healed.

@c    9:22. But Jesus turning and seeing her, said:  Be of good heart,
@c    daughter, thy faith hath made thee whole.  And the woman was made whole
@c    from that hour.

@c    9:23. And when Jesus was come into the house of the ruler, and saw the
@c    minstrels and the multitude making a rout,

@c    9:24. He said:  Give place, for the girl is not dead, but sleepeth.  And
@c    they laughed him to scorn.

@c    9:25. And when the multitude was put forth, he went in, and took her by
@c    the hand.  And the maid arose.

@c    9:26. And the fame hereof went abroad into all that country.

@c    9:27. And as Jesus passed from thence, there followed him two blind men
@c    crying out and saying, Have mercy on us, O Son of David.

@c    9:28. And when he was come to the house, the blind men came to him.  And
@c    Jesus saith to them, Do you believe, that I can do this unto you?  They
@c    say to him, Yea, Lord.

@c    9:29. Then he touched their eyes, saying, According to your faith, be
@c    it done unto you.

@c    9:30. And their eyes were opened, and Jesus strictly charged them,
@c    saying, See that no man know this.

@c    9:31. But they going out, spread his fame abroad in all that country.

@c    9:32. And when they were gone out, behold they brought him a dumb man,
@c    possessed with a devil.

@c    9:33. And after the devil was cast out, the dumb man spoke, and the
@c    multitudes wondered, saying, Never was the like seen in Israel.

@c    9:34. But the Pharisees said, By the prince of devils he casteth out
@c    devils.

@c    9:35. And Jesus went about all the cities and towns, teaching in their
@c    synagogues, and preaching the gospel of the kingdom, and healing every
@c    disease, and every infirmity.

@c    9:36. And seeing the multitudes, he had compassion on them:  because
@c    they were distressed, and lying like sheep that have no shepherd.

@c    9:37. Then he saith to his disciples, The harvest indeed is great, but
@c    the labourers are few.

@c    9:38. Pray ye therefore the Lord of the harvest, that he send forth
@c    labourers into his harvest.



@c    Matthew Chapter 10


@c    Christ sends out his twelve apostles, with the power of miracles.  The
@c    lessons he gives them.

@c    10:1. And having called his twelve disciples together, he gave them
@c    power over unclean spirits, to cast them out, and to heal all manner of
@c    diseases, and all manner of infirmities.

@c    10:2. And the names of the twelve Apostles are these:  The first, Simon
@c    who is called Peter, and Andrew his brother,

@c    10:3. James the son of Zebedee, and John his brother, Philip and
@c    Bartholomew, Thomas and Matthew the publican, and James the son of
@c    Alpheus, and Thaddeus,

@c    10:4. Simon the Cananean, and Judas Iscariot, who also betrayed him.

@c    10:5. These twelve Jesus sent:  commanding them, saying:  Go ye not into
@c    the way of the Gentiles, and into the city of the Samaritans enter ye
@c    not.

@c    10:6. But go ye rather to the lost sheep of the house of Israel.

@c    10:7. And going, preach, saying:  The kingdom of heaven is at hand.

@c    10:8. Heal the sick, raise the dead, cleanse the lepers, cast out
@c    devils:  freely have you received, freely give.

@c    10:9. Do not possess gold, nor silver, nor money in your purses:

@c    10:10. Nor scrip for your journey, nor two coats, nor shoes, nor a
@c    staff; for the workman is worthy of his meat.

@c    10:11. And into whatsoever city or town you shall enter, inquire who in
@c    it is worthy, and there abide till you go thence.

@c    10:12. And when you come into the house, salute it, saying:  Peace be to
@c    this house.

@c    10:13. And if that house be worthy, your peace shall come upon it; but
@c    if it be not worthy, your peace shall return to you.

@c    10:14. And whosoever shall not receive you, nor hear your words:  going
@c    forth out of that house or city shake off the dust from your feet.

@c    10:15. Amen I say to you, it shall be more tolerable for the land of
@c    Sodom and Gomorrha in the day of judgment, than for that city.

@c    10:16. Behold I send you as sheep in the midst of wolves.  Be ye
@c    therefore wise as serpents and simple as doves.

@c    Simple. . .That is, harmless, plain, sincere, and without guile.

@c    10:17. But beware of men.  For they will deliver you up in councils, and
@c    they will scourge you in their synagogues.

@c    10:18. And you shall be brought before governors, and before kings for
@c    my sake, for a testimony to them and to the Gentiles:

@c    10:19. But when they shall deliver you up, take no thought how or what
@c    to speak:  for it shall be given you in that hour what to speak:

@c    10:20. For it is not you that speak, but the spirit of your Father that
@c    speaketh in you.

@c    10:21. The brother also shall deliver up the brother to death, and the
@c    father the son; and the children shall rise up against their parents,
@c    and shall put them to death.

@c    10:22. And you shall be hated by all men for my name's sake:  but he
@c    that shall persevere unto the end, he shall be saved.

@c    10:23. And when they shall persecute you in this city, flee into
@c    another.  Amen I say to you, you shall not finish all the cities of
@c    Israel, till the Son of man come.

@c    10:24. The disciple is not above the master, nor the servant above his
@c    lord.

@c    10:25. It is enough for the disciple that he be as his master, and the
@c    servant as his lord.  If they have called the good man of the house
@c    Beelzebub, how much more them of his household?

@c    10:26. Therefore fear them not.  For nothing is covered that shall not
@c    be revealed:  nor hid, that shall not be known.

@c    10:27. That which I tell you in the dark, speak ye in the light:  and
@c    that which you hear in the ear, preach ye upon the housetops.

@c    10:28. And fear ye not them that kill the body, and are not able to
@c    kill the soul:  but rather fear him that can destroy both soul and body
@c    in hell.

@c    10:29. Are not two sparrows sold for a farthing?  and not one of them
@c    shall fall on the ground without your Father.

@c    10:30. But the very hairs of your head are all numbered.

@c    10:31. Fear not therefore:  better are you than many sparrows.

@c    10:32. Every one therefore that shall confess me before men, I will
@c    also confess him before my Father who is in heaven.

@c    10:33. But he that shall deny me before men, I will also deny him
@c    before my Father who is in heaven.

@c    10:34. Do not think that I came to send peace upon earth:  I came not to
@c    send peace, but the sword.

@c    10:35. For I came to set a man at variance against his father, and the
@c    daughter against her mother, and the daughter in law against her mother
@c    in law.

@c    I came to set a man at variance, etc. . .Not that this was the end or
@c    design of the coming of our Saviour; but that his coming and his
@c    doctrine would have this effect, by reason of the obstinate resistance
@c    that many would make, and of their persecuting all such as should
@c    adhere to him.

@c    10:36. And a man's enemies shall be they of his own household.

@c    10:37. He that loveth father or mother more than me, is not worthy of
@c    me; and he that loveth son or daughter more than me, is not worthy of
@c    me.

@c    10:38. And he that taketh not up his cross, and followeth me, is not
@c    worthy of me.

@c    10:39. He that findeth his life, shall lose it:  and he that shall lose
@c    his life for me, shall find it.

@c    10:40. He that receiveth you, receiveth me:  and he that receiveth me,
@c    receiveth him that sent me.

@c    10:41. He that receiveth a prophet in the name of a prophet, shall
@c    receive the reward of a prophet:  and he that receiveth a just man in
@c    the name of a just man, shall receive the reward of a just man.

@c    10:42. And whosoever shall give to drink to one of these little ones a
@c    cup of cold water only in the name of a disciple, amen I say to you he
@c    shall not lose his reward.



@c    Matthew Chapter 11


@c    John sends his disciples to Christ, who upbraids the Jews for their
@c    incredulity, and calls to him such as are sensible of their burdens.

@c    11:1. And it came to pass, when Jesus had made an end of commanding his
@c    twelve disciples, he passed from thence, to teach and to preach in
@c    their cities.

@c    11:2. Now when John had heard in prison the works of Christ:  sending
@c    two of his disciples he said to him:

@c    11:3. Art thou he that art to come, or look we for another?

@c    11:4. And Jesus making answer said to them:  Go and relate to John what
@c    you have heard and seen.

@c    11:5. The blind see, the lame walk, the lepers are cleansed, the deaf
@c    hear, the dead rise again, the poor have the gospel preached to them.

@c    11:6. And blessed is he that shall not be scandalized in me.

@c    Scandalized in me. . .That is, who shall not take occasion of scandal or
@c    offence from my humility, and the disgraceful death of the cross which
@c    I shall endure.

@c    11:7. And when they went their way, Jesus began to say to the
@c    multitudes concerning John:  What went you out into the desert to see?  a
@c    reed shaken with the wind?

@c    11:8. But what went you out to see?  a man clothed in soft garments?
@c    Behold they that are clothed in soft garments, are in the houses of
@c    kings.

@c    11:9. But what went you out to see?  A prophet?  Yea I tell you, and more
@c    than a prophet.

@c    11:10. For this is he of whom it is written:  Behold I send my angel
@c    before my face, who shall prepare thy way before thee.

@c    11:11. Amen I say to you, there hath not risen among them that are born
@c    of women a greater than John the Baptist:  yet he that is the lesser in
@c    the kingdom of heaven is greater than he.

@c    11:12. And from the days of John the Baptist until now, the kingdom of
@c    heaven suffereth violence, and the violent bear it away.

@c    Suffereth violence, etc. . .It is not to be obtained but by main force,
@c    by using violence upon ourselves, by mortification and penance, and
@c    resisting our perverse inclinations.

@c    11:13. For all the prophets and the law prophesied until John:

@c    11:14. And if you will receive it, he is Elias that is to come.

@c    He is Elias, etc. . .Not in person, but in spirit.  St. Luke 1. 17.

@c    11:15. He that hath ears to hear, let him hear.

@c    11:16. But whereunto shall I esteem this generation to be like?  It is
@c    like to children sitting in the market place.

@c    11:17. Who crying to their companions say:  We have piped to you, and
@c    you have not danced:  we have lamented, and you have not mourned.

@c    11:18. For John came neither eating nor drinking; and they say:  He hath
@c    a devil.

@c    11:19. The Son of man came eating and drinking, and they say:  Behold a
@c    man that is a glutton and a wine drinker, a friend of publicans and
@c    sinners.  And wisdom is justified by her children.

@c    11:20. Then began he to upbraid the cities wherein were done the most
@c    of his miracles, for that they had not done penance.

@c    11:21. Woe thee, Corozain, woe to thee, Bethsaida:  for if in Tyre and
@c    Sidon had been wrought the miracles that have been wrought in you, they
@c    had long ago done penance in sackcloth and ashes.

@c    11:22. But I say unto you, it shall be more tolerable for Tyre and
@c    Sidon in the day of judgment, than for you.

@c    11:23. And thou Capharnaum, shalt thou be exalted up to heaven?  thou
@c    shalt go down even unto hell.  For if in Sodom had been wrought the
@c    miracles that have been wrought in thee, perhaps it had remained unto
@c    this day.

@c    11:24. But I say unto you, that it shall be more tolerable for the land
@c    of Sodom in the day of judgment than for thee.

@c    11:25. At that time Jesus answered and said:  I confess to thee, O
@c    Father, Lord of Heaven and earth, because thou hast hid these things
@c    from the wise and prudent, and hast revealed them to little ones.

@c    11:26. Yea, Father:  for so hath it seemed good in thy sight.

@c    11:27. All things are delivered to me by my Father.  And no one knoweth
@c    the Son but the Father:  neither doth any one know the Father, but the
@c    Son, and he to whom it shall please the Son to reveal him.

@c    11:28. Come to me all you that labor and are burdened, and I will
@c    refresh you.

@c    11:29. Take up my yoke upon you, and learn of me, because I am meek,
@c    and humble of heart:  And you shall find rest to your souls.

@c    11:30. For my yoke is sweet and my burden light.



@c    Matthew Chapter 12


@c    Christ reproves the blindness of the Pharisees, and confutes their
@c    attributing his miracles to Satan.

@c    12:1. At that time Jesus went through the corn on the sabbath:  and his
@c    disciples being hungry, began to pluck the ears, and to eat.

@c    12:2. And the Pharisees seeing them, said to him:  Behold thy disciples
@c    do that which is not lawful to do on the sabbath days.

@c    12:3. But he said to them:  Have you not read what David did when he was
@c    hungry, and they that were with him:

@c    12:4. How he entered into the house of God, and did eat the loaves of
@c    proposition, which it was not lawful for him to eat, nor for them that
@c    were with him, but for the priests only?

@c    The loaves of proposition. . .So were called the twelve loaves which
@c    were placed before the sanctuary in the temple of God.

@c    12:5. Or have ye not read in the law, that on the sabbath days the
@c    priests in the temple break the sabbath, and are without blame?

@c    12:6. But I tell you that there is here a greater than the temple.

@c    12:7. And if you knew what this meaneth:  I will have mercy, and not
@c    sacrifice:  you would never have condemned the innocent.

@c    12:8. For the Son of man is Lord even of the sabbath.

@c    12:9. And when he had passed from thence, he came into their
@c    synagogues.

@c    12:10. And behold there was a man who had a withered hand, and they
@c    asked him, saying:  Is it lawful to heal on the sabbath days?  that they
@c    might accuse him.

@c    12:11. But he said to them:  What man shall there be among you, that
@c    hath one sheep:  and if the same fall into a pit on the sabbath day,
@c    will he not take hold on it and lift it up?

@c    12:12. How much better is a man than a sheep?  Therefore it is lawful to
@c    do a good deed on the sabbath days.

@c    12:13. Then he saith to the man:  Stretch forth thy hand; and he
@c    stretched it forth, and it was restored to health even as the other.

@c    12:14. And the Pharisees going out made a consultation against him, how
@c    they might destroy him.

@c    12:15. But Jesus knowing it, retired from thence:  and many followed
@c    him, and he healed them all.

@c    12:16. And he charged them that they should not make him known.

@c    12:17. That it might be fulfilled which was spoken by Isaias the
@c    prophet, saying:

@c    12:18. Behold my servant whom I have chosen, my beloved in whom my soul
@c    hath been well pleased.  I will put my spirit upon him, and he shall
@c    shew judgment to the Gentiles.

@c    12:19. He shall not contend, nor cry out, neither shall any man hear
@c    his voice in the streets.

@c    12:20. The bruised reed he shall not break:  and smoking flax he shall
@c    not extinguish:  till he send forth judgment unto victory.

@c    12:21. And in his name the Gentiles shall hope.

@c    12:22. Then was offered to him one possessed with a devil, blind and
@c    dumb:  and he healed him, so that he spoke and saw.

@c    12:23. And all the multitudes were amazed, and said:  Is not this the
@c    son of David?

@c    12:24. But the Pharisees hearing it, said:  This man casteth not out
@c    devils but by Beelzebub the prince of the devils.

@c    12:25. And Jesus knowing their thoughts, said to them:  Every kingdom
@c    divided against itself shall be made desolate:  and every city or house
@c    divided against itself shall not stand.

@c    12:26. And if Satan cast out Satan, he is divided against himself:  how
@c    then shall his kingdom stand?

@c    12:27. And if I by Beelzebub cast out devils, by whom do your children
@c    cast them out?  Therefore they shall be your judges.

@c    12:28. But if I by the Spirit of God cast out devils, then is the
@c    kingdom of God come upon you.

@c    12:29. Or how can any one enter into the house of the strong, and rifle
@c    his goods, unless he first bind the strong?  and then he will rifle his
@c    house.

@c    12:30. He that is not with me, is against me:  and he that gathereth not
@c    with me, scattereth.

@c    12:31. Therefore I say to you:  Every sin and blasphemy shall be
@c    forgiven men, but the blasphemy of the Spirit shall not be forgiven.

@c    The blasphemy of the Spirit. . .The sin here spoken of is that
@c    blasphemy, by which the Pharisees attributed the miracles of Christ,
@c    wrought by the Spirit of God, to Beelzebub the prince of devils.  Now
@c    this kind of sin is usually accompanied with so much obstinacy, and
@c    such wilful opposing the Spirit of God, and the known truth, that men
@c    who are guilty of it, are seldom or never converted:  and therefore are
@c    never forgiven, because they will not repent.  Otherwise there is no
@c    sin, which God cannot or will not forgive to such as sincerely repent,
@c    and have recourse to the keys of the church.

@c    12:32. And whosoever shall speak a word against the Son of man, it
@c    shall be forgiven him:  but he that shall speak against the Holy Ghost,
@c    it shall not be forgiven him neither in this world, nor in the world to
@c    come.

@c    Nor in the world to come. . .From these words St. Augustine (De Civ.
@c    Dei, lib. 21, c. 13) and St. Gregory (Dialog., 4, c. 39) gather, that
@c    some sins may be remitted in the world to come; and, consequently, that
@c    there is a purgatory or a middle place.

@c    12:33. Either make the tree good and its fruit good:  or make the tree
@c    evil, and its fruit evil.  For by the fruit the tree is known.

@c    12:34. O generation of vipers, how can you speak good things, whereas
@c    you are evil?  for out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaketh.

@c    12:35. A good man out of a good treasure bringeth forth good things:
@c    and an evil man out of an evil treasure bringeth forth evil things.

@c    12:36. But I say unto you, that every idle word that men shall speak,
@c    they shall render an account for it in the day of judgment.

@c    Every idle word. . .This shews there must be a place of temporal
@c    punishment hereafter where these slighter faults shall be punished.

@c    12:37. For by thy words thou shalt be justified, and by thy words thou
@c    shalt be condemned.

@c    12:38. Then some of the scribes and Pharisees answered him, saying:
@c    Master, we would see a sign from thee.

@c    A sign. . .That is, a miracle from heaven.  St. Luke 11. 16.

@c    12:39. Who answering said to them:  An evil and adulterous generation
@c    seeketh a sign:  and a sign shall not be given it, but the sign of Jonas
@c    the prophet.

@c    12:40. For as Jonas was in the whale's belly three days and three
@c    nights:  so shall the Son of man be in the heart of the earth three days
@c    and three nights.

@c    Three days, etc. . .Not complete days and nights; but part of three
@c    days, and three nights taken according to the way that the Hebrews
@c    counted their days and nights, viz., from evening to evening.

@c    12:41. The men of Ninive shall rise in judgment with this generation,
@c    and shall condemn it:  because they did penance at the preaching of
@c    Jonas.  And behold a greater than Jonas here.

@c    12:42. The queen of the south shall rise in judgment with this
@c    generation, and shall condemn it:  because she came from the ends of the
@c    earth to hear the wisdom of Solomon, and behold a greater than Solomon
@c    here.

@c    12:43. And when an unclean spirit is gone out of a man he walketh
@c    through dry places seeking rest, and findeth none.

@c    12:44. Then he saith:  I will return into my house from whence I came
@c    out.  And coming he findeth it empty, swept, and garnished.

@c    12:45. Then he goeth, and taketh with him seven other spirits more
@c    wicked than himself, and they enter in and dwell there:  and the last
@c    state of that man is made worse than the first.  So shall it be also to
@c    this wicked generation.

@c    12:46. As he was yet speaking to the multitudes, behold his mother and
@c    his brethren stood without, seeking to speak to him.

@c    12:47. And one said unto him:  Behold thy mother and thy brethren stand
@c    without, seeking thee.

@c    12:48. But he answering him that told him, said:  Who is my mother, and
@c    who are my brethren?

@c    Who is my mother?. . .This was not spoken by way of slighting his
@c    mother, but to shew that we are never to suffer ourselves to be taken
@c    from the service of God, by any inordinate affection to our earthly
@c    parents:  and that which our Lord chiefly regarded in his mother, was
@c    her doing the will of his Father in heaven.  It may also further allude
@c    to the reprobation of the Jews, his carnal kindred, and the election of
@c    the Gentiles.

@c    12:49. And stretching forth his hand towards his disciples, he said:
@c    Behold my mother and my brethren.

@c    12:50. For whosoever shall do the will of my Father, that is in heaven,
@c    he is my brother, and sister, and mother.



@c    Matthew Chapter 13


@c    The parables of the sower and the cockle:  of the mustardseed, etc.

@c    13:1. The same day Jesus going out of the house, sat by the sea side.

@c    13:2. And great multitudes were gathered together unto him, so that he
@c    went up into a boat and sat:  and all the multitude stood on the shore.

@c    13:3. And he spoke to them many things in parables, saying:  Behold the
@c    sower went forth to sow.

@c    13:4. And whilst he soweth some fell by the way side, and the birds of
@c    the air came and ate them up.

@c    13:5. And other some fell upon stony ground, where they had not much
@c    earth:  and they sprung up immediately, because they had no deepness of
@c    earth.

@c    13:6. And when the sun was up they were scorched:  and because they had
@c    not root, they withered away.

@c    13:7. And others fell among thorns:  and the thorns grew up and choked
@c    them.

@c    13:8. And others fell upon good ground:  and they brought forth fruit,
@c    some an hundred fold, some sixty fold, and some thirty fold.

@c    13:9. He that hath ears to hear, let him hear.

@c    13:10. And his disciples came and said to him:  Why speakest thou to
@c    them in parables?

@c    13:11. Who answered and said to them:  Because to you it is given to
@c    know the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven:  but to them it is not
@c    given.

@c    13:12. For he that hath, to him shall be given, and he shall abound:
@c    but he that hath not, from him shall be taken away that also which he
@c    hath.

@c    13:13. Therefore do I speak to them in parables:  because seeing they
@c    see not, and hearing they hear not, neither do they understand.

@c    13:14. And the prophecy of Isaias is fulfilled in them, who saith:  By
@c    hearing you shall hear, and shall not understand:  and seeing you shall
@c    see, and shall not perceive.

@c    13:15. For the heart of this people is grown gross, and with their ears
@c    they have been dull of hearing, and their eyes they have shut:  lest at
@c    any time they should see with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and
@c    understand with their heart, and be converted, and I should heal them.

@c    13:16. But blessed are your eyes, because they see, and your ears,
@c    because they hear.

@c    13:17. For, amen, I say to you, many prophets and just men have desired
@c    to see the things that you see, and have not seen them:  and to hear the
@c    things that you hear and have not heard them.

@c    13:18. Hear you therefore the parable of the sower.

@c    13:19. When any one heareth the word of the kingdom, and understandeth
@c    it not, there cometh the wicked one, and catcheth away that which was
@c    sown in his heart:  this is he that received the seed by the way side.

@c    13:20. And he that received the seed upon stony ground, is he that
@c    heareth the word, and immediately receiveth it with joy.

@c    13:21. Yet hath he not root in himself, but is only for a time:  and
@c    when there ariseth tribulation and persecution because of the word, he
@c    is presently scandalized.

@c    13:22. And he that received the seed among thorns, is he that heareth
@c    the word, and the care of this world and the deceitfulness of riches
@c    choketh up the word, and he becometh fruitless.

@c    13:23. But he that received the seed upon good ground, is he that
@c    heareth the word, and understandeth, and beareth fruit, and yieldeth
@c    the one an hundredfold, and another sixty, and another thirty.

@c    13:24. Another parable he proposed to them, saying:  The kingdom of
@c    heaven is likened to a man that sowed good seed in his field.

@c    13:25. But while men were asleep, his enemy came and oversowed cockle
@c    among the wheat and went his way.

@c    13:26. And when the blade was sprung up, and had brought forth fruit,
@c    then appeared also the cockle.

@c    13:27. And the servants of the good man of the house coming said to
@c    him.  Sir, didst thou not sow good seed in thy field?  Whence then hath
@c    it cockle?

@c    13:28. And he said to them:  An enemy hath done this.  And the servants
@c    said to him:  Wilt thou that we go and gather it up?

@c    13:29. And he said:  No, lest perhaps gathering up the cockle, you root
@c    up the wheat also together with it.

@c    13:30. Suffer both to grow until the harvest, and in the time of the
@c    harvest I will say to the reapers:  Gather up first the cockle, and bind
@c    it into bundles to burn, but the wheat gather ye into my barn.

@c    13:31. Another parable he proposed unto them, saying:  The kingdom of
@c    heaven is like to a grain of mustard seed, which a man took and sowed
@c    in his field.

@c    13:32. Which is the least indeed of all seeds; but when it is grown up,
@c    it is greater than all herbs, and becometh a tree, so that the birds of
@c    the air come, and dwell in the branches thereof.

@c    13:33. Another parable he spoke to them:  The kingdom of heaven is like
@c    to leaven, which a woman took and hid in three measures of meal, until
@c    the whole was leavened.

@c    13:34. All these things Jesus spoke in parables to the multitudes:  and
@c    without parables he did not speak to them.

@c    13:35. That it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the prophet,
@c    saying:  I will open my mouth in parables, I will utter things hidden
@c    from the foundation of the world.

@c    13:36. Then having sent away the multitudes, he came into the house,
@c    and his disciples came to him, saying:  Expound to us the parable of the
@c    cockle of the field.

@c    13:37. Who made answer and said to them:  He that soweth the good seed
@c    is the Son of man.

@c    13:38. And the field is the world.  And the good seed are the children
@c    of the kingdom.  And the cockle are the children of the wicked one.

@c    13:39. And the enemy that sowed them, is the devil.  But the harvest is
@c    the end of the world.  And the reapers are the angels.

@c    13:40. Even as cockle therefore is gathered up, and burnt with fire:  so
@c    shall it be at the end of the world.

@c    13:41. The Son of man shall send his angels, and they shall gather out
@c    of his kingdom all scandals, and them that work iniquity.

@c    13:42. And shall cast them into the furnace of fire:  there shall be
@c    weeping and gnashing of teeth.

@c    13:43. Then shall the just shine as the sun, in the kingdom of their
@c    Father.  He that hath ears to hear, let him hear.

@c    13:44. The kingdom of heaven is like unto a treasure hidden in a field.
@c    Which a man having found, hid it, and for joy thereof goeth, and
@c    selleth all that he hath, and buyeth that field.

@c    13:45. Again the kingdom of heaven is like to a merchant seeking good
@c    pearls.

@c    13:46. Who when he had found one pearl of great price, went his way,
@c    and sold all that he had, and bought it.

@c    13:47. Again the kingdom of heaven is like to a net cast into the sea,
@c    and gathering together of all kinds of fishes.

@c    13:48. Which, when it was filled, they drew out, and sitting by the
@c    shore, they chose out the good into vessels, but the bad they cast
@c    forth.

@c    13:49. So shall it be at the end of the world.  The angels shall go out,
@c    and shall separate the wicked from among the just.

@c    13:50. And shall cast them into the furnace of fire:  there shall be
@c    weeping and gnashing of teeth.

@c    13:51. Have ye understood all these things?  They say to him:  Yes.

@c    13:52. He said unto them:  Therefore every scribe instructed in the
@c    kingdom of heaven, is like to a man that is a householder, who bringeth
@c    forth out of his treasure new things and old.

@c    13:53. And it came to pass:  when Jesus had finished these parables, he
@c    passed from thence.

@c    13:54. And coming into his own country, he taught them in their
@c    synagogues, so that they wondered and said:  How came this man by this
@c    wisdom and miracles?

@c    13:55. Is not this the carpenter's son?  Is not his mother called Mary,
@c    and his brethren James, and Joseph, and Simon, and Jude:

@c    His brethren. . .These were the children of Mary the wife of Cleophas,
@c    sister to our Blessed Lady, (St. Matt. 27. 56; St. John 19. 25,) and
@c    therefore, according to the usual style of the Scripture, they were
@c    called brethren, that is, near relations to our Saviour.

@c    13:56. And his sisters, are they not all with us?  Whence therefore hath
@c    he all these things?

@c    13:57. And they were scandalized in his regard.  But Jesus said to them:
@c    A prophet is not without honour, save in his own country, and in his
@c    own house.

@c    13:58. And he wrought not many miracles there, because of their
@c    unbelief.



@c    Matthew Chapter 14


@c    Herod puts John to death.  Christ feeds five thousand in the desert.  He
@c    walks upon the sea, and heals all the diseased with the touch of his
@c    garment.

@c    14:1. At that time Herod the Tetrarch heard the fame of Jesus.

@c    Tetrarch. . .This word, derived from the Greek, signifies one that rules
@c    over the fourth part of a kingdom:  as Herod then ruled over Galilee,
@c    which was but the fourth part of the kingdom of his father.

@c    14:2. And he said to his servants:  This is John the Baptist:  he is
@c    risen from the dead, and therefore mighty works shew forth themselves
@c    in him.

@c    14:3. For Herod had apprehended John and bound him, and put him into
@c    prison, because of Herodias, his brother's wife.

@c    14:4. For John said to him:  It is not lawful for thee to have her.

@c    14:5. And having a mind to put him to death, he feared the people:
@c    because they esteemed him as a prophet.

@c    14:6. But on Herod's birthday, the daughter of Herodias danced before
@c    them:  and pleased Herod.

@c    14:7. Whereupon he promised with an oath, to give her whatsoever she
@c    would ask of him.

@c    14:8. But she being instructed before by her mother, said:  Give me here
@c    in a dish the head of John the Baptist.

@c    14:9. And the king was struck sad:  yet because of his oath, and for
@c    them that sat with him at table, he commanded it to be given.

@c    14:10. And he sent, and beheaded John in the prison.

@c    14:11. And his head was brought in a dish:  and it was given to the
@c    damsel, and she brought it to her mother.

@c    14:12. And his disciples came and took the body, and buried it, and
@c    came and told Jesus.

@c    14:13. Which when Jesus had heard, he retired from thence by a boat,
@c    into a desert place apart, and the multitudes having heard of it,
@c    followed him on foot out of the cities.

@c    14:14. And he coming forth saw a great multitude, and had compassion on
@c    them, and healed their sick.

@c    14:15. And when it was evening, his disciples came to him, saying:  This
@c    is a desert place, and the hour is now passed:  send away the
@c    multitudes, that going into the towns, they may buy themselves
@c    victuals.

@c    14:16. But Jesus said to them, They have no need to go:  give you them
@c    to eat.

@c    14:17. They answered him:  We have not here, but five loaves, and two
@c    fishes.

@c    14:18. Who said to them:  Bring them hither to me.

@c    14:19. And when he had commanded the multitude to sit down upon the
@c    grass, he took the five loaves and the two fishes, and looking up to
@c    heaven, he blessed, and brake, and gave the loaves to his disciples,
@c    and the disciples to the multitudes.

@c    14:20. And they did all eat, and were filled.  And they took up what
@c    remained, twelve full baskets of fragments.

@c    14:21. And the number of them that did eat, was five thousand men,
@c    besides women and children.

@c    14:22. And forthwith Jesus obliged his disciples to go up into the
@c    boat, and to go before him over the water, till he dismissed the
@c    people.

@c    14:23. And having dismissed the multitude, he went into a mountain
@c    alone to pray.  And when it was evening, he was there alone.

@c    14:24. But the boat in the midst of the sea was tossed with the waves:
@c    for the wind was contrary.

@c    14:25. And in the fourth watch of the night, he came to them walking
@c    upon the sea.

@c    14:26. And they seeing him walking upon the sea, were troubled, saying:
@c    It is an apparition.  And they cried out for fear.

@c    14:27. And immediately Jesus spoke to them, saying:  Be of good heart:
@c    it is I, fear ye not.

@c    14:28. And Peter making answer, said:  Lord, if it be thou, bid me come
@c    to thee upon the waters.

@c    14:29. And he said:  Come.  And Peter going down out of the boat walked
@c    upon the water to come to Jesus.

@c    14:30. But seeing the wind strong, he was afraid:  and when he began to
@c    sink, he cried out, saying:  Lord, save me.

@c    14:31. And immediately Jesus stretching forth his hand took hold of
@c    him, and said to him:  O thou of little faith, why didst thou doubt?

@c    14:32. And when they were come up into the boat, the wind ceased.

@c    14:33. And they that were in the boat came and adored him, saying:
@c    Indeed thou art the Son of God.

@c    14:34. And having passed the water, they came into the country of
@c    Genesar.

@c    14:35. And when the men of that place had knowledge of him, they sent
@c    into all that country, and brought to him all that were diseased.

@c    14:36. And they besought him that they might touch but the hem of his
@c    garment.  And as many as touched, were made whole.



@c    Matthew Chapter 15


@c    Christ reproves the Scribes.  He cures the daughter of the woman of
@c    Canaan:  and many others:  and feeds four thousand with seven loaves.

@c    15:1. Then came to him from Jerusalem scribes and Pharisees, saying:

@c    15:2. Why do thy disciples transgress the tradition of the ancients?
@c    For they wash not their hands when they eat bread.

@c    15:3. But he answering, said to them:  Why do you also transgress the
@c    commandment of God for your tradition?  For God said:

@c    15:4. Honour thy father and mother:  And:  He that shall curse father or
@c    mother, let him die the death.

@c    15:5. But you say:  Whosoever shall say to father or mother, The gift
@c    whatsoever proceedeth from me, shall profit thee.

@c    The gift, etc. . .That is, the offering that I shall make to God, shall
@c    be instead of that which should be expended for thy profit.  This
@c    tradition of the Pharisees was calculated to enrich themselves; by
@c    exempting children from giving any further assistance to their parents,
@c    if they once offered to the temple and the priests, that which should
@c    have been the support of their parents.  But this was a violation of the
@c    law of God, and of nature, which our Saviour here condemns.

@c    15:6. And he shall not honour his father or his mother:  and you have
@c    made void the commandment of God for your tradition.

@c    15:7. Hypocrites, well hath Isaias prophesied of you, saying:

@c    15:8. This people honoureth me with their lips:  but their heart is far
@c    from me.

@c    15:9. And in vain do they worship me, teaching doctrines and
@c    commandments of men.

@c    Commandments of men. . .The doctrines and commandments here reprehended
@c    are such as are either contrary to the law of God, (as that of
@c    neglecting parents, under pretence of giving to God,) or at least are
@c    frivolous, unprofitable, and no ways conducing to true piety, as that
@c    of often washing hands, etc., without regard to the purity of the
@c    heart.  But as to the rules and ordinances of the holy church, touching
@c    fasts, festivals, etc., these are no ways repugnant to, but highly
@c    agreeable to God's holy word, and all Christian piety:  neither are they
@c    to be counted among the doctrines and commandments of men; because they
@c    proceed not from mere human authority; but from that which Christ has
@c    established in his church; whose pastors he has commanded us to hear
@c    and obey, even as himself.  St. Luke 10. 16; St. Matt. 18. 17.

@c    15:10. And having called together the multitudes unto him, he said to
@c    them:  Hear ye and understand.

@c    15:11. Not that which goeth into the mouth defileth a man:  but what
@c    cometh out of the mouth, this defileth a man.

@c    Not that which goeth into, etc. . .No uncleanness in meat, nor any dirt
@c    contracted by eating it with unwashed hands, can defile the soul:  but
@c    sin alone; or a disobedience of the heart to the ordinance and will of
@c    God.  And thus when Adam took the forbidden fruit, it was not the apple,
@c    which entered into the mouth, but the disobedience to the law of God
@c    which defiled him.  The same is to be said if a Jew, in the time of the
@c    old law, had eaten swine's flesh; or a Christian convert, in the days
@c    of the apostles, contrary to their ordinance, had eaten blood; or if
@c    any of the faithful at present should transgress the ordinance of God's
@c    church, by breaking the fasts:  for in all these cases the soul would be
@c    defiled; not indeed by that which goeth into the mouth; but by the
@c    disobedience of the heart, in wilfully transgressing the ordinance of
@c    God, or of those who have their authority from him.

@c    15:12. Then came his disciples, and said to him:  Dost thou know that
@c    the Pharisees, when they heard this word, were scandalized?

@c    15:13. But he answering, said:  Every plant which my heavenly Father
@c    hath not planted, shall be rooted up.

@c    15:14. Let them alone:  they are blind, and leaders of the blind.  And if
@c    the blind lead the blind, both fall into the pit.

@c    15:15. And Peter answering, said to him:  Expound to us this parable.

@c    15:16. But he said:  Are you also yet without understanding?

@c    15:17. Do you not understand, that whatsoever entereth into the mouth,
@c    goeth into the belly, and is cast out into the privy?

@c    15:18. But the things which proceed out of the mouth, come forth from
@c    the heart, and those things defile a man.

@c    15:19. For from the heart come forth evil thoughts, murders,
@c    adulteries, fornications, thefts, false testimonies, blasphemies.

@c    15:20. These are the things that defile a man.  But to eat with unwashed
@c    hands doth not defile a man.

@c    15:21. And Jesus went from thence, and retired into the coast of Tyre
@c    and Sidon.

@c    15:22. And behold a woman of Canaan who came out of those coasts,
@c    crying out, said to him:  Have mercy on me, O Lord, thou son of David:
@c    my daughter is grievously troubled by a devil.

@c    15:23. Who answered her not a word.  And his disciples came and besought
@c    him, saying:  Send her away, for she crieth after us:

@c    15:24. And he answering, said:  I was not sent but to the sheep, that
@c    are lost of the house of Israel.

@c    15:25. But she came and adored him, saying:  Lord, help me.

@c    15:26. Who answering, said:  It is not good to take the bread of the
@c    children, and to cast it to the dogs.

@c    15:27. But she said:  Yea, Lord; for the whelps also eat of the crumbs
@c    that fall from the table of their masters.

@c    15:28. Then Jesus answering, said to her:  O woman, great is thy faith:
@c    be it done to thee as thou wilt:  and her daughter was cured from that
@c    hour.

@c    15:29. And when Jesus had passed away from thence, he came nigh the sea
@c    of Galilee:  and going up into a mountain, he sat there.

@c    15:30. And there came to him great multitudes, having with them the
@c    dumb, the blind, the lame, the maimed, and many others:  and they cast
@c    them down at his feet, and he healed them:

@c    15:31. So that the multitudes marvelled seeing the dumb speak, the lame
@c    walk, the blind see:  and they glorified the God of Israel.

@c    15:32. And Jesus called together his disciples, and said:  I have
@c    compassion on the multitudes, because they continue with me now three
@c    days, and have not what to eat, and I will not send them away fasting,
@c    lest they faint in the way.

@c    15:33. And the disciples say unto him:  Whence then should we have so
@c    many loaves in the desert, as to fill so great a multitude?

@c    15:34. And Jesus said to them:  How many loaves have you?  But they said:
@c    Seven, and a few little fishes.

@c    15:35. And he commanded the multitude to sit down upon the ground.

@c    15:36. And taking the seven loaves and the fishes, and giving thanks,
@c    he brake, and gave to his disciples, and the disciples gave to the
@c    people.

@c    15:37. And they did all eat, and had their fill.  And they took up seven
@c    baskets full, of what remained of the fragments.

@c    15:38. And they that did eat, were four thousand men, beside children
@c    and women.

@c    15:39. And having dismissed the multitude, he went up into a boat, and
@c    came into the coasts of Magedan.



@c    Matthew Chapter 16


@c    Christ refuses to shew the Pharisees a sign from heaven.  Peter's
@c    confession is rewarded.  He is rebuked for opposing Christ's passion.
@c    All his followers must deny themselves.

@c    16:1. And there came to him the Pharisees and Sadducees tempting:  and
@c    they asked him to shew them a sign from heaven.

@c    16:2. But he answered and said to them:  When it is evening, you say, It
@c    will be fair weather, for the sky is red.

@c    16:3. And in the morning:  To day there will be a storm, for the sky is
@c    red and lowering.  You know then how to discern the face of the sky:  and
@c    can you not know the signs of the times?

@c    16:4. A wicked and adulterous generation seeketh after a sign:  and a
@c    sign shall not be given it, but the sign of Jonas the prophet.  And he
@c    left them, and went away.

@c    16:5. And when his disciples were come over the water, they had
@c    forgotten to take bread.

@c    16:6. Who said to them:  Take heed and beware of the leaven of the
@c    Pharisees and Sadducees.

@c    16:7. But they thought within themselves, saying:  Because we have taken
@c    no bread.

@c    16:8. And Jesus knowing it, said:  Why do you think within yourselves, O
@c    ye of little faith, for that you have no bread?

@c    16:9. Do you not yet understand, neither do you remember the five
@c    loaves among five thousand men, and how many baskets you took up?

@c    16:10. Nor the seven loaves, among four thousand men, and how many
@c    baskets you took up?

@c    16:11. Why do you not understand that it was not concerning bread I
@c    said to you:  Beware of the leaven of the Pharisees and Sadducees?

@c    16:12. Then they understood that he said not that they should beware of
@c    the leaven of bread, but of the doctrine of the Pharisees and
@c    Sadducees.

@c    16:13. And Jesus came into the quarters of Cesarea Philippi:  and he
@c    asked his disciples, saying:  Whom do men say that the Son of man is?

@c    16:14. But they said:  Some John the Baptist, and other some Elias, and
@c    others Jeremias, or one of the prophets.

@c    16:15. Jesus saith to them:  But whom do you say that I am?

@c    16:16. Simon Peter answered and said:  Thou art Christ, the Son of the
@c    living God.

@c    16:17. And Jesus answering said to him:  Blessed art thou, Simon
@c    Bar-Jona:  because flesh and blood hath not revealed it to thee, but my
@c    Father who is in heaven.

@c    16:18. And I say to thee:  That thou art Peter; and upon this rock I
@c    will build my church, and the gates of hell shall not prevail against
@c    it.

@c    Thou art Peter, etc. . .As St. Peter, by divine revelation, here made a
@c    solemn profession of his faith of the divinity of Christ; so in
@c    recompense of this faith and profession, our Lord here declares to him
@c    the dignity to which he is pleased to raise him:  viz., that he to whom
@c    he had already given the name of Peter, signifying a rock, St. John 1.
@c    42, should be a rock indeed, of invincible strength, for the support of
@c    the building of the church; in which building he should be, next to
@c    Christ himself, the chief foundation stone, in quality of chief pastor,
@c    ruler, and governor; and should have accordingly all fulness of
@c    ecclesiastical power, signified by the keys of the kingdom of heaven.
@c    Upon this rock, etc. . .The words of Christ to Peter, spoken in the
@c    vulgar language of the Jews which our Lord made use of, were the same
@c    as if he had said in English, Thou art a Rock, and upon this rock I
@c    will build my church.  So that, by the plain course of the words, Peter
@c    is here declared to be the rock, upon which the church was to be built:
@c    Christ himself being both the principal foundation and founder of the
@c    same.  Where also note, that Christ, by building his house, that is, his
@c    church, upon a rock, has thereby secured it against all storms and
@c    floods, like the wise builder, St. Matt. 7. 24, 25. The gates of hell,
@c    etc. . .That is, the powers of darkness, and whatever Satan can do,
@c    either by himself, or his agents.  For as the church is here likened to
@c    a house, or fortress, built on a rock; so the adverse powers are
@c    likened to a contrary house or fortress, the gates of which, that is,
@c    the whole strength, and all the efforts it can make, will never be able
@c    to prevail over the city or church of Christ.  By this promise we are
@c    fully assured, that neither idolatry, heresy, nor any pernicious error
@c    whatsoever shall at any time prevail over the church of Christ.

@c    16:19. And I will give to thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven.  And
@c    whatsoever thou shalt bind upon earth, it shall be bound also in
@c    heaven:  and whatsoever thou shalt loose on earth, it shall be loosed
@c    also in heaven.

@c    Loose on earth. . .The loosing the bands of temporal punishments due to
@c    sins, is called an indulgence; the power of which is here granted.

@c    16:20. Then he commanded his disciples, that they should tell no one
@c    that he was Jesus the Christ.

@c    16:21. From that time Jesus began to shew to his disciples, that he
@c    must go to Jerusalem, and suffer many things from the ancients and
@c    scribes and chief priests, and be put to death, and the third day rise
@c    again.

@c    16:22. And Peter taking him, began to rebuke him, saying:  Lord, be it
@c    far from thee, this shall not be unto thee.

@c    And Peter taking him. . .That is, taking him aside, out of a tender
@c    love, respect and zeal for his Lord and Master's honour, began to
@c    expostulate with him, as it were to rebuke him, saying, Lord, far be it
@c    from thee to suffer death; but the Lord said to Peter, ver. 23, Go
@c    behind me, Satan.  These words may signify, Begone from me; but the holy
@c    Fathers expound them otherwise, that is, come after me, or follow me;
@c    and by these words the Lord would have Peter to follow him in his
@c    suffering, and not to oppose the divine will by contradiction; for the
@c    word satan means in Hebrew an adversary, or one that opposes.

@c    16:23. Who turning, said to Peter:  Go behind me, Satan, thou art a
@c    scandal unto me:  because thou savourest not the things that are of God,
@c    but the things that are of men.

@c    16:24. Then Jesus said to his disciples:  If any man will come after me,
@c    let him deny himself, and take up his cross, and follow me.

@c    16:25. For he that will save his life, shall lose it:  and he that shall
@c    lose his life for my sake, shall find it.

@c    16:26. For what doth it profit a man, if he gain the whole world and
@c    suffer the loss of his own soul?  Or what exchange shall a man give for
@c    his soul?

@c    16:27. For the Son of man shall come in the glory of his Father with
@c    his angels:  and then will he render to every man according to his
@c    works.

@c    16:28. Amen I say to you, there are some of them that stand here, that
@c    shall not taste death, till they see the Son of man coming in his
@c    kingdom.



@c    Matthew Chapter 17


@c    The Transfiguration of Christ:  He cures the lunatic child:  foretells
@c    his passion; and pays the didrachma.

@c    17:1. And after six days Jesus taketh unto him Peter and James, and
@c    John his brother, and bringeth them up into a high mountain apart:

@c    17:2. And he was transfigured before them.  And his face did shine as
@c    the sun:  and his garments became white as snow.

@c    17:3. And behold there appeared to them Moses and Elias talking with
@c    him.

@c    17:4. And Peter answering, said to Jesus:  Lord, it is good for us to be
@c    here:  if thou wilt, let us make here three tabernacles, one for thee,
@c    and one for Moses, and one for Elias.

@c    17:5. And as he was yet speaking, behold a bright cloud overshadowed
@c    them.  And lo a voice out of the cloud, saying:  This is my beloved Son,
@c    in whom I am well pleased:  hear ye him.

@c    17:6. And the disciples hearing fell upon their face, and were very
@c    much afraid.

@c    17:7. And Jesus came and touched them:  and said to them:  Arise, and
@c    fear not.

@c    17:8. And they lifting up their eyes, saw no one, but only Jesus.

@c    17:9. And as they came down from the mountain, Jesus charged them,
@c    saying:  Tell the vision to no man, till the Son of man be risen from
@c    the dead.

@c    17:10. And his disciples asked him, saying:  Why then do the scribes say
@c    that Elias must come first?

@c    17:11. But he answering, said to them:  Elias indeed shall come, and
@c    restore all things.

@c    17:12. But I say to you, that Elias is already come, and they knew him
@c    not, But have done unto him whatsoever they had a mind.  So also the Son
@c    of man shall suffer from them.

@c    17:13. Then the disciples understood, that he had spoken to them of
@c    John the Baptist.

@c    17:14. And when he was come to the multitude, there came to him a man
@c    falling down on his knees before him saying:  Lord, have pity on my son,
@c    for he is a lunatic, and suffereth much:  for he falleth often into the
@c    fire, and often into the water.

@c    17:15. And I brought him to thy disciples, and they could not cure him.

@c    17:16. Then Jesus answered and said:  O unbelieving and perverse
@c    generation, how long shall I be with you?  How long shall I suffer you?
@c    Bring him hither to me.

@c    17:17. And Jesus rebuked him, and the devil went out of him, and the
@c    child was cured from that hour.

@c    17:18. Then came the disciples to Jesus secretly, and said:  Why could
@c    not we cast him out?

@c    17:19. Jesus said to them:  Because of your unbelief.  For, amen I say to
@c    you, if you have faith as a grain of mustard seed, you shall say to
@c    this mountain:  Remove from hence hither, and it shall remove:  and
@c    nothing shall be impossible to you.

@c    As a grain of mustard seed. . .That is, a perfect faith; which in its
@c    properties, and its fruits, resembles the grain of mustard seed, in the
@c    parable, chap. 13. 31.

@c    17:20. But this kind is not cast out but by prayer and fasting.

@c    17:21. And when they abode together in Galilee, Jesus said to them:  The
@c    Son of man shall be betrayed into the hands of men:

@c    17:22. And they shall kill him, and the third day he shall rise again.
@c    And they were troubled exceedingly.

@c    17:23. And when they were come to Capharnaum, they that received the
@c    didrachmas, came to Peter, and said to him:  Doth not your master pay
@c    the didrachma?

@c    The didrachmas. . .A didrachma was half a sicle, or half a stater; that
@c    is, about 15d. English:  which was a tax laid upon every head for the
@c    service of the temple.

@c    17:24. He said:  Yes.  And when he was come into the house, Jesus
@c    prevented him, saying:  What is thy opinion, Simon?  The kings of the
@c    earth, of whom do they receive tribute or custom, of their own
@c    children, or of strangers?

@c    17:25. And he said:  Of strangers.  Jesus said to him:  Then the children
@c    are free.

@c    17:26. But that we may not scandalize them, go to the sea, and cast in
@c    a hook:  and that fish which shall first come up, take:  and when thou
@c    hast opened it's mouth, thou shalt find a stater:  take that, and give
@c    it to them for me and thee.



@c    Matthew Chapter 18


@c    Christ teaches humility, to beware of scandal, and to flee the
@c    occasions of sin:  to denounce to the church incorrigible sinners, and
@c    to look upon such as refuse to hear the church as heathens.  He promises
@c    to his disciples the power of binding and loosing:  and that he will be
@c    in the midst of their assemblies.  No forgiveness for them that will not
@c    forgive.

@c    18:1. At that hour the disciples came to Jesus, saying:  Who, thinkest
@c    thou, is the greater in the kingdom of heaven?

@c    18:2. And Jesus, calling unto him a little child, set him in the midst
@c    of them.

@c    18:3. And said:  amen I say to you, unless you be converted, and become
@c    as little children, you shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven.

@c    18:4. Whosoever therefore shall humble himself as this little child, he
@c    is the greater in the kingdom of heaven.

@c    18:5. And he that shall receive one such little child in my name,
@c    receiveth me.

@c    18:6. But he that shall scandalize one of these little ones that
@c    believe in me, it were better for him that a millstone should be hanged
@c    about his neck, and that he should be drowned in the depth of the sea.

@c    Shall scandalize. . .That is, shall put a stumblingblock in their way,
@c    and cause them to fall into sin.

@c    18:7. Woe to the world because of scandals.  For it must needs be that
@c    scandals come:  but nevertheless woe to that man by whom the scandal
@c    cometh.

@c    It must needs be, etc. . .Viz., considering the wickedness and
@c    corruption of the world.

@c    18:8. And if thy hand, or thy foot, scandalize thee, cut it off, and
@c    cast it from thee.  It is better for thee to go into life maimed or
@c    lame, than having two hands or two feet, to be cast into everlasting
@c    fire.

@c    Scandalize thee. . .That is, cause thee to offend.

@c    18:9. And if thy eye scandalize thee, pluck it out, and cast it from
@c    thee.  It is better for thee having one eye to enter into life, than
@c    having two eyes to be cast into hell fire.

@c    18:10. See that you despise not one of these little ones:  for I say to
@c    you, that their angels in heaven always see the face of my Father who
@c    is in heaven.

@c    18:11. For the Son of man is come to save that which was lost.

@c    18:12. What think you?  If a man have an hundred sheep, and one of them
@c    should go astray:  doth he not leave the ninety-nine in the mountains,
@c    and goeth to seek that which is gone astray?

@c    18:13. And if it so be that he find it:  Amen I say to you, he rejoiceth
@c    more for that, than for the ninety-nine that went not astray.

@c    18:14. Even so it is not the will of your Father, who is in heaven,
@c    that one of these little ones should perish.

@c    18:15. But if thy brother shall offend against thee, go, and rebuke him
@c    between thee and him alone.  If he shall hear thee, thou shalt gain thy
@c    brother.

@c    18:16. And if he will not hear thee, take with thee one or two more:
@c    that in the mouth of two or three witnesses every word may stand.

@c    18:17. And if he will not hear them:  tell the church.  And if he will
@c    not hear the church, let him be to thee as the heathen and publican.

@c    18:18. Amen I say to you, whatsoever you shall bind upon earth, shall
@c    be bound also in heaven:  and whatsoever you shall loose upon earth,
@c    shall be loosed also in heaven.

@c    18:19. Again I say to you, that if two of you shall consent upon earth,
@c    concerning anything whatsoever they shall ask, it shall be done to them
@c    by my Father who is in heaven.

@c    18:20. For where there are two or three gathered together in my name,
@c    there am I in the midst of them.

@c    There am I in the midst of them. . .This is understood of such
@c    assemblies only as are gathered in the name and authority of Christ;
@c    and in unity of the church of Christ.  St. Cyprian, De Unitate
@c    Ecclesiae.

@c    18:21. Then came Peter unto him and said:  Lord, how often shall my
@c    brother offend against me, and I forgive him?  till seven times?

@c    18:22. Jesus saith to him:  I say not to thee, till seven times; but
@c    till seventy times seven times.

@c    18:23. Therefore is the kingdom of heaven likened to a king, who would
@c    take an account of his servants.

@c    18:24. And when he had begun to take the account, one as brought to
@c    him, that owed him ten thousand talents.

@c    Talents. . .A talent was seven hundred and fifty ounces of silver, which
@c    at the rate of five shillings to the ounce is a hundred and
@c    eighty-seven pounds ten shillings sterling.

@c    18:25. And as he had not wherewith to pay it, his lord commanded that
@c    he should be sold, and his wife and children, and all that he had, and
@c    payment to be made.

@c    18:26. But that servant falling down, besought him, saying:  Have
@c    patience with me, and I will pay thee all.

@c    18:27. And the lord of that servant being moved with pity, let him go
@c    and forgave him the debt.

@c    18:28. But when that servant was gone out, he found one of his
@c    fellow-servants that owed him an hundred pence:  and laying hold of him,
@c    he throttled him, saying:  Pay what thou owest.

@c    Pence. . .The Roman penny was the eighth part of an ounce, that is,
@c    about sevenpence half-penny English.

@c    18:29. And his fellow-servant falling down, besought him, saying:  Have
@c    patience with me, and I will pay thee all.

@c    18:30. And he would not:  but went and cast him into prison, till he
@c    paid the debt.

@c    18:31. Now his fellow servants seeing what was done, were very much
@c    grieved, and they came, and told their lord all that was done.

@c    18:32. Then his lord called him:  and said to him:  Thou wicked servant,
@c    I forgave thee all the debt, because thou besoughtest me:

@c    18:33. Shouldst not thou then have had compassion also on thy fellow
@c    servant, even as I had compassion on thee?

@c    18:34. And his lord being angry, delivered him to the torturers until
@c    he paid all the debt.

@c    18:35. So also shall my heavenly Father do to you, if you forgive not
@c    every one his brother from your hearts.



@c    Matthew Chapter 19


@c    Christ declares matrimony to be indissoluble:  he recommends the making
@c    one's self an eunuch for the kingdom of heaven; and parting with all
@c    things for him.  He shews the danger of riches, and the reward of
@c    leaving all to follow him.

@c    19:1. And it came to pass when Jesus had ended these words, he departed
@c    from Galilee and came into the coasts of Judea, beyond Jordan.

@c    19:2. And great multitudes followed him:  and he healed them there.

@c    19:3. And there came to him the Pharisees tempting him, saying:  Is it
@c    lawful for a man to put away his wife for every cause?

@c    19:4. Who answering, said to them:  Have ye not read, that he who made
@c    man from the beginning, made them male and female?  And he said:

@c    19:5. For this cause shall a man leave father and mother, and shall
@c    cleave to his wife, and they two shall be in one flesh.

@c    19:6. Therefore now they are not two, but one flesh.  What therefore God
@c    hath joined together, let no man put asunder.

@c    19:7. They say to him:  Why then did Moses command to give a bill of
@c    divorce, and to put away?

@c    19:8. He saith to them:  Because Moses by reason of the hardness of your
@c    heart permitted you to put away your wives:  but from the beginning it
@c    was not so.

@c    19:9. And I say to you, that whosoever shall put away his wife, except
@c    it be for fornication, and shall marry another, committeth adultery:
@c    and he that shall marry her that is put away, committeth adultery.

@c    Except it be, etc. . .In the case of fornication, that is, of adultery,
@c    the wife may be put away:  but even then the husband cannot marry
@c    another as long as the wife is living.

@c    19:10. His disciples say unto him:  If the case of a man with his wife
@c    be so, it is not expedient to marry.

@c    19:11. Who said to them:  All men take not this word, but they to whom
@c    it is given.

@c    All men take not this word. . .That is, all receive not the gift of
@c    living singly and chastely, unless they pray for the grace of God to
@c    enable them to live so, and for some it may be necessary to that end to
@c    fast as well as pray:  and to those it is given from above.

@c    19:12. For there are eunuchs, who were born so from their mothers womb:
@c    and there are eunuchs, who were made so by men:  and there are eunuchs,
@c    who have made themselves eunuchs for the kingdom of heaven.  He that can
@c    take, let him take it.

@c    There are eunuchs, who have made themselves eunuchs, for the kingdom of
@c    heaven. . .This text is not to be taken in the literal sense; but means,
@c    that there are such, who have taken a firm and commendable resolution
@c    of leading a single and chaste life, in order to serve God in a more
@c    perfect state than those who marry:  as St. Paul clearly shews.  1 Cor.
@c    7. 37, 38.

@c    19:13. Then were little children presented to him, that he should
@c    impose hands upon them and pray.  And the disciples rebuked them.

@c    19:14. But Jesus said to them:  Suffer the little children, and forbid
@c    them not to come to me:  for the kingdom of heaven is for such.

@c    19:15. And when he had imposed hands upon them, he departed from
@c    thence.

@c    19:16. And behold one came and said to him:  Good master, what good
@c    shall I do that I may have life everlasting?

@c    19:17. Who said to him:  Why askest thou me concerning good?  One is
@c    good, God.  But if thou wilt enter into life, keep the commandments.

@c    19:18. He said to him:  Which?  And Jesus said:  Thou shalt do no murder,
@c    Thou shalt not commit adultery, Thou shalt not steal, Thou shalt not
@c    bear false witness.

@c    19:19. Honour thy father and thy mother:  and, Thou shalt love thy
@c    neighbor as thyself.

@c    19:20. The young man saith to him:  All these have I kept from my youth,
@c    what is yet wanting to me?

@c    19:21. Jesus saith to him:  If thou wilt be perfect, go sell what thou
@c    hast, and give to the poor, and thou shalt have treasure in heaven:  and
@c    come, follow me.

@c    19:22. And when the young man had heard this word, he went away sad:
@c    for he had great possessions.

@c    19:23. Then Jesus said to his disciples:  Amen, I say to you, that a
@c    rich man shall hardly enter into the kingdom of heaven.

@c    19:24. And again I say to you:  It is easier for a camel to pass through
@c    the eye of a needle, than for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of
@c    heaven.

@c    19:25. And when they had heard this, the disciples wondered much,
@c    saying:  Who then can be saved?

@c    19:26. And Jesus beholding, said to them:  With men this is impossible:
@c    but with God all things are possible.

@c    19:27. Then Peter answering, said to him:  Behold we have left all
@c    things, and have followed thee:  what therefore shall we have?

@c    19:28. And Jesus said to them:  Amen I say to you, that you who have
@c    followed me, in the regeneration, when the Son of man shall sit on the
@c    seat of his majesty, you also shall sit on twelve seats judging the
@c    twelve tribes of Israel.

@c    19:29. And every one that hath left house, or brethren, or sisters, or
@c    father, or mother, or wife, or children, or lands for my name's sake,
@c    shall receive an hundredfold, and shall possess life everlasting.

@c    19:30. And many that are first, shall be last:  and the last shall be
@c    first.



@c    Matthew Chapter 20


@c    The parable of the labourers in the vineyard.  The ambition of the two
@c    sons of Zebedee.  Christ gives sight to two blind men.

@c    20:1. The kingdom of heaven is like to an householder, who went out
@c    early in the morning to hire labourers into his vineyard.

@c    20:2. And having agreed with the labourers for a penny a day, he sent
@c    them into his vineyard.

@c    20:3. And going out about the third hour, he saw others standing in the
@c    marketplace idle.

@c    20:4. And he said to them:  Go you also into my vineyard, and I will
@c    give you what shall be just.

@c    20:5. And they went their way.  And again he went out about the sixth
@c    and the ninth hour, and did in like manner.

@c    20:6. But about the eleventh hour he went out and found others
@c    standing, and he saith to them:  Why stand you here all the day idle?

@c    20:7. They say to him:  Because no man hath hired us.  He saith to them:
@c    Go ye also into my vineyard.

@c    20:8. And when evening was come, the lord of the vineyard saith to his
@c    steward:  Call the labourers and pay them their hire, beginning from the
@c    last even to the first.

@c    20:9. When therefore they were come that came about the eleventh hour,
@c    they received every man a penny.

@c    20:10. But when the first also came, they thought that they should
@c    receive more:  And they also received every man a penny.

@c    20:11. And receiving it they murmured against the master of the house,

@c    20:12. Saying:  These last have worked but one hour.  and thou hast made
@c    them equal to us, that have borne the burden of the day and the heats.

@c    20:13. But he answering said to one of them:  friend, I do thee no
@c    wrong:  didst thou not agree with me for a penny?

@c    20:14. Take what is thine, and go thy way:  I will also give to this
@c    last even as to thee.

@c    20:15. Or, is it not lawful for me to do what I will?  Is thy eye evil,
@c    because I am good?

@c    What I will. . .Viz., with my own, and in matters that depend on my own
@c    bounty.

@c    20:16. So shall the last be first and the first last.  For many are
@c    called but few chosen.

@c    20:17. And Jesus going up to Jerusalem, took the twelve disciples apart
@c    and said to them:

@c    20:18. Behold we go up to Jerusalem, and the Son of man shall be
@c    betrayed to the chief priests and the scribes:  and they shall condemn
@c    him to death.

@c    20:19. And shall deliver him to the Gentiles to be mocked and scourged
@c    and crucified:  and the third day he shall rise again.

@c    20:20. Then came to him the mother of the sons of Zebedee with her
@c    sons, adoring and asking something of him.

@c    20:21. Who said to her:  What wilt thou?  She saith to him:  say that
@c    these my two sons may sit, the one on thy right hand, and the other on
@c    thy left, in thy kingdom.

@c    20:22. And Jesus answering, said:  You know not what you ask.  Can you
@c    drink the chalice that I shall drink?  They say to him:  We can.

@c    20:23. He saith to them:  My chalice indeed you shall drink; but to sit
@c    on my right or left hand is not mine to give to you, but to them for
@c    whom it is prepared by my Father.

@c    20:24. And the ten, hearing it, were moved with indignation against the
@c    two brethren.

@c    20:25. But Jesus called them to him and said:  You know that the princes
@c    of the Gentiles lord it over them; and that they that are the greater,
@c    exercise power upon them.

@c    20:26. It shall not be so among you:  but whosoever is the greater among
@c    you, let him be your minister.

@c    20:27. And he that will be first among you shall be your servant.

@c    20:28. Even as the Son of man is not come to be ministered unto, but to
@c    minister and to give his life a redemption for many.

@c    20:29. And when they went out from Jericho, a great multitude followed
@c    him.

@c    20:30. And behold two blind men sitting by the way side heard that
@c    Jesus passed by.  And they cried out, saying:  O Lord, thou son of David,
@c    have mercy on us.

@c    20:31. And the multitude rebuked them that they should hold their
@c    peace.  But they cried out the more, saying:  O Lord, thou son of David,
@c    have mercy on us.

@c    20:32. And Jesus stood and called them and said:  What will ye that I do
@c    to you?

@c    20:33. They say to him:  Lord, that our eyes be opened.

@c    20:34. And Jesus having compassion on them, touched their eyes.  And
@c    immediately they saw and followed him.



@c    Matthew Chapter 21


@c    Christ rides into Jerusalem upon an ass.  He casts the buyers and
@c    sellers out of the temple, curses the fig tree and puts to silence the
@c    priests and scribes.

@c    21:1. And when they drew nigh to Jerusalem and were come to Bethphage,
@c    unto mount Olivet, then Jesus sent two disciples,

@c    21:2. Saying to them:  Go ye into the village that is over against you:
@c    and immediately you shall find an ass tied and a colt with her.  Loose
@c    them and bring them to me.

@c    21:3. And if any man shall say anything to you, say ye that the Lord
@c    hath need of them.  And forthwith he will let them go.

@c    21:4. Now all this was done that it might be fulfilled which was spoken
@c    by the prophet, saying:

@c    21:5. Tell ye the daughter of Sion:  Behold thy king cometh to thee,
@c    meek and sitting upon an ass and a colt, the foal of her that is used
@c    to the yoke.

@c    21:6. And the disciples going, did as Jesus commanded them.

@c    21:7. And they brought the ass and the colt and laid their garments
@c    upon them and made him sit thereon.

@c    21:8. And a very great multitude spread their garments in the way:  and
@c    others cut boughs from the trees and strewed them in the way.

@c    21:9. And the multitudes that went before and that followed cried,
@c    saying:  Hosanna to the son of David:  Blessed is he that cometh in the
@c    name of the Lord:  Hosanna in the highest.

@c    21:10. And when he was come into Jerusalem, the whole city was moved,
@c    saying:  Who is this?

@c    21:11. And the people said:  This is Jesus, the prophet from Nazareth of
@c    Galilee.

@c    21:12. And Jesus went into the temple of God and cast out all them that
@c    sold and bought in the temple and overthrew the tables of the money
@c    changers and the chairs of them that sold doves.

@c    21:13. And he saith to them:  It is written, My house shall be called
@c    the house of prayer; but you have made it a den of thieves.

@c    21:14. And there came to him the blind and the lame in the temple:  and
@c    he healed them.

@c    21:15. And the chief priests and scribes, seeing the wonderful things
@c    that he did and the children crying in the temple and saying:  Hosanna
@c    to the son of David, were moved with indignation,

@c    21:16. And said to him:  Hearest thou what these say?  And Jesus said to
@c    them:  Yea, have you never read:  Out of the mouth of infants and of
@c    sucklings thou hast perfected praise?

@c    21:17. And leaving them, he went out of the city into Bethania and
@c    remained here.

@c    21:18. And in the morning, returning into the city, he was hungry.

@c    21:19. And seeing a certain fig tree by the way side, he came to it and
@c    found nothing on it but leaves only.  And he saith to it:  May no fruit
@c    grow on thee henceforward for ever.  And immediately the fig tree
@c    withered away.

@c    21:20. And the disciples seeing it wondered, saying:  How is it
@c    presently withered away?

@c    21:21. And Jesus answering, said to them:  Amen, I say to you, if you
@c    shall have faith and stagger not, not only this of the fig tree shall
@c    you do, but also if you shall say to this mountain, Take up and cast
@c    thyself into the sea, it shall be done.

@c    21:22. And all things whatsoever you shall ask in prayer believing, you
@c    shall receive.

@c    21:23. And when he was come into the temple, there came to him, as he
@c    was teaching, the chief priests and ancients of the people, saying:  By
@c    what authority dost thou these things?  And who hath given thee this
@c    authority?

@c    21:24. Jesus answering, said to them:  I also will ask you one word,
@c    which if you shall tell me, I will also tell you by what authority I do
@c    these things.

@c    21:25. The baptism of John, whence was it?  From heaven or from men?  But
@c    they thought within themselves, saying:

@c    21:26. If we shall say, from heaven, he will say to us:  Why then did
@c    you not believe him?  But if we shall say, from men, we are afraid of
@c    the multitude:  for all held John as a prophet.

@c    21:27. And answering Jesus, they said:  We know not.  He also said to
@c    them:  Neither do I tell you by what authority I do these things.

@c    21:28. But what think you?  A certain man had two sons:  and coming to
@c    the first, he said:  Son, go work to day in my vineyard.

@c    21:29. And he answering, said:  I will not.  But afterwards, being moved
@c    with repentance, he went.

@c    21:30. And coming to the other, he said in like manner.  And he
@c    answering said:  I go, Sir.  And he went not.

@c    21:31. Which of the two did the father's will?  They say to him:  The
@c    first.  Jesus saith to them:  Amen I say to you that the publicans and
@c    the harlots shall go into the kingdom of God before you.

@c    21:32. For John came to you in the way of justice:  and you did not
@c    believe him.  But the publicans and the harlots believed him:  but you,
@c    seeing it, did not even afterwards repent, that you might believe him.

@c    21:33. Hear ye another parable.  There was a man, an householder, who
@c    planted a vineyard and made a hedge round about it and dug in it a
@c    press and built a tower and let it out to husbandmen and went into a
@c    strange country.

@c    21:34. And when the time of the fruits drew nigh, he sent his servants
@c    to the husbandmen that they might receive the fruits thereof.

@c    21:35. And the husbandmen laying hands on his servants, beat one and
@c    killed another and stoned another.

@c    21:36. Again he sent other servants, more than the former; and they did
@c    to them in like manner.

@c    21:37. And last of all he sent to them his son, saying:  They will
@c    reverence my son.

@c    21:38. But the husbandmen seeing the son, said among themselves:  This
@c    is the heir:  come, let us kill him, and we shall have his inheritance.

@c    21:39. And taking him, they cast him forth out of the vineyard and
@c    killed him.

@c    21:40. When therefore the lord of the vineyard shall come, what will he
@c    do to those husbandmen?

@c    21:41. They say to him:  He will bring those evil men to an evil end and
@c    let out his vineyard to other husbandmen that shall render him the
@c    fruit in due season.

@c    21:42. Jesus saith to them:  Have you never read in the Scriptures:  The
@c    stone which the builders rejected, the same is become the head of the
@c    corner?  By the Lord this has been done; and it is wonderful in our
@c    eyes.

@c    21:43. Therefore I say to you that the kingdom of God shall be taken
@c    from you and shall be given to a nation yielding the fruits thereof.

@c    21:44. And whosoever shall fall on this stone shall be broken:  but on
@c    whomsoever it shall fall, it shall grind him to powder.

@c    21:45. And when the chief priests and Pharisees had heard his parables,
@c    they knew that he spoke of them.

@c    21:46. And seeking to lay hands on him, they feared the multitudes,
@c    because they held him as a prophet.



@c    Matthew Chapter 22


@c    The parable of the marriage feast.  Christ orders tribute to be paid to
@c    Caesar.  He confutes the Sadducees, shews which is the first commandment
@c    in the law and puzzles the Pharisees.

@c    22:1. And Jesus answering, spoke again in parables to them, saying:

@c    22:2. The kingdom of heaven is likened to a king who made a marriage
@c    for his son.

@c    22:3. And he sent his servants to call them that were invited to the
@c    marriage:  and they would not come.

@c    22:4. Again he sent other servants, saying:  Tell them that were
@c    invited, Behold, I have prepared my dinner:  my beeves and fatlings are
@c    killed, and all things are ready.  Come ye to the marriage.

@c    22:5. But they neglected and went their ways, one to his farm and
@c    another to his merchandise.

@c    22:6. And the rest laid hands on his servants and, having treated them
@c    contumeliously, put them to death.

@c    22:7. But when the king had heard of it, he was angry:  and sending his
@c    armies, he destroyed those murderers and burnt their city.

@c    22:8. Then he saith to his servants:  The marriage indeed is ready; but
@c    they that were invited were not worthy.

@c    22:9. Go ye therefore into the highways; and as many as you shall find,
@c    call to the marriage.

@c    22:10. And his servants going forth into the ways, gathered together
@c    all that they found, both bad and good:  and the marriage was filled
@c    with guests.

@c    22:11. And the king went in to see the guests:  and he saw there a man
@c    who had not on a wedding garment.

@c    22:12. And he saith to him:  Friend, how camest thou in hither not
@c    having on a wedding garment?  But he was silent.

@c    22:13. Then the king said to the waiters:  Bind his hands and feet, and
@c    cast him into the exterior darkness.  There shall be weeping and
@c    gnashing of teeth.

@c    22:14. For many are called, but few are chosen.

@c    22:15. Then the Pharisees going, consulted among themselves how to
@c    insnare him in his speech.

@c    22:16. And they sent to him their disciples with the Herodians, saying:
@c    Master, we know that thou art a true speaker and teachest the way of
@c    God in truth.  Neither carest thou for any man:  for thou dost not regard
@c    the person of men.

@c    The Herodians. . .That is, some that belonged to Herod, and that joined
@c    with him in standing up for the necessity of paying tribute to Caesar,
@c    that is, to the Roman emperor.  Some are of opinion that there was a
@c    sect among the Jews called Herodians, from their maintaining that Herod
@c    was the Messias.

@c    22:17. Tell us therefore what dost thou think?  Is it lawful to give
@c    tribute to Caesar, or not?

@c    22:18. But Jesus knowing their wickedness, said:  Why do you tempt me,
@c    ye hypocrites?

@c    22:19. Shew me the coin of the tribute.  And they offered him a penny.

@c    22:20. And Jesus saith to them:  Whose image and inscription is this?

@c    22:21. They say to him:  Caesar's.  Then he saith to them:  Render
@c    therefore to Caesar the things that are Caesar's; and to God, the
@c    things that are God's.

@c    22:22. And hearing this, they wondered and, leaving him, went their
@c    ways.

@c    22:23. That day there came to him the Sadducees, who say there is no
@c    resurrection; and asked him,

@c    22:24. Saying:  Master, Moses said:  If a man die having no son, his
@c    brother shall marry his wife and raise up issue to his brother.

@c    22:25. Now there were with us seven brethren:  and the first having
@c    married a wife, died; and not having issue, left his wife to his
@c    brother.

@c    22:26. In like manner the second and the third and so on, to the
@c    seventh.

@c    22:27. And last of all the woman died also.

@c    22:28. At the resurrection therefore, whose wife of the seven shall she
@c    be?  For they all had her.

@c    22:29. And Jesus answering, said to them:  You err, not knowing the
@c    Scriptures nor the power of God.

@c    22:30. For in the resurrection they shall neither marry nor be married,
@c    but shall be as the angels of God in heaven.

@c    22:31. And concerning the resurrection of the dead, have you not read
@c    that which was spoken by God, saying to you:

@c    22:32. I am the God of Abraham and the God of Isaac and the God of
@c    Jacob?  He is not the God of the dead but of the living.

@c    22:33. And the multitudes hearing it were in admiration at his
@c    doctrine.

@c    22:34. But the Pharisees, hearing that he had silenced the Sadducees,
@c    came together.

@c    22:35. And one of them, a doctor of the law, asked him, tempting him:

@c    22:36. Master, which is the great commandment in the law?

@c    22:37. Jesus said to him:  Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with thy
@c    whole heart and with thy whole soul and with thy whole mind.

@c    22:38. This is the greatest and the first commandment.

@c    22:39. And the second is like to this:  Thou shalt love thy neighbour as
@c    thyself.

@c    22:40. On these two commandments dependeth the whole law and the
@c    prophets.

@c    22:41. And the Pharisees being gathered together, Jesus asked them,

@c    22:42. Saying:  What think you of Christ?  Whose son is he?  They say to
@c    him:  David's.

@c    22:43. He saith to them:  How then doth David in spirit call him Lord,
@c    saying:

@c    22:44. The Lord said to my Lord:  Sit on my right hand, until I make thy
@c    enemies thy footstool?

@c    22:45. If David then call him Lord, how is he his son?

@c    22:46. And no man was able to answer him a word:  neither durst any man
@c    from that day forth ask him any more questions.



@c    Matthew Chapter 23


@c    Christ admonishes the people to follow the good doctrine, not the bad
@c    example of the scribes and Pharisees.  He warns his disciples not to
@c    imitate their ambition and denounces divers woes against them for their
@c    hypocrisy and blindness.

@c    23:1. Then Jesus spoke to the multitudes and to his disciples,

@c    23:2. Saying:  The scribes and the Pharisees have sitten on the chair of
@c    Moses.

@c    23:3. All things therefore whatsoever they shall say to you, observe
@c    and do:  but according to their works do ye not.  For they say, and do
@c    not.

@c    23:4. For they bind heavy and insupportable burdens and lay them on
@c    men's shoulders:  but with a finger of their own they will not move
@c    them.

@c    23:5. And all their works they do for to be seen of men.  For they make
@c    their phylacteries broad and enlarge their fringes.

@c    Phylacteries. . .that is, parchments, on which they wrote the ten
@c    commandments, and carried them on their foreheads before their eyes:
@c    which the Pharisees affected to wear broader than other men; so to seem
@c    more zealous for the law.

@c    23:6. And they love the first places at feasts and the first chairs in
@c    the synagogues,

@c    23:7. And salutations in the market place, and to be called by men,
@c    Rabbi.

@c    23:8. But be not you called Rabbi.  For one is your master:  and all you
@c    are brethren.

@c    23:9. And call none your father upon earth; for one is your father, who
@c    is in heaven.

@c    Call none your father--Neither be ye called masters, etc. . .The
@c    meaning is that our Father in heaven is incomparably more to be
@c    regarded, than any father upon earth:  and no master to be followed, who
@c    would lead us away from Christ.  But this does not hinder but that we
@c    are by the law of God to have a due respect both for our parents and
@c    spiritual fathers, (1 Cor. 4. 23:15,) and for our masters and teachers.

@c    23:10. Neither be ye called masters:  for one is your master, Christ.

@c    23:11. He that is the greatest among you shall be your servant.

@c    23:12. And whosoever shall exalt himself shall be humbled:  and he that
@c    shall humble himself shall be exalted.

@c    23:13. But woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites, because you
@c    shut the kingdom of heaven against men:  for you yourselves do not enter
@c    in and those that are going in, you suffer not to enter.

@c    23:14. Woe to you scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites, because you devour
@c    the houses of widows, praying long prayers.  For this you shall receive
@c    the greater judgment.

@c    23:15. Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites, because you go
@c    round about the sea and the land to make one proselyte.  And when he is
@c    made, you make him the child of hell twofold more than yourselves.

@c    23:16. Woe to you, blind guides, that say, Whosoever shall swear by the
@c    temple, it is nothing; but he that shall swear by the gold of the
@c    temple is a debtor.

@c    23:17. Ye foolish and blind:  for whether is greater, the gold or the
@c    temple that sanctifieth the gold?

@c    23:18. And whosoever shall swear by the altar, it is nothing; but
@c    whosoever shall swear by the gift that is upon it is a debtor.

@c    23:19. Ye foolish and blind:  for whether is greater, the gift or the
@c    altar that sanctifieth the gift?

@c    23:20. He therefore that sweareth by the altar sweareth by it and by
@c    all things that are upon it.

@c    23:21. And whosoever shall swear by the temple sweareth by it and by
@c    him that dwelleth in it.

@c    23:22. And he that sweareth by heaven sweareth by the throne of God and
@c    by him that sitteth thereon.

@c    23:23. Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites; because you tithe
@c    mint and anise and cummin and have left the weightier things of the
@c    law:  judgment and mercy and faith.  These things you ought to have done
@c    and not to leave those undone.

@c    23:24. Blind guides, who strain out a gnat and swallow a camel.

@c    23:25. Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites; because you make
@c    clean the outside of the cup and of the dish, but within you are full
@c    of rapine and uncleanness.

@c    23:26. Thou blind Pharisee, first make clean the inside of the cup and
@c    of the dish, that the outside may become clean.

@c    23:27. Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites; because you are
@c    like to whited sepulchres, which outwardly appear to men beautiful but
@c    within are full of dead men's bones and of all filthiness.

@c    23:28. So you also outwardly indeed appear to men just:  but inwardly
@c    you are full of hypocrisy and iniquity.

@c    23:29. Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites, that build the
@c    sepulchres of the prophets and adorn the monuments of the just,

@c    Build the sepulchres, etc. . .This is not blamed, as if it were in
@c    itself evil to build or adorn the monuments of the prophets:  but the
@c    hypocrisy of the Pharisees is here taxed; who, whilst they pretended to
@c    honour the memory of the prophets, were persecuting even unto death the
@c    Lord of the prophets.

@c    23:30. And say:  If we had been in the days of our fathers, we would not
@c    have been partakers with them in the blood of the prophets.

@c    23:31. Wherefore you are witnesses against yourselves, that you are the
@c    sons of them that killed the prophets.

@c    23:32. Fill ye up then the measure of your fathers.

@c    23:33. You serpents, generation of vipers, how will you flee from the
@c    judgment of hell?

@c    23:34. Therefore behold I send to you prophets and wise men and
@c    scribes:  and some of them you will put to death and crucify:  and some
@c    you will scourge in your synagogues and persecute from city to city.

@c    23:35. That upon you may come all the just blood that hath been shed
@c    upon the earth, from the blood of Abel the just, even unto the blood of
@c    Zacharias the son of Barachias, whom you killed between the temple and
@c    the altar.

@c    That upon you may come, etc. . .Not that they should suffer more than
@c    their own sins justly deserved; but that the justice of God should now
@c    fall upon them with such a final vengeance, once for all, as might
@c    comprise all the different kinds of judgments and punishments, that had
@c    at any time before been inflicted for the shedding of just blood.

@c    23:36. Amen I say to you, all these things shall come upon this
@c    generation.

@c    23:37. Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest the prophets and stonest
@c    them that are sent unto thee, how often would I have gathered together
@c    thy children, as the hen doth gather her chickens under her wings, and
@c    thou wouldst not?

@c    23:38. Behold, your house shall be left to you, desolate.

@c    23:39. For I say to you, you shall not see me henceforth till you say:
@c    Blessed is he that cometh in the name of the Lord.



@c    Matthew Chapter 24


@c    Christ foretells the destruction of the temple, with the signs that
@c    shall come before it and before the last judgment.  We must always
@c    watch.

@c    24:1. And Jesus being come out of the temple, went away.  And his
@c    disciples came to shew him the buildings of the temple.

@c    24:2. And he answering, said to them:  Do you see all these things?  Amen
@c    I say to you, there shall not be left here a stone upon a stone that
@c    shall not be destroyed.

@c    24:3. And when he was sitting on mount Olivet, the disciples came to
@c    him privately, saying:  Tell us when shall these things be?  And what
@c    shall be the sign of thy coming and of the consummation of the world?

@c    24:4. And Jesus answering, said to them:  Take heed that no man seduce
@c    you.

@c    24:5. For many will come in my name saying, I am Christ.  And they will
@c    seduce many.

@c    24:6. And you shall hear of wars and rumours of wars.  See that ye be
@c    not troubled.  For these things must come to pass:  but the end is not
@c    yet.

@c    24:7. For nation shall rise against nation, and kingdom against
@c    kingdom:  And there shall be pestilences and famines and earthquakes in
@c    places.

@c    24:8. Now all these are the beginnings of sorrows.

@c    24:9. Then shall they deliver you up to be afflicted and shall put you
@c    to death:  and you shall be hated by all nations for my name's sake.

@c    24:10. And then shall many be scandalized and shall betray one another
@c    and shall hate one another.

@c    24:11. And many false prophets shall rise and shall seduce many.

@c    24:12. And because iniquity hath abounded, the charity of many shall
@c    grow cold.

@c    24:13. But he that shall persevere to the end, he shall be saved.

@c    24:14. And this gospel of the kingdom shall be preached in the whole
@c    world, for a testimony to all nations:  and then shall the consummation
@c    come.

@c    24:15. When therefore you shall see the abomination of desolation,
@c    which was spoken of by Daniel the prophet, standing in the holy place:
@c    he that readeth let him understand.

@c    24:16. Then they that are in Judea, let them flee to the mountains:

@c    24:17. And he that is on the housetop, let him not come down to take
@c    any thing out of his house:

@c    24:18. And he that is in the field, let him not go back to take his
@c    coat.

@c    24:19. And woe to them that are with child and that give suck in those
@c    days.

@c    24:20. But pray that your flight be not in the winter or on the
@c    sabbath.

@c    24:21. For there shall be then great tribulation, such as hath not been
@c    from the beginning of the world until now, neither shall be.

@c    24:22. And unless those days had been shortened, no flesh should be
@c    saved:  but for the sake of the elect those days shall be shortened.

@c    24:23. Then if any man shall say to you, Lo here is Christ, or there:
@c    do not believe him.

@c    24:24. For there shall arise false Christs and false prophets and shall
@c    shew great signs and wonders, insomuch as to deceive (if possible) even
@c    the elect.

@c    24:25. Behold I have told it to you, beforehand.

@c    24:26. If therefore they shall say to you, Behold he is in the desert:
@c    go ye not out.  Behold he is in the closets:  believe it not.

@c    24:27. For as lightning cometh out of the east and appeareth even into
@c    the west:  so shall also the cowling of the Son of man be.

@c    24:28. Wheresoever the body shall be, there shall the eagles also be
@c    gathered together.

@c    Wheresoever, etc. . .The coming of Christ shall be sudden, and manifest
@c    to all the world, like lightning:  and wheresoever he shall come,
@c    thither shall all mankind be gathered to him, as eagles are gathered
@c    about a dead body.

@c    24:29. And immediately after the tribulation of those days, the sun
@c    shall be darkened and the moon shall not give her light and the stars
@c    shall fall from heaven and the powers of heaven shall be moved.

@c    The stars. . .Or flaming meteors resembling stars.

@c    24:30. And then shall appear the sign of the Son of man in heaven.  And
@c    then shall all tribes of the earth mourn:  and they shall see the Son of
@c    man coming in the clouds of heaven with much power and majesty.

@c    The sign, etc. . .The cross of Christ.

@c    24:31. And he shall send his angels with a trumpet and a great voice:
@c    and they shall gather together his elect from the four winds, from the
@c    farthest parts of the heavens to the utmost bounds of them.

@c    24:32. And from the fig tree learn a parable:  When the branch thereof
@c    is now tender and the leaves come forth, you know that summer is nigh.

@c    24:33. So you also, when you shall see all these things, know ye that
@c    it is nigh, even at the doors.

@c    24:34. Amen I say to you that this generation shall not pass till all
@c    these things be done.

@c    24:35. Heaven and earth shall pass:  but my words shall not pass.

@c    Shall pass. . .Because they shall be changed at the end of the world
@c    into a new heaven and new earth.

@c    24:36. But of that day and hour no one knoweth:  no, not the angels of
@c    heaven, but the Father alone.

@c    24:37. And as in the days of Noe, so shall also the coming of the Son
@c    of man be.

@c    24:38. For, as in the days before the flood they were eating and
@c    drinking, marrying and giving in marriage, even till that day in which
@c    Noe entered into the ark:

@c    24:39. And they knew not till the flood came and took them all away:  so
@c    also shall the coming of the Son of man be.

@c    24:40. Then two shall be in the field.  One shall be taken and one shall
@c    be left.

@c    24:41. Two women shall be grinding at the mill.  One shall be taken and
@c    one shall be left.

@c    24:42. Watch ye therefore, because you know not what hour your Lord
@c    will come.

@c    24:43. But this know ye, that, if the goodman of the house knew at what
@c    hour the thief would come, he would certainly watch and would not
@c    suffer his house to be broken open.

@c    24:44. Wherefore be you also ready, because at what hour you know not
@c    the Son of man will come.

@c    24:45. Who, thinkest thou, is a faithful and wise servant, whom his
@c    lord hath appointed over his family, to give them meat in season?

@c    24:46. Blessed is that servant, whom when his lord shall come he shall
@c    find so doing.

@c    24:47. Amen I say to you:  he shall place him over all his goods.

@c    24:48. But if that evil servant shall say in his heart:  My lord is long
@c    a coming:

@c    24:49. And shall begin to strike his fellow servants and shall eat and
@c    drink with drunkards:

@c    24:50. The lord of that servant shall come in a day that he hopeth not
@c    and at an hour that he knoweth not:

@c    24:51. And shall separate him and appoint his portion with the
@c    hypocrites.  There shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.



@c    Matthew Chapter 25


@c    The parable of the ten virgins and of the talents.  The description of
@c    the last judgment.

@c    25:1. Then shall the kingdom of heaven be like to ten virgins, who
@c    taking their lamps went out to meet the bridegroom and the bride.

@c    25:2. And five of them were foolish and five wise.

@c    25:3. But the five foolish, having taken their lamps, did not take oil
@c    with them.

@c    25:4. But the wise took oil in their vessels with the lamps.

@c    25:5. And the bridegroom tarrying, they all slumbered and slept.

@c    25:6. And at midnight there was a cry made:  Behold the bridegroom
@c    cometh.  Go ye forth to meet him.

@c    25:7. Then all those virgins arose and trimmed their lamps.

@c    25:8. And the foolish said to the wise:  Give us of your oil, for our
@c    lamps are gone out.

@c    25:9. The wise answered, saying:  Lest perhaps there be not enough for
@c    us and for you, go ye rather to them that sell and buy for yourselves.

@c    25:10. Now whilst they went to buy the bridegroom came:  and they that
@c    were ready went in with him to the marriage.  And the door was shut.

@c    25:11. But at last came also the other virgins, saying:  Lord, Lord,
@c    open to us.

@c    25:12. But he answering said:  Amen I say to you, I know you not.

@c    25:13. Watch ye therefore, because you know not the day nor the hour.

@c    25:14. For even as a man going into a far country called his servants
@c    and delivered to them his goods;

@c    25:15. And to one he gave five talents, and to another two, and to
@c    another one, to every one according to his proper ability:  and
@c    immediately he took his journey.

@c    25:16. And he that had received the five talents went his way and
@c    traded with the same and gained other five.

@c    25:17. And in like manner he that had received the two gained other
@c    two.

@c    25:18. But he that had received the one, going his way, digged into the
@c    earth and hid his lord's money.

@c    25:19. But after a long time the lord of those servants came and
@c    reckoned with them.

@c    25:20. And he that had received the five talents coming, brought other
@c    five talents, saying:  Lord, thou didst deliver to me five talents.
@c    Behold I have gained other five over and above.

@c    25:21. His lord said to him:  Well done, good and faithful servant,
@c    because thou hast been faithful over a few things, I will place thee
@c    over many things.  Enter thou into the joy of thy lord.

@c    25:22. And he also that had received the two talents came and said:
@c    Lord, thou deliveredst two talents to me.  Behold I have gained other
@c    two.

@c    25:23. His lord said to him:  Well done, good and faithful servant:
@c    because thou hast been faithful over a few things, I will place thee
@c    over many things.  Enter thou into the joy of thy lord.

@c    25:24. But he that had received the one talent, came and said:  Lord, I
@c    know that thou art a hard man; thou reapest where thou hast not sown
@c    and gatherest where thou hast not strewed.

@c    25:25. And being afraid, I went and hid thy talent in the earth.  Behold
@c    here thou hast that which is thine.

@c    25:26. And his lord answering, said to him:  Wicked and slothful
@c    servant, thou knewest that I reap where I sow not and gather where I
@c    have not strewed.

@c    25:27. Thou oughtest therefore to have committed my money to the
@c    bankers:  and at my coming I should have received my own with usury.

@c    25:28. Take ye away therefore the talent from him and give it him that
@c    hath ten talents.

@c    25:29. For to every one that hath shall be given, and he shall abound:
@c    but from him that hath not, that also which he seemeth to have shall be
@c    taken away.

@c    25:30. And the unprofitable servant, cast ye out into the exterior
@c    darkness.  There shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.

@c    25:31. And when the Son of man shall come in his majesty, and all the
@c    angels with him, then shall he sit upon the seat of his majesty.

@c    25:32. And all nations shall be gathered together before him:  and he
@c    shall separate them one from another, as the shepherd separateth the
@c    sheep from the goats:

@c    25:33. And he shall set the sheep on his right hand, but the goats on
@c    his left.

@c    25:34. Then shall the king say to them that shall be on his right hand:
@c    Come, ye blessed of my Father, possess you the kingdom prepared for you
@c    from the foundation of the world.

@c    25:35. For I was hungry, and you gave me to eat:  I was thirsty, and you
@c    gave me to drink:  I was a stranger, and you took me in:

@c    25:36. Naked, and you covered me:  sick, and you visited me:  I was in
@c    prison, and you came to me.

@c    25:37. Then shall the just answer him, saying:  Lord, when did we see
@c    thee hungry and fed thee:  thirsty and gave thee drink?

@c    25:38. Or when did we see thee a stranger and took thee in?  Or naked
@c    and covered thee?

@c    25:39. Or when did we see thee sick or in prison and came to thee?

@c    25:40. And the king answering shall say to them:  Amen I say to you, as
@c    long as you did it to one of these my least brethren, you did it to me.

@c    25:41. Then he shall say to them also that shall be on his left hand:
@c    Depart from me, you cursed, into everlasting fire, which was prepared
@c    for the devil and his angels.

@c    25:42. For I was hungry and you gave me not to eat:  I was thirsty and
@c    you gave me not to drink.

@c    25:43. I was a stranger and you took me not in:  naked and you covered
@c    me not:  sick and in prison and you did not visit me.

@c    25:44. Then they also shall answer him, saying:  Lord, when did we see
@c    thee hungry or thirsty or a stranger or naked or sick or in prison and
@c    did not minister to thee?

@c    25:45. Then he shall answer them, saying:  Amen:  I say to you, as long
@c    as you did it not to one of these least, neither did you do it to me.

@c    25:46. And these shall go into everlasting punishment:  but the just,
@c    into life everlasting.



@c    Matthew Chapter 26


@c    The Jews conspire against Christ.  He is anointed by Mary.  The treason
@c    of Judas.  The last supper.  The prayer in the garden.  The apprehension
@c    of our Lord.  His treatment in the house of Caiphas.

@c    26:1. And it came to pass, when Jesus had ended all these words, he
@c    said to his disciples:

@c    26:2. You know that after two days shall be the pasch:  and the Son of
@c    man shall be delivered up to be crucified.

@c    26:3. Then were gathered together the chief priests and ancients of the
@c    people, into the court of the high priest, who was called Caiphas:

@c    26:4. And they consulted together that by subtilty they might apprehend
@c    Jesus and put him to death.

@c    26:5. But they said:  Not on the festival day, lest perhaps there should
@c    be a tumult among the people.

@c    26:6. And when Jesus was in Bethania, in the house of Simon the leper,

@c    26:7. There came to him a woman having an alabaster box of precious
@c    ointment and poured it on his head as he was at table.

@c    26:8. And the disciples seeing it had indignation, saying:  To what
@c    purpose is this waste?

@c    26:9. For this might have been sold for much and given to the poor.

@c    26:10. And Jesus knowing it, said to them:  Why do you trouble this
@c    woman?  For she hath wrought a good work upon me.

@c    26:11. For the poor you have always with you:  but me you have not
@c    always.

@c    Me you have not always. . .Viz., in a visible manner, as when conversant
@c    here on earth; and as we have the poor, whom we may daily assist and
@c    relieve.

@c    26:12. For she in pouring this ointment on my body hath done it for my
@c    burial.

@c    26:13. Amen I say to you, wheresoever this gospel shall be preached in
@c    the whole world, that also which she hath done shall be told for a
@c    memory of her.

@c    26:14. Then went one of the twelve, who was called Judas Iscariot, to
@c    the chief priests.

@c    26:15. And said to them:  What will you give me, and I will deliver him
@c    unto you?  But they appointed him thirty pieces of silver.

@c    26:16. And from thenceforth he sought opportunity to betray him.

@c    26:17. And on the first day of the Azymes, the disciples came to Jesus,
@c    saying:  Where wilt thou that we prepare for thee to eat the pasch?

@c    Azymes. . .Feast of the unleavened bread.  Pasch. . .The paschal lamb.

@c    26:18. But Jesus said:  Go ye into the city to a certain man and say to
@c    him:  The master saith, My time is near at hand.  With thee I make the
@c    pasch with my disciples.

@c    26:19. And the disciples did as Jesus appointed to them:  and they
@c    prepared the pasch.

@c    26:20. But when it was evening, he sat down with his twelve disciples.

@c    26:21. And whilst they were eating, he said:  Amen I say to you that one
@c    of you is about to betray me.

@c    26:22. And they being very much troubled began every one to say:  Is it
@c    I, Lord?

@c    26:23. But he answering said:  He that dippeth his hand with me in the
@c    dish, he shall betray me.

@c    26:24. The Son of man indeed goeth, as it is written of him.  But woe to
@c    that man by whom the Son of man shall be betrayed.  It were better for
@c    him, if that man had not been born.

@c    26:25. And Judas that betrayed him answering, said:  Is it I, Rabbi?  He
@c    saith to him:  Thou hast said it.

@c    26:26. And whilst they were at supper, Jesus took bread and blessed and
@c    broke and gave to his disciples and said:  Take ye and eat.  This is my
@c    body.

@c    This is my body. . .He does not say, This is the figure of my body--but
@c    This is my body.  (2 Council of Nice, Act. 6.)  Neither does he say in
@c    this, or with this is my body; but absolutely, This is my body:  which
@c    plainly implies transubstantiation.

@c    26:27. And taking the chalice, he gave thanks and gave to them, saying:
@c    Drink ye all of this.

@c    Drink ye all of this. . .This was spoken to the twelve apostles; who
@c    were the all then present; and they all drank of it, says St. Mark 14.
@c    23. But it no ways follows from these words spoken to the apostles,
@c    that all the faithful are here commanded to drink of the chalice; any
@c    more than that all the faithful are commanded to consecrate, offer and
@c    administer this sacrament; because Christ upon this same occasion, and
@c    at the same time, bid the apostles do so; in these words, St. Luke 22.
@c    19, Do this for a commemoration of me.

@c    26:28. For this is my blood of the new testament, which shall be shed
@c    for many unto remission of sins.

@c    Blood of the new testament. . .As the old testament was dedicated with
@c    the blood of victims, by Moses, in these words:  This is the blood of
@c    the testament, etc., Heb. 9. 20; so here is the dedication and
@c    institution of the new testament, in the blood of Christ, here
@c    mystically shed by these words:  This is the blood of the new testament,
@c    etc.

@c    26:29. And I say to you, I will not drink from henceforth of this fruit
@c    of the vine until that day when I shall drink it with you new in the
@c    kingdom of my Father.

@c    Fruit of the vine. . .These words, by the account of St. Luke 26:22. 18,
@c    were not spoken of the sacramental cup, but of the wine that was drunk
@c    with the paschal lamb.  Though the sacramental cup might also be called
@c    the fruit of the vine, because it was consecrated from wine, and
@c    retains the likeness, and all the accidents or qualities of wine.

@c    26:30. And a hymn being said, they went out unto mount Olivet.

@c    26:31. Then Jesus saith to them:  All you shall be scandalized in me
@c    this night.  For it is written:  I will strike the shepherd:  and the
@c    sheep of the flock shall be dispersed.

@c    Scandalized in me, etc. . .Forasmuch as my being apprehended shall make
@c    you all run away and forsake me.

@c    26:32. But after I shall be risen again, I will go before you into
@c    Galilee.

@c    26:33. And Peter answering, said to him:  Although all shall be
@c    scandalized in thee, I will never be scandalized.

@c    26:34. Jesus said to him:  Amen I say to thee that in this night before
@c    the cock crow, thou wilt deny me thrice.

@c    26:35. Peter saith to him:  Yea, though I should die with thee, I will
@c    not deny thee.  And in like manner said all the disciples.

@c    26:36. Then Jesus came with them into a country place which is called
@c    Gethsemani.  And he said to his disciples:  Sit you here, till I go
@c    yonder and pray.

@c    26:37. And taking with him Peter and the two sons of Zebedee, he began
@c    to grow sorrowful and to be sad.

@c    26:38. Then he saith to them:  My soul is sorrowful even unto death.
@c    Stay you here and watch with me.

@c    26:39. And going a little further, he fell upon his face, praying and
@c    saying:  My Father, if it be possible, let this chalice pass from me.
@c    Nevertheless, not as I will but as thou wilt.

@c    26:40. And he cometh to his disciples and findeth them asleep.  And he
@c    saith to Peter:  What?  Could you not watch one hour with me?

@c    26:41. Watch ye:  and pray that ye enter not into temptation.  The spirit
@c    indeed is willing, but the flesh is weak.

@c    26:42. Again the second time, he went and prayed, saying:  My Father, if
@c    this chalice may not pass away, but I must drink it, thy will be done.

@c    26:43. And he cometh again and findeth them sleeping:  for their eyes
@c    were heavy.

@c    26:44. And leaving them, he went again:  and he prayed the third time,
@c    saying the selfsame word.

@c    26:45. Then he cometh to his disciples and said to them:  Sleep ye now
@c    and take your rest.  Behold the hour is at hand:  and the Son of man
@c    shall be betrayed into the hands of sinners.

@c    26:46. Rise:  let us go.  Behold he is at hand that will betray me.

@c    26:47. As he yet spoke, behold Judas, one of the twelve, came, and with
@c    him a great multitude with swords and clubs, sent from the chief
@c    priests and the ancients of the people.

@c    26:48. And he that betrayed him gave them a sign, saying:  Whomsoever I
@c    shall kiss, that is he.  Hold him fast.

@c    26:49. And forthwith coming to Jesus, he said:  Hail, Rabbi.  And he
@c    kissed him.

@c    26:50. And Jesus said to him:  Friend, whereto art thou come?  Then they
@c    came up and laid hands on Jesus and held him.

@c    26:51. And behold one of them that were with Jesus, stretching forth
@c    his hand, drew out his sword:  and striking the servant of the high
@c    priest, cut off his ear.

@c    26:52. Then Jesus saith to him:  Put up again thy sword into its place:
@c    for all that take the sword shall perish with the sword.

@c    26:53. Thinkest thou that I cannot ask my Father, and he will give me
@c    presently more than twelve legions of angels?

@c    26:54. How then shall the scriptures be fulfilled, that so it must be
@c    done?

@c    26:55. In that same hour, Jesus said to the multitudes:  You are come
@c    out, as it were to a robber, with swords and clubs to apprehend me.  I
@c    sat daily with you, teaching in the temple:  and you laid not hands on
@c    me.

@c    26:56. Now all this was done that the scriptures of the prophets might
@c    be fulfilled.  Then the disciples, all leaving him, fled.

@c    26:57. But they holding Jesus led him to Caiphas the high priest, where
@c    the scribes and the ancients were assembled.

@c    26:58. And Peter followed him afar off, even to the court of the high
@c    priest, And going in, he sat with the servants, that he might see the
@c    end.

@c    26:59. And the chief priests and the whole council sought false witness
@c    against Jesus, that they might put him to death.

@c    26:60. And they found not, whereas many false witnesses had come in.
@c    And last of all there came two false witnesses:

@c    26:61. And they said:  This man said, I am able to destroy the temple of
@c    God and after three days to rebuild it.

@c    26:62. And the high priest rising up, said to him:  Answerest thou
@c    nothing to the things which these witness against thee?

@c    26:63. But Jesus held his peace.  And the high priest said to him:  I
@c    adjure thee by the living God, that thou tell us if thou be the Christ
@c    the Son of God.

@c    26:64. Jesus saith to him:  Thou hast said it.  Nevertheless I say to
@c    you, hereafter you shall see the Son of man sitting on the right hand
@c    of the power of God and coming in the clouds of heaven.

@c    26:65. Then the high priest rent his garments, saying:  He hath
@c    blasphemed:  What further need have we of witnesses?  Behold, now you
@c    have heard the blasphemy.

@c    26:66. What think you?  But they answering, said:  He is guilty of death.

@c    26:67. Then did they spit in his face and buffeted him.  And others
@c    struck his face with the palms of their hands,

@c    26:68. Saying:  Prophesy unto us, O Christ.  Who is he that struck thee?

@c    26:69. But Peter sat without in the court.  And there came to him a
@c    servant maid, saying:  Thou also wast with Jesus the Galilean.

@c    26:70. But he denied before them all, saying:  I know not what thou
@c    sayest.

@c    26:71. And as he went out of the gate, another maid saw him; and she
@c    saith to them that were there:  This man also was with Jesus of
@c    Nazareth.

@c    26:72. And again he denied with an oath:  I know not the man.

@c    26:73. And after a little while, they came that stood by and said to
@c    Peter:  Surely thou also art one of them.  For even thy speech doth
@c    discover thee.

@c    26:74. Then he began to curse and to swear that he knew not the man.
@c    And immediately the cock crew.

@c    26:75. And Peter remembered the word of Jesus which he had said:  Before
@c    the cock crow, thou wilt deny me thrice.  And going forth, he wept
@c    bitterly.



@c    Matthew Chapter 27


@c    The continuation of the history of the passion of Christ.  His death and
@c    burial.

@c    27:1. And when morning was come, all the chief priests and ancients of
@c    the people took counsel against Jesus, that they might put him to
@c    death.

@c    27:2. And they brought him bound and delivered him to Pontius Pilate
@c    the governor.

@c    27:3. Then Judas, who betrayed him, seeing that he was condemned,
@c    repenting himself, brought back the thirty pieces of silver to the
@c    chief priests and ancients,

@c    27:4. Saying:  I have sinned in betraying innocent blood.  But they said:
@c    What is that to us?  Look thou to it.

@c    27:5. And casting down the pieces of silver in the temple, he departed
@c    and went and hanged himself with an halter.

@c    27:6. But the chief priests having taken the pieces of silver, said:  It
@c    is not lawful to put them into the corbona, because it is the price of
@c    blood.

@c    Corbona. . .A place in the temple where the people put in their gifts or
@c    offerings.

@c    27:7. And after they had consulted together, they bought with them the
@c    potter's field, to be a burying place for strangers.

@c    27:8. For this cause that field was called Haceldama, that is, the
@c    field of blood, even to this day.

@c    27:9. Then was fulfilled that which was spoken by Jeremias the prophet,
@c    saying:  And they took the thirty pieces of silver, the price of him
@c    that was prized, whom they prized of the children of Israel.

@c    27:10. And they gave them unto the potter's field, as the Lord
@c    appointed to me.

@c    27:11. And Jesus stood before the governor, and the governor asked him,
@c    saying:  Art thou the king of the Jews?  Jesus saith to him:  Thou sayest
@c    it.

@c    27:12. And when he was accused by the chief priests and ancients, he
@c    answered nothing.

@c    27:13. Then Pilate saith to him:  Dost not thou hear how great
@c    testimonies they allege against thee?

@c    27:14. And he answered him to never a word, so that the governor
@c    wondered exceedingly.

@c    27:15. Now upon the solemn day the governor was accustomed to release
@c    to the people one prisoner, whom they would.

@c    27:16. And he had then a notorious prisoner that was called Barabbas.

@c    27:17. They therefore being gathered together, Pilate said:  Whom will
@c    you that I release to You:  Barabbas, or Jesus that is called Christ?

@c    27:18. For he knew that for envy they had delivered him.

@c    27:19. And as he was sitting in the place of judgment, his wife sent to
@c    him, saying:  Have thou nothing to do with that just man; for I have
@c    suffered many things this day in a dream because of him.

@c    27:20. But the chief priests and ancients persuaded the people that
@c    they should ask Barabbas and make Jesus away.

@c    27:21. And the governor answering, said to them:  Whether will you of
@c    the two to be released unto you?  But they said:  Barabbas.

@c    27:22. Pilate saith to them:  What shall I do then with Jesus that is
@c    called Christ?  They say all:  Let him be crucified.

@c    27:23. The governor said to them:  Why, what evil hath he done?  But they
@c    cried out the more, saying:  Let him be crucified.

@c    27:24. And Pilate seeing that he prevailed nothing, but that rather a
@c    tumult was made, taking water washed his hands before the people,
@c    saying:  I am innocent of the blood of this just man.  Look you to it.

@c    27:25. And the whole people answering, said:  His blood be upon us and
@c    upon our children.

@c    27:26. Then he released to them Barabbas:  and having scourged Jesus,
@c    delivered him unto them to be crucified.

@c    27:27. Then the soldiers of the governor, taking Jesus into the hall,
@c    gathered together unto him the whole band.

@c    27:28. And stripping him, they put a scarlet cloak about him.

@c    27:29. And platting a crown of thorns, they put it upon his head, and a
@c    reed in his right hand.  And bowing the knee before him, they mocked
@c    him, saying:  Hail, King of the Jews.

@c    27:30. And spitting upon him, they took the reed and struck his head.

@c    27:31. And after they had mocked him, they took off the cloak from him
@c    and put on him his own garments and led him away to crucify him.

@c    27:32. And going out, they found a man of Cyrene, named Simon:  him they
@c    forced to take up his cross.

@c    27:33. And they came to the place that is called Golgotha, which is the
@c    place of Calvary.

@c    27:34. And they gave him wine to drink mingled with gall.  And when he
@c    had tasted, he would not drink.

@c    27:35. And after they had crucified him, they divided his garments,
@c    casting lots; that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the
@c    prophet, saying:  They divided my garments among them; and upon my
@c    vesture they cast lots.

@c    27:36. And they sat and watched him.

@c    27:37. And they put over his head his cause written:  THIS IS JESUS THE
@c    KING OF THE JEWS.

@c    27:38. Then were crucified with him two thieves:  one on the right hand
@c    and one on the left.

@c    27:39. And they that passed by blasphemed him, wagging their heads,

@c    27:40. And saying:  Vah, thou that destroyest the temple of God and in
@c    three days dost rebuild it:  save thy own self.  If thou be the Son of
@c    God, come down from the cross.

@c    27:41. In like manner also the chief priests, with the scribes and
@c    ancients, mocking said:

@c    27:42. He saved others:  himself he cannot save.  If he be the king of
@c    Israel, let him now come down from the cross:  and we will believe him.

@c    27:43. He trusted in God:  let him now deliver him if he will have him.
@c    For he said:  I am the Son of God.

@c    27:44. And the selfsame thing the thieves also that were crucified with
@c    him reproached him with.

@c    27:45. Now from the sixth hour, there was darkness over the whole
@c    earth, until the ninth hour.

@c    27:46. And about the ninth hour, Jesus cried with a loud voice, saying:
@c    Eli, Eli, lamma sabacthani?  That is, My God, My God, why hast thou
@c    forsaken me?

@c    27:47. And some that stood there and heard said:  This man calleth
@c    Elias.

@c    27:48. And immediately one of them running took a sponge and filled it
@c    with vinegar and put it on a reed and gave him to drink.

@c    27:49. And the others said:  Let be.  Let us see whether Elias will come
@c    to deliver him.

@c    27:50. And Jesus again crying with a loud voice, yielded up the ghost.

@c    27:51. And behold the veil of the temple was rent in two from the top
@c    even to the bottom:  and the earth quaked and the rocks were rent.

@c    27:52. And the graves were opened:  and many bodies of the saints that
@c    had slept arose,

@c    27:53. And coming out of the tombs after his resurrection, came into
@c    the holy city and appeared to many.

@c    27:54. Now the centurion and they that were with him watching Jesus,
@c    having seen the earthquake and the things that were done, were sore
@c    afraid, saying:  Indeed this was the Son of God.

@c    27:55. And there were there many women afar off, who had followed Jesus
@c    from Galilee, ministering unto him:

@c    27:56. Among whom was Mary Magdalen and Mary the mother of James and
@c    Joseph and the mother of the sons of Zebedee.

@c    27:57. And when it was evening, there came a certain rich man of
@c    Arimathea, named Joseph, who also himself was a disciple of Jesus.

@c    27:58. He went to Pilate and asked the body of Jesus.  Then Pilate
@c    commanded that the body should be delivered.

@c    27:59. And Joseph taking the body wrapped it up in a clean linen cloth:

@c    27:60. And laid it in his own new monument, which he had hewed out in a
@c    rock.  And he rolled a great stone to the door of the monument and went
@c    his way.

@c    27:61. And there was there Mary Magdalen and the other Mary, sitting
@c    over against the sepulchre.

@c    27:62. And the next day, which followed the day of preparation, the
@c    chief priests and the Pharisees came together to Pilate,

@c    The day of preparation. . .The eve of the sabbath; so called, because on
@c    that day they prepared all things necessary; not being allowed so much
@c    as to dress their meat on the sabbath day.

@c    27:63. Saying:  Sir, we have remembered, that that seducer said, while
@c    he was yet alive:  After three days I will rise again.

@c    27:64. Command therefore the sepulchre to be guarded until the third
@c    day:  lest perhaps his disciples come and steal him away and say to the
@c    people:  He is risen from the dead.  And the last error shall be worse
@c    than the first.

@c    27:65. Pilate saith to them:  You have a guard.  Go, guard it as you
@c    know.

@c    27:66. And they departing, made the sepulchre sure, sealing the stone
@c    and setting guards.



@c    Matthew Chapter 28


@c    The resurrection of Christ.  His commission to his disciples.

@c    28:1. And in the end of the sabbath, when it began to dawn towards the
@c    first day of the week, came Mary Magdalen and the other Mary, to see
@c    the sepulchre.

@c    28:2. And behold there was a great earthquake.  For an angel of the Lord
@c    descended from heaven and coming rolled back the stone and sat upon it.

@c    28:3. And his countenance was as lightning and his raiment as snow.

@c    28:4. And for fear of him, the guards were struck with terror and
@c    became as dead men.

@c    28:5. And the angel answering, said to the women:  Fear not you:  for I
@c    know that you seek Jesus who was crucified.

@c    28:6. He is not here.  For he is risen, as he said.  Come, and see the
@c    place where the Lord was laid.

@c    28:7. And going quickly, tell ye his disciples that he is risen.  And
@c    behold he will go before you into Galilee.  There you shall see him.  Lo,
@c    I have foretold it to you.

@c    28:8. And they went out quickly from the sepulchre with fear and great
@c    joy, running to tell his disciples.

@c    28:9. And behold, Jesus met them, saying:  All hail.  But they came up
@c    and took hold of his feet and adored him.

@c    28:10. Then Jesus said to them:  Fear not.  Go, tell my brethren that
@c    they go into Galilee.  There they shall see me.

@c    28:11. Who when they were departed, behold, some of the guards came
@c    into the city and told the chief priests all things that had been done.

@c    28:12. And they being assembled together with the ancients, taking
@c    counsel, gave a great sum of money to the soldiers,

@c    28:13. Saying:  Say you, His disciples came by night and stole him away
@c    when we were asleep.

@c    28:14. And if the governor shall hear of this, we will persuade him and
@c    secure you.

@c    28:15. So they taking the money, did as they were taught:  and this word
@c    was spread abroad among the Jews even unto this day.

@c    28:16. And the eleven disciples went into Galilee, unto the mountain
@c    where Jesus had appointed them.

@c    28:17. And seeing him they adored:  but some doubted.

@c    28:18. And Jesus coming, spoke to them, saying:  All power is given to
@c    me in heaven and in earth.

@c    All power, etc. . .See here the warrant and commission of the apostles
@c    and their successors, the bishops and pastors of Christ's church.  He
@c    received from his Father all power in heaven and in earth:  and in
@c    virtue of this power, he sends them (even as his Father sent him, St.
@c    John 20. 21) to teach and disciple, not one, but all nations; and
@c    instruct them in all truths:  and that he may assist them effectually in
@c    the execution of this commission, he promises to be with them, not for
@c    three or four hundred years only, but all days, even to the
@c    consummation of the world.  How then could the Catholic Church ever go
@c    astray; having always with her pastors, as is here promised, Christ
@c    himself, who is the way, the truth, and the life.  St. John 14.

@c    28:19. Going therefore, teach ye all nations:  baptizing them in the
@c    name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Ghost.

@c    28:20. Teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded
@c    you.  And behold I am with you all days, even to the consummation of the
@c    world.
