@c    THE EPISTLE OF ST. PAUL TO THE PHILIPPIANS



@c    The Philippians were the first among the Macedonians converted to the
@c    faith.  They had a great veneration for St. Paul and supplied his wants
@c    when he was a prisoner in Rome, sending to him by Epaphroditus, by whom
@c    he sent this Epistle; in which he recommends charity, unity and
@c    humility and warns them against false teachers, whom he calls dogs and
@c    enemies of the cross of Christ.  He also returns thanks for their
@c    benefactions.  It was written about twenty-nine years after our Lord's
@c    Ascension.



@c    Philippians Chapter 1


@c    The apostle's affection for the Philippians.

@c    1:1. Paul and Timothy, the servants of Jesus Christ:  to all the saints
@c    in Christ Jesus who are at Philippi, with the bishops and deacons.

@c    1:2. Grace be unto you and peace, from God our Father and from the Lord
@c    Jesus Christ.

@c    1:3. I give thanks to my God in every remembrance of you:

@c    1:4. Always in all my prayers making supplication for you all with joy:

@c    1:5. For your communication in the gospel of Christ, from the first day
@c    unto now.

@c    1:6. Being confident of this very thing:  that he who hath begun a good
@c    work in you will perfect it unto the day of Christ Jesus.

@c    1:7. As it is meet for me to think this for you all, for that I have
@c    you in my heart; and that, in my bands and in the defence and
@c    confirmation of the gospel, you all are partakers of my joy.

@c    1:8. For God is my witness how I long after you all in the bowels of
@c    Jesus Christ.

@c    1:9. And this I pray:  That your charity may more and more abound in
@c    knowledge and in all understanding:

@c    1:10. That you may approve the better things:  that you may be sincere
@c    and without offence unto the day of Christ:

@c    1:11. Filled with the fruit of justice, through Jesus Christ, unto the
@c    glory and praise of God.

@c    1:12. Now, brethren, I desire you should know that the things which
@c    have happened to me have fallen out rather to the furtherance of the
@c    gospel:

@c    1:13. So that my bands are made manifest in Christ, in all the court
@c    and in all other places.

@c    1:14. And many of the brethren in the Lord, growing confident by my
@c    bands, are much more bold to speak the word of God without fear.

@c    1:15. Some indeed, even out of envy and contention:  but some also for
@c    good will preach Christ.

@c    1:16. Some out of charity, knowing that I am set for the defence of the
@c    gospel.

@c    1:17. And some out of contention preach Christ not sincerely:  supposing
@c    that they raise affliction to my bands.

@c    1:18. But what then?  So that by all means, whether by occasion or by
@c    truth, Christ be preached:  in this also I rejoice, yea, and will
@c    rejoice.

@c    1:19. For I know that this shall fall out to me unto salvation, through
@c    your prayer and the supply of the Spirit of Jesus Christ,

@c    1:20. According to my expectation and hope; that in nothing I shall be
@c    confounded:  but with all confidence, as always, so now also, shall
@c    Christ be magnified in my body, whether it be by life or by death.

@c    1:21. For to me, to live is Christ:  and to die is gain.

@c    1:22. And if to live in the flesh:  this is to me the fruit of labour.
@c    And what I shall choose I know not.

@c    This is to me, etc. . .His meaning is, that although his dying
@c    immediately for Christ would be his gain, by putting him presently in
@c    possession of heaven; yet he is doubtful what he should choose, because
@c    by staying longer in the flesh, he should be more beneficial to the
@c    souls of his neighbours.

@c    1:23. But I am straitened between two:  having a desire to be dissolved
@c    and to be with Christ, a thing by far the better.

@c    1:24. But to abide still in the flesh is needful for you.

@c    1:25. And having this confidence, I know that I shall abide and
@c    continue with you all, for your furtherance and joy of faith:

@c    1:26. That your rejoicing may abound in Christ Jesus for me, by my
@c    coming to you again.

@c    1:27. Only let your conversation be worthy of the gospel of Christ:
@c    that, whether I come and see you, or, being absent, may hear of you,
@c    that you stand fast in one spirit, with one mind labouring together for
@c    the faith of the gospel.

@c    1:28. And in nothing be ye terrified by the adversaries:  which to them
@c    is a cause of perdition, but to you of salvation, and this from God.

@c    1:29. For unto you it is given for Christ, not only to believe in him,
@c    but also to suffer for him:

@c    1:30. Having the same conflict as that which you have seen in me and
@c    now have heard of me.



@c    Philippians Chapter 2


@c    He recommends them to unity and humility, and to work out their
@c    salvation with fear and trembling.

@c    2:1. If there be therefore any consolation in Christ, if any comfort of
@c    charity, if any society of the spirit, if any bowels of commiseration:

@c    2:2. Fulfil ye my joy, that you be of one mind, having the same
@c    charity, being of one accord, agreeing in sentiment.

@c    2:3. Let nothing be done through contention:  neither by vain glory.  But
@c    in humility, let each esteem others better than themselves:

@c    2:4. Each one not considering the things that are his own, but those
@c    that are other men's.

@c    2:5. For let this mind be in you, which was also in Christ Jesus:

@c    2:6. Who being in the form of God, thought it not robbery to be equal
@c    with God:

@c    2:7. But emptied himself, taking the form of a servant, being made in
@c    the likeness of men, and in habit found as a man.

@c    Emptied himself, exinanivit. . .made himself as of no account.

@c    2:8. He humbled himself, becoming obedient unto death, even to the
@c    death of the cross.

@c    2:9. For which cause, God also hath exalted him and hath given him a
@c    name which is above all names:

@c    2:10. That in the name of Jesus every knee should bow, of those that
@c    are in heaven, on earth, and under the earth:

@c    2:11. And that every tongue should confess that the Lord Jesus Christ
@c    is in the glory of God the Father.

@c    2:12. Wherefore, my dearly beloved, (as you have always obeyed, not as
@c    in my presence only but much more now in my absence) with fear and
@c    trembling work out your salvation.

@c    With fear, etc. . .This is against the false faith, and presumptuous
@c    security of modern sectaries.

@c    2:13. For it is God who worketh in you, both to will and to accomplish,
@c    according to his good will.

@c    2:14. And do ye all things without murmurings and hesitations:

@c    2:15. That you may be blameless and sincere children of God, without
@c    reproof, in the midst of a crooked and perverse generation:  among whom
@c    you shine as lights in the world.

@c    2:16. Holding forth the word of life to my glory in the day of Christ:
@c    because I have not run in vain, nor laboured in vain.

@c    2:17. Yea, and if I be made a victim upon the sacrifice and service of
@c    your faith, I rejoice and congratulate with you all.

@c    2:18. And for the selfsame thing, do you also rejoice and congratulate
@c    with me.

@c    2:19. And I hope in the Lord Jesus to send Timothy unto you shortly,
@c    that I also may be of good comfort, when I know the things concerning
@c    you.

@c    2:20. For I have no man so of the same mind, who with sincere affection
@c    is solicitous for you.

@c    2:21. For all seek the things that are their own not the things that
@c    are Jesus Christ's.

@c    2:22. Now know ye the proof of him:  that as a son with the father, so
@c    hath he served with me in the gospel.

@c    2:23. Him therefore I hope to send unto you immediately:  so soon as I
@c    shall see how it will go with me.

@c    2:24. And I trust in the Lord that I myself also shall come to you
@c    shortly.

@c    2:25. But I have thought it necessary to send to you Epaphroditus, my
@c    brother and fellow labourer and fellow soldier, but your apostle:  and
@c    he that hath ministered to my wants.

@c    2:26. For indeed he longed after you all:  and was sad, for that you had
@c    heard that he was sick.

@c    2:27. For indeed he was sick, nigh unto death:  but God had mercy on
@c    him.  And not only on him, but on me also, lest I should have sorrow
@c    upon sorrow.

@c    2:28. Therefore, I sent him the more speedily:  that seeing him again,
@c    you may rejoice, and I may be without sorrow.

@c    2:29. Receive him therefore with all joy in the Lord:  and treat with
@c    honour such as he is.

@c    2:30. Because for the work of Christ he came to the point of death:
@c    delivering his life, that he might fulfil that which on your part was
@c    wanting towards my service.



@c    Philippians Chapter 3


@c    He warneth them against false teachers.  He counts all other things
@c    loss, that he may gain Christ.

@c    3:1. As to the rest, my brethren, rejoice in the Lord.  To write the
@c    same things to you, to me indeed is not wearisome, but to you is
@c    necessary.

@c    3:2. Beware of dogs:  beware of evil workers:  beware of the concision.

@c    3:3. For we are the circumcision, who in spirit serve God and glory in
@c    Christ Jesus, not having confidence in the flesh.

@c    3:4. Though I might also have confidence in the flesh.  If any other
@c    thinketh he may have confidence in the flesh, I more:

@c    3:5. Being circumcised the eighth day, of the stock of Israel, of the
@c    tribe of Benjamin, an Hebrew of the Hebrews.  According to the law, a
@c    Pharisee:

@c    3:6. According to zeal, persecuting the church of God:  According to the
@c    justice that is in the law, conversing without blame.

@c    3:7. But the things that were gain to me, the same I have counted loss
@c    for Christ.

@c    3:8. Furthermore, I count all things to be but loss for the excellent
@c    knowledge of Jesus Christ, my Lord:  for whom I have suffered the loss
@c    of all things and count them but as dung, that I may gain Christ.

@c    3:9. And may be found in him, not having my justice, which is of the
@c    law, but that which is of the faith of Christ Jesus, which is of God:
@c    justice in faith.

@c    3:10. That I may know him and the power of his resurrection and the
@c    fellowship of his sufferings:  being made conformable to his death,

@c    3:11. If by any means I may attain to the resurrection which is from
@c    the dead.

@c    3:12. Not as though I had already attained, or were already perfect:
@c    but I follow after, if I may by any means apprehend, wherein I am also
@c    apprehended by Christ Jesus.

@c    3:13. Brethren, I do not count myself to have apprehended.  But one
@c    thing I do:  Forgetting the things that are behind and stretching forth
@c    myself to those that are before,

@c    3:14. I press towards the mark, to the prize of the supernal vocation
@c    of God in Christ Jesus.

@c    3:15. Let us therefore, as many as are perfect, be thus minded:  and if
@c    in any thing you be otherwise minded, this also God will reveal to you,

@c    3:16. Nevertheless, whereunto we are come, that we be of the same mind,
@c    let us also continue in the same rule.

@c    3:17. Be ye followers of me, brethren:  and observe them who walk so as
@c    you have our model.

@c    3:18. For many walk, of whom I have told you often (and now tell you
@c    weeping) that they are enemies of the cross of Christ:

@c    3:19. Whose end is destruction:  whose God is their belly:  and whose
@c    glory is in their shame:  who mind earthly things.

@c    3:20. But our conversation is in heaven:  from whence also we look for
@c    the Saviour, our Lord Jesus Christ,

@c    3:21. Who will reform the body of our lowness, made like to the body of
@c    his glory, according to the operation whereby also he is able to subdue
@c    all things unto himself.



@c    Philippians Chapter 4


@c    He exhorts them to perseverance in all good and acknowledges their
@c    charitable contributions to him.

@c    4:1. Therefore my dearly beloved brethren and most desired, my joy and
@c    my crown:  so stand fast in the Lord, my dearly beloved.

@c    4:2. I beg of Evodia and I beseech Syntyche to be of one mind in the
@c    Lord.

@c    4:3. And I entreat thee also, my sincere companion, help those women
@c    who have laboured with me in the gospel, with Clement and the rest of
@c    my fellow labourers, whose names are in the book of life.

@c    4:4. Rejoice in the Lord always:  again, I say, rejoice.

@c    4:5. Let your modesty be known to all men.  The Lord is nigh.

@c    4:6. Be nothing solicitous:  but in every thing, by prayer and
@c    supplication, with thanksgiving, let your petitions be made known to
@c    God.

@c    4:7. And the peace of God, which surpasseth all understanding, keep
@c    your hearts and minds in Christ Jesus.

@c    4:8. For the rest, brethren, whatsoever things are true, whatsoever
@c    modest, whatsoever just, whatsoever holy, whatsoever lovely, whatsoever
@c    of good fame, if there be any virtue, if any praise of discipline:
@c    think on these things.

@c    For the rest, brethren, whatsoever things are true, etc. . .Here the
@c    apostle enumerates general precepts of morality, which they ought to
@c    practise.  Whatsoever things are true. . .in words, in promises, in
@c    lawful oaths, etc., he commands rectitude of mind, and sincerity of
@c    heart.  Whatsoever modest. . .by these words he prescribes gravity in
@c    manners, modesty in dress, and decency in conversation.  Whatsoever
@c    just. . .That is, in dealing with others, in buying or selling, in trade
@c    or business, to be fair and honest.  Whatsoever holy. . .by these words
@c    may be understood, that those who are in a religious state professed,
@c    or in holy orders, should lead a life of sanctity and chastity,
@c    according to the vows they make; but these words being also applied to
@c    those in the world, indicate the virtuous life they are bound by the
@c    divine commandments to follow.  Whatsoever lovely. . .that is, to
@c    practise those good offices in society, that procure us the esteem and
@c    good will of our neighbours.  Whatsoever of good fame. . .That is, that
@c    by our conduct and behaviour we should edify our neighbours, and give
@c    them good example by our actions.  If there be any virtue, if any praise
@c    of discipline. . .that those in error, by seeing the morality and good
@c    discipline of the true religion, may be converted.  And finally, the
@c    apostle commands, not only the Philippians, but all Christians, to
@c    think on these things. . .that is, to make it their study and concern
@c    that the peace of God might be with them.

@c    4:9. The things which you have both learned and received and heard and
@c    seen in me, these do ye:  and the God of peace shall be with you.

@c    4:10. Now I rejoice in the Lord exceedingly that now at length your
@c    thought for me hath flourished again, as you did also think; but you
@c    were busied.

@c    4:11. I speak not as it were for want.  For I have learned, in
@c    whatsoever state I am, to be content therewith.

@c    4:12. I know both how to be brought low, and I know how to abound
@c    (every where and in all things I am instructed):  both to be full and to
@c    be hungry:  both to abound and to suffer need.

@c    4:13. I can do all things in him who strengtheneth me.

@c    4:14. Nevertheless, you have done well in communicating to my
@c    tribulation.

@c    4:15. And you also know, O Philippians, that in the beginning of the
@c    gospel, when I departed from Macedonia, no church communicated with me
@c    as concerning giving and receiving, but you only.

@c    4:16. For unto Thessalonica also you sent once and again for my use.

@c    4:17. Not that I seek the gift:  but I seek the fruit that may abound to
@c    your account.

@c    4:18. But I have all and abound:  I am filled, having received from
@c    Epaphroditus the things you sent, an odour of sweetness, an acceptable
@c    sacrifice, pleasing to God.

@c    4:19. And may my God supply all your want, according to his riches in
@c    glory in Christ Jesus.

@c    4:20. Now to God and our Father be glory, world without end.  Amen.

@c    4:21. Salute ye every saint in Christ Jesus.

@c    4:22. The brethren who are with me salute you.  All the saints salute
@c    you:  especially they that are of Caesar's household.

@c    4:23. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with your spirit.  Amen.
