@c    THE EPISTLE OF ST. PAUL TO PHILEMON



@c    Philemon, a noble citizen of Colossa, had a servant named Onesimus, who
@c    robbed him and fled to Rome, where he met St. Paul, who was then a
@c    prisoner there the first time.  The apostle took compassion on him and
@c    received him with tenderness and converted him to the faith; for he was
@c    a Gentile before.  St. Paul sends him back to his master with this
@c    Epistle in his favour:  and though he beseeches Philemon to pardon him,
@c    yet the Apostle writes with becoming dignity and authority.  It contains
@c    divers profitable instructions and points out the charity and humanity
@c    that masters should have for their servants.



@c    Philemon Chapter 1


@c    He commends the faith and charity of Philemon; and sends back to him
@c    his fugitive servant, whom he had converted in prison.

@c    1:1. Paul, a prisoner of Christ Jesus, and Timothy, a brother:  to
@c    Philemon, our beloved and fellow labourer,

@c    1:2. And to Appia, our dearest sister, and to Archippus, our fellow
@c    soldier, and to the church which is in thy house.

@c    1:3. Grace to you and peace, from God our Father and from the Lord
@c    Jesus Christ.

@c    1:4. I give thanks to my God, always making a remembrance of thee in my
@c    prayers.

@c    1:5. Hearing of thy charity and faith, which thou hast in the Lord
@c    Jesus and towards all the saints:

@c    1:6. That the communication of thy faith may be made evident in the
@c    acknowledgment of every good work that is in you in Christ Jesus.

@c    1:7. For I have had great joy and consolation in thy charity, because
@c    the bowels of the saints have been refreshed by thee, brother.

@c    1:8. Wherefore, though I have much confidence in Christ Jesus to
@c    command thee that which is to the purpose:

@c    1:9. For charity sake I rather beseech, whereas thou art such a one, as
@c    Paul, an old man and now a prisoner also of Jesus Christ.

@c    1:10. I beseech thee for my son, whom I have begotten in my bands,
@c    Onesimus,

@c    1:11. Who hath been heretofore unprofitable to thee but now is
@c    profitable both to me and thee:

@c    1:12. Whom I have sent back to thee.  And do thou receive him as my own
@c    bowels.

@c    1:13. Whom I would have retained with me, that in thy stead he might
@c    have ministered to me in the bands of the gospel.

@c    1:14. But without thy counsel I would do nothing:  that thy good deed
@c    might not be as it were of necessity, but voluntary.

@c    1:15. For perhaps he therefore departed for a season from thee that
@c    thou mightest receive him again for ever:

@c    1:16. Not now as a servant, but instead of a servant, a most dear
@c    brother, especially to me.  But how much more to thee, both in the flesh
@c    and in the Lord?

@c    1:17. If therefore thou count me a partner, receive him as myself.

@c    1:18. And if he hath wronged thee in any thing or is in thy debt, put
@c    that to my account.

@c    1:19. I Paul have written it with my own hand:  I will repay it:  not to
@c    say to thee that thou owest me thy own self also.

@c    1:20. Yea, brother.  May I enjoy thee in the Lord!  Refresh my bowels in
@c    the Lord.

@c    1:21. Trusting in thy obedience, I have written to thee:  knowing that
@c    thou wilt also do more than I say.

@c    1:22. But withal prepare me also a lodging.  For I hope that through
@c    your prayers I shall be given unto you.

@c    1:23. There salute thee Epaphras, my fellow prisoner in Christ Jesus:

@c    1:24. Mark, Aristarchus, Demas and Luke, my fellow labourers.

@c    1:25. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with your spirit.  Amen.
