@c    THE EPISTLE OF ST. PAUL THE APOSTLE TO THE ROMANS



@c    St. Paul wrote this epistle at Corinth, when he was preparing to go to
@c    Jerusalem with the charitable contributions collected in Achaia and
@c    Macedonia for the relief of the Christians in Judea; which was about
@c    twenty-four years after Our Lord's Ascension.  It was written in Greek;
@c    but at the same time translated into Latin, for the benefit of those
@c    who did not understand that language.  And though it is not the first of
@c    his Epistles in the order of time, yet it is first placed on account of
@c    sublimity of the matter contained in it, of the preeminence of the
@c    place to which it was sent, and in veneration of the Church.



@c    Romans Chapter 1


@c    He commends the faith of the Romans, whom he longs to see.  The
@c    philosophy of the heathens, being void of faith and humility, betrayed
@c    them into shameful sins.

@c    1:1. Paul, a servant of Jesus Christ, called to be an apostle,
@c    separated unto the gospel of God.

@c    1:2. Which he had promised before, by his prophets, in the holy
@c    scriptures,

@c    1:3. Concerning his Son, who was made to him of the seed of David,
@c    according to the flesh,

@c    1:4. Who was predestinated the Son of God in power, according to the
@c    spirit of sanctification, by the resurrection of our Lord Jesus Christ
@c    from the dead:

@c    Predestinated, etc. . .Christ as man, was predestinated to be the Son of
@c    God:  and declared to be so (as the apostle here signifies) first, by
@c    power, that is, by his working stupendous miracles; secondly, by the
@c    spirit of sanctification, that is, by his infinite sanctity; thirdly,
@c    by his ressurection, or raising himself from the dead.

@c    1:5. By whom we have received grace and apostleship for obedience to
@c    the faith, in all nations, for his name:

@c    1:6. Among whom are you also the called of Jesus Christ:

@c    1:7. To all that are at Rome, the beloved of God, called to be saints.
@c    Grace to you and peace, from God our Father and from the Lord Jesus
@c    Christ.

@c    1:8. First, I give thanks to my God, through Jesus Christ, for you all:
@c    because your faith is spoken of in the whole world.

@c    1:9. For God is my witness, whom I serve in my spirit in the gospel of
@c    his Son, that without ceasing I make a commemoration of you:

@c    1:10. Always in my prayers making request, if by any means now at
@c    length I may have a prosperous journey, by the will of God, to come
@c    unto you.

@c    1:11. For I long to see you that I may impart unto you some spiritual
@c    grace, to strengthen you:

@c    1:12. That is to say, that I may be comforted together in you by that
@c    which is common to us both, your faith and mine.

@c    1:13. And I would not have you ignorant, brethren, that I have often
@c    purposed to come unto you (and have been hindered hitherto) that I
@c    might have some fruit among you also, even as among other Gentiles.

@c    1:14. To the Greeks and to the barbarians, to the wise and to the
@c    unwise, I am a debtor.

@c    1:15. So (as much as is in me) I am ready to preach the gospel to you
@c    also that are at Rome.

@c    1:16. For I am not ashamed of the gospel.  For it is the power of God
@c    unto salvation to every one that believeth:  to the Jew first and to the
@c    Greek.

@c    1:17. For the justice of God is revealed therein, from faith unto
@c    faith, as it is written:  The just man liveth by faith.

@c    1:18. For the wrath of God is revealed from heaven against all
@c    ungodliness and injustice of those men that detain the truth of God in
@c    injustice:

@c    1:19. Because that which is known of God is manifest in them.  For God
@c    hath manifested it unto them.

@c    1:20. For the invisible things of him from the creation of the world
@c    are clearly seen, being understood by the things that are made.  His
@c    eternal power also and divinity:  so that they are inexcusable.

@c    1:21. Because that, when they knew God, they have not glorified him as
@c    God or given thanks:  but became vain in their thoughts.  And their
@c    foolish heart was darkened.

@c    1:22. For, professing themselves to be wise, they became fools.

@c    1:23. And they changed the glory of the incorruptible God into the
@c    likeness of the image of a corruptible man and of birds, and of
@c    fourfooted beasts and of creeping things.

@c    1:24. Wherefore, God gave them up to the desires of their heart, unto
@c    uncleanness:  to dishonour their own bodies among themselves.

@c    1:25. Who changed the truth of God into a lie and worshipped and served
@c    the creature rather than the Creator, who is blessed for ever.  Amen.

@c    1:26. For this cause, God delivered them up to shameful affections.  For
@c    their women have changed the natural use into that use which is against
@c    nature.

@c    God delivered them up. . .Not by being author of their sins, but by
@c    withdrawing his grace, and so permitting them, in punishment of their
@c    pride, to fall into those shameful sins.

@c    1:27. And, in like manner, the men also, leaving the natural use of the
@c    women, have burned in their lusts, one towards another:  men with men,
@c    working that which is filthy and receiving in themselves the recompense
@c    which was due to their error.

@c    1:28. And as they liked not to have God in their knowledge, God
@c    delivered them up to a reprobate sense, to do those things which are
@c    not convenient.

@c    1:29. Being filled with all iniquity, malice, fornication, avarice,
@c    wickedness:  full of envy, murder, contention, deceit, malignity:
@c    whisperers,

@c    1:30. Detractors, hateful to God, contumelious, proud, haughty,
@c    inventors of evil things, disobedient to parents,

@c    1:31. Foolish, dissolute:  without affection, without fidelity, without
@c    mercy.

@c    1:32. Who, having known the justice of God, did not understand that
@c    they who do such things, are worthy of death:  and not only they that do
@c    them, but they also that consent to them that do them.



@c    Romans Chapter 2


@c    The Jews are censured, who make their boast of the law and keep it not.
@c    He declares who are the true Jews.

@c    2:1. Wherefore thou art inexcusable, O man, whosoever thou art that
@c    judgest.  For wherein thou judgest another, thou condemnest thyself.  For
@c    thou dost the same things which thou judgest.

@c    2:2. For we know that the judgment of God is, according to truth,
@c    against them that do such things.

@c    2:3. And thinkest thou this, O man, that judgest them who do such
@c    things and dost the same, that thou shalt escape the judgment of God?

@c    2:4. Or despisest thou the riches of his goodness and patience and
@c    longsuffering?  Knowest thou not that the benignity of God leadeth thee
@c    to penance?

@c    2:5. But according to thy hardness and impenitent heart, thou
@c    treasurest up to thyself wrath, against the day of wrath and revelation
@c    of the just judgment of God:

@c    2:6. Who will render to every man according to his works.

@c    2:7. To them indeed who, according to patience in good work, seek glory
@c    and honour and incorruption, eternal life:

@c    2:8. But to them that are contentious and who obey not the truth but
@c    give credit to iniquity, wrath and indignation.

@c    2:9. Tribulation and anguish upon every soul of man that worketh evil:
@c    of the Jew first, and also of the Greek.

@c    2:10. But glory and honour and peace to every one that worketh good:  to
@c    the Jew first, and also to the Greek.

@c    2:11. For there is no respect of persons with God.

@c    2:12. For whosoever have sinned without the law shall perish without
@c    the law:  and whosoever have sinned in the law shall be judged by the
@c    law.

@c    2:13. For not the hearers of the law are just before God:  but the doers
@c    of the law shall be justified.

@c    2:14. For when the Gentiles, who have not the law, do by nature those
@c    things that are of the law; these, having not the law, are a law to
@c    themselves.

@c    2:15. Who shew the work of the law written in their hearts, their
@c    conscience bearing witness to them:  and their thoughts between
@c    themselves accusing or also defending one another,

@c    2:16. In the day when God shall judge the secrets of men by Jesus
@c    Christ, according to my gospel.

@c    2:17. But if thou art called a Jew and restest in the law and makest
@c    thy boast of God,

@c    2:18. And knowest his will and approvest the more profitable things,
@c    being instructed by the law:

@c    2:19. Art confident that thou thyself art a guide of the blind, a light
@c    of them that are in darkness,

@c    2:20. An instructor of the foolish, a teacher of infants, having the
@c    form of knowledge and of truth in the law.

@c    2:21. Thou therefore, that teachest another, teachest not thyself:
@c    thou, that preachest that men should not steal, stealest.

@c    2:22. Thou, that sayest men should not commit adultery, committest
@c    adultery:  thou, that abhorrest idols, committest sacrilege:

@c    2:23. Thou, that makest thy boast of the law, by transgression of the
@c    law dishonourest God.

@c    2:24. (For the name of God through you is blasphemed among the
@c    Gentiles, as it is written.)

@c    2:25. Circumcision profiteth indeed, if thou keep the law:  but if thou
@c    be a transgressor of the law, thy circumcision is made uncircumcision.

@c    2:26. If then, the uncircumcised keep the justices of the law, shall
@c    not this uncircumcision be counted for circumcision?

@c    2:27. And shall not that which by nature is uncircumcision, if it
@c    fulfil the law, judge thee, who by the letter and circumcision art a
@c    transgressor of the law?

@c    2:28. For it is not he is a Jew, who is so outwardly:  nor is that
@c    circumcision which is outwardly in the flesh.

@c    2:29. But he is a Jew that is one inwardly and the circumcision is that
@c    of the heart, in the spirit not in the letter:  whose praise is not of
@c    men, but of God.



@c    Romans Chapter 3


@c    The advantages of the Jews.  All men are sinners and none can be
@c    justified by the works of the law, but only by the grace of Christ.

@c    3:1. What advantage then hath the Jew:  or what is the profit of
@c    circumcision?

@c    3:2. Much every way.  First indeed, because the words of God were
@c    committed to them.

@c    3:3. For what if some of them have not believed?  Shall their unbelief
@c    make the faith of God without effect?  God forbid!

@c    3:4. But God is true and every man a liar, as it is written:  That thou
@c    mayest be justified in thy words and mayest overcome when thou art
@c    judged.

@c    God only is essentially true.  All men in their own capacity are liable
@c    to lies and errors:  nevertheless God, who is the truth, will make good
@c    his promise of keeping his church in all truth.  See St. John 16.13.

@c    3:5. But if our injustice commend the justice of God, what shall we
@c    say?  Is God unjust, who executeth wrath?

@c    3:6. (I speak according to man.)  God forbid!  Otherwise how shall God
@c    judge this world?

@c    3:7. For if the truth of God hath more abounded through my lie, unto
@c    his glory, why am I also yet judged as a sinner?

@c    3:8. And not rather (as we are slandered and as some affirm that we
@c    say) let us do evil that there may come good?  Whose damnation is just.

@c    3:9. What then?  Do we excel them?  No, not so.  For we have charged both
@c    Jews and Greeks, that they are all under sin.

@c    3:10. As it is written:  There is not any man just.

@c    There is not any man just, viz. . .by virtue either of the law of
@c    nature, or of the law of Moses; but only by faith and grace.

@c    3:11. There is none that understandeth:  there is none that seeketh
@c    after God.

@c    3:12. All have turned out of the way:  they are become unprofitable
@c    together:  there is none that doth good, there is not so much as one.

@c    3:13. Their throat is an open sepulchre:  with their tongues they have
@c    dealt deceitfully.  The venom of asps is under their lips.

@c    3:14. Whose mouth is full of cursing and bitterness:

@c    3:15. Their feet swift to shed blood:

@c    3:16. Destruction and misery in their ways:

@c    3:17. And the way of peace they have not known.

@c    3:18. There is no fear of God before their eyes.

@c    3:19. Now we know that what things soever the law speaketh, it speaketh
@c    to them that are in the law:  that every mouth may be stopped and all
@c    the world may be made subject to God.

@c    3:20. Because by the works of the law no flesh shall be justified
@c    before him.  For by the law is the knowledge of sin.

@c    3:21. But now, without the law, the justice of God is made manifest,
@c    being witnessed by the law and the prophets.

@c    3:22. Even the justice of God, by faith of Jesus Christ, unto all, and
@c    upon all them that believe in him:  for there is no distinction.

@c    3:23. For all have sinned and do need the glory of God.

@c    3:24. Being justified freely by his grace, through the redemption that
@c    is in Christ Jesus,

@c    3:25. Whom God hath proposed to be a propitiation, through faith in his
@c    blood, to the shewing of his justice, for the remission of former sins,

@c    3:26. Through the forbearance of God, for the shewing of his justice in
@c    this time:  that he himself may be just and the justifier of him who is
@c    of the faith of Jesus Christ

@c    3:27. Where is then thy boasting?  It is excluded.  By what law?  Of
@c    works?  No, but by the law of faith.

@c    3:28. For we account a man to be justified by faith, without the works
@c    of the law.

@c    By faith, etc. . .The faith, to which the apostle here attributes man's
@c    justification, is not a presumptuous assurance of our being justified;
@c    but a firm and lively belief of all that God has revealed or promised.
@c    Heb. 11.  A faith working through charity in Jesus Christ.  Gal. 5.6. In
@c    short, a faith which takes in hope, love, repentance, and the use of
@c    the sacraments.  And the works which he here excludes, are only the
@c    works of the law:  that is, such as are done by the law of nature, or
@c    that of Moses, antecedent to the faith of Christ:  but by no means, such
@c    as follow faith, and proceed from it.

@c    3:29. Is he the God of the Jews only?  Is he not also of the Gentiles?
@c    yes, of the Gentiles also.

@c    3:30. For it is one God that justifieth circumcision by faith and
@c    uncircumcision through faith.

@c    3:31. Do we then, destroy the law through faith?  God forbid!  But we
@c    establish the law.



@c    Romans Chapter 4


@c    Abraham was not justified by works done, as of himself, but by grace
@c    and by faith.  And that before he was circumcised.  Gentiles, by faith,
@c    are his children.

@c    4:1. What shall we say then that Abraham hath found, who is our father
@c    according to the flesh?

@c    4:2. For if Abraham were justified by works, he hath whereof to glory,
@c    but not before God.

@c    By works. . .Done by his own strength, without the grace of God, and
@c    faith in him.  Not before God. . .Whatever glory or applause such works
@c    might procure from men, they would be of no value in the sight of God.

@c    4:3. For what saith the scripture?  Abraham believed God:  and it was
@c    reputed to him unto justice.

@c    Reputed, etc. . .By God, who reputeth nothing otherwise than it is.
@c    However, we may gather from this word, that when we are justified, our
@c    justification proceedeth from God's free grace and bounty; and not from
@c    any efficacy which any act of ours could have of its own nature,
@c    abstracting from God's grace.

@c    4:4. Now to him that worketh, the reward is not reckoned according to
@c    grace but according to debt.

@c    To him that worketh. . .Vis., as of his own fund, or by his own
@c    strength.  Such a man, says the apostle, challenges his reward as a debt
@c    due to his own performances; whereas he who worketh not, that is, who
@c    presumeth not upon any works done by his own strength, but seeketh
@c    justice through faith and grace, is freely justified by God's grace.

@c    4:5. But to him that worketh not, yet believeth in him that justifieth
@c    the ungodly, his faith is reputed to justice, according to the purpose
@c    of the grace of God.

@c    4:6. As David also termeth the blessedness of a man to whom God
@c    reputeth justice without works:

@c    4:7. Blessed are they whose iniquities are forgiven:  and whose sins are
@c    covered.

@c    Blessed are they whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are
@c    covered. . .That is, blessed are those who, by doing penance, have
@c    obtained pardon and remission of their sins, and also are covered; that
@c    is, newly clothed with the habit of grace, and vested with the stole of
@c    charity.

@c    4:8. Blessed is the man to whom the Lord hath not imputed sin.

@c    Blessed is the man to whom the Lord hath not imputed sin. . .That is,
@c    blessed is the man who hath retained his baptismal innocence, that no
@c    grievous sin can be imputed to him.  And, likewise, blessed is the man,
@c    who after fall into sin, hath done penance and leads a virtuous life,
@c    by frequenting the sacraments necessary for obtaining the grace to
@c    prevent a relapse, that sin is no more imputed to him.

@c    4:9. This blessedness then, doth it remain in the circumcision only or
@c    in the uncircumcision also?  For we say that unto Abraham faith was
@c    reputed to justice.

@c    In the circumcision, etc. . .That is, is it only for the Jews that are
@c    circumcised?  No, says the apostle, but also for the uncircumcised
@c    Gentiles:  who, by faith and grace, may come to justice; as Abraham did
@c    before he was circumcised.

@c    4:10. How then was it reputed?  When he was in circumcision or in
@c    uncircumcision?  Not in circumcision, but in uncircumcision.

@c    4:11. And he received the sign of circumcision, a seal of the justice
@c    of the faith which he had, being uncircumcised:  that he might be the
@c    father of all them that believe, being uncircumcised:  that unto them
@c    also it may be reputed to justice:

@c    4:12. And he might be the father of circumcision; not to them only that
@c    are of the circumcision, but to them also that follow the steps of the
@c    faith that is in the uncircumcision of our father Abraham.

@c    4:13. For not through the law was the promise to Abraham or to his
@c    seed, that he should be heir of the world:  but through the justice of
@c    faith.

@c    4:14. For if they who are of the law be heirs, faith is made void:  the
@c    promise is made of no effect.

@c    Be heirs. . .That is, if they alone, who follow the ceremonies of the
@c    law, be heirs of the blessings promised to Abraham; then that faith
@c    which was so much praised in him, will be found to be of little value.
@c    And the very promise will be made void, by which he was promised to be
@c    the father, not of the Jews only, but of all nations of believers.

@c    4:15. For the law worketh wrath.  For where there is no law, neither is
@c    there transgression.

@c    The law worketh wrath. . .The law, abstracting from faith and grace,
@c    worketh wrath occasionally, by being an occasion of many
@c    transgressions, which provoke God's wrath.

@c    4:16. Therefore is it of faith, that according to grace the promise
@c    might be firm to all the seed:  not to that only which is of the law,
@c    but to that also which is of the faith of Abraham, who is the father of
@c    us all,

@c    4:17. (As it is written:  I have made thee a father of many nations),
@c    before God, whom he believed:  who quickeneth the dead and calleth those
@c    things that are not, as those that are.

@c    4:18. Who against hope believed in hope; that he might be made the
@c    father of many nations, according to that which was said to him:  So
@c    shall thy seed be.

@c    4:19. And he was not weak in faith.  Neither did he consider his own
@c    body, now dead (whereas he was almost an hundred years old), nor the
@c    dead womb of Sara.

@c    4:20. In the promise also of God he staggered not by distrust:  but was
@c    strengthened in faith, giving glory to God:

@c    4:21. Most fully knowing that whatsoever he has promised, he is able
@c    also to perform.

@c    4:22. And therefore it was reputed to him unto justice.

@c    4:23. Now it is not written only for him.  that it was reputed to him
@c    unto justice,

@c    4:24. But also for us, to whom it shall be reputed, if we believe in
@c    him that raised up Jesus Christ, our Lord, from the dead,

@c    4:25. Who was delivered up for our sins and rose again for our
@c    justification.



@c    Romans Chapter 5


@c    The grounds we have for hope in Christ.  Sin and death came by Adam,
@c    grace and life by Christ.

@c    5:1. Being justified therefore by faith, let us have peace with God,
@c    through our Lord Jesus Christ:

@c    5:2. By whom also we have access through faith into this grace wherein
@c    we stand:  and glory in the hope of the glory of the sons of God.

@c    5:3. And not only so:  but we glory also in tribulation, knowing that
@c    tribulation worketh patience;

@c    5:4. And patience trial; and trial hope;

@c    5:5. And hope confoundeth not:  because the charity of God is poured
@c    forth in our hearts, by the Holy Ghost who is given to us.

@c    5:6. For why did Christ, when as yet we were weak, according to the
@c    time, die for the ungodly?

@c    5:7. For scarce for a just man will one die:  yet perhaps for a good man
@c    some one would dare to die.

@c    5:8. But God commendeth his charity towards us:  because when as yet we
@c    were sinners according to the time.

@c    5:9. Christ died for us.  Much more therefore, being now justified by
@c    his blood, shall we be saved from wrath through him.

@c    5:10. For if, when we were enemies, we were reconciled to God by the
@c    death of his Son:  much more, being reconciled, shall we be saved by his
@c    life.

@c    5:11. And not only so:  but also we glory in God, through our Lord Jesus
@c    Christ, by whom we have now received reconciliation.

@c    5:12. Wherefore as by one man sin entered into this world and by sin
@c    death:  and so death passed upon all men, in whom all have sinned.

@c    By one man. . .Adam, from whom we all contracted original sin.

@c    5:13. For until the law sin was in the world:  but sin was not imputed,
@c    when the law was not.

@c    Not imputed. . .That is, men knew not, or made no account of sin,
@c    neither was it imputed to them, in the manner it was afterwards, when
@c    they transgressed the known written law of God.

@c    5:14. But death reigned from Adam unto Moses, even over them also who
@c    have not sinned, after the similitude of the transgression of Adam, who
@c    is a figure of him who was to come.

@c    5:15. But not as the offence, so also the gift.  For if by the offence
@c    of one, many died:  much more the grace of God and the gift, by the
@c    grace of one man, Jesus Christ, hath abounded unto many.

@c    5:16. And not as it was by one sin, so also is the gift.  For judgment
@c    indeed was by one unto condemnation:  but grace is of many offences unto
@c    justification.

@c    5:17. For if by one man's offence death reigned through one; much more
@c    they who receive abundance of grace and of the gift and of justice
@c    shall reign in life through one, Jesus Christ.

@c    5:18. Therefore, as by the offence of one, unto all men to
@c    condemnation:  so also by the justice of one, unto all men to
@c    justification of life.

@c    5:19. For as by the disobedience of one man, many were made sinners:  so
@c    also by the obedience of one, many shall be made just.

@c    5:20. Now the law entered in that sin might abound.  And where sin
@c    abounded, grace did more abound.

@c    That sin might abound. . .Not as if the law were given on purpose for
@c    sin to abound:  but that it so happened through man's perversity, taking
@c    occasion of sinning more, from the prohibition of sin.

@c    5:21. That as sin hath reigned to death:  so also grace might reign by
@c    justice unto life everlasting, through Jesus Christ our Lord.



@c    Romans Chapter 6


@c    The Christian must die to sin and live to God.

@c    6:1. What shall we say, then?  Shall we continue in sin, that grace may
@c    abound?

@c    6:2. God forbid!  For we that are dead to sin, how shall we live any
@c    longer therein?

@c    6:3. Know you not that all we who are baptized in Christ Jesus are
@c    baptized in his death?

@c    6:4. For we are buried together with him by baptism into death:  that,
@c    as Christ is risen from the dead by the glory of the Father, so we also
@c    may walk in newness of life.

@c    6:5. For if we have been planted together in the likeness of his death,
@c    we shall be also in the likeness of his resurrection.

@c    6:6. Knowing this, that our old man is crucified with him, that the
@c    body of sin may be destroyed, to the end that we may serve sin no
@c    longer.

@c    Old man--body of sin. . .Our corrupt state, subject to sin and
@c    concupiscence, coming to us from Adam, is called our old man, as our
@c    state, reformed in and by Christ, is called the new man.  And the vices
@c    and sins, which then ruled in us are named the body of sin.

@c    6:7. For he that is dead is justified from sin.

@c    6:8. Now, if we be dead with Christ, we believe that we shall live also
@c    together with Christ.

@c    6:9. Knowing that Christ, rising again from the dead, dieth now no
@c    more.  Death shall no more have dominion over him.

@c    6:10. For in that he died to sin, he died once:  but in that he liveth,
@c    he liveth unto God.

@c    6:11. So do you also reckon that you are dead to sin, but alive unto
@c    God, in Christ Jesus our Lord.

@c    6:12. Let not sin therefore reign in your mortal body, so as to obey
@c    the lusts thereof.

@c    6:13. Neither yield ye your members as instruments of iniquity unto
@c    sin:  but present yourselves to God, as those that are alive from the
@c    dead; and your members as instruments of justice unto God.

@c    6:14. For sin shall not have dominion over you:  for you are not under
@c    the law, but under grace.

@c    6:15. What then?  Shall we sin, because we are not under the law, but
@c    under grace?  God forbid!

@c    6:16. Know you not that to whom you yield yourselves servants to obey,
@c    his servants you are whom you obey, whether it be of sin unto death or
@c    of obedience unto justice.

@c    6:17. But thanks be to God, that you were the servants of sin but have
@c    obeyed from the heart unto that form of doctrine into which you have
@c    been delivered.

@c    6:18. Being then freed from sin, we have been made servants of justice.

@c    6:19. I speak an human thing, because of the infirmity of your flesh.
@c    For as you have yielded your members to serve uncleanness and iniquity,
@c    unto iniquity:  so now yield your members to serve justice, unto
@c    sanctification.

@c    6:20. For when you were the servants of sin, you were free men to
@c    justice.

@c    6:21. What fruit therefore had you then in those things of which you
@c    are now ashamed?  For the end of them is death.

@c    6:22. But now being made free from sin and become servants to God, you
@c    have your fruit unto sanctification, and the end life everlasting.

@c    6:23. For the wages of sin is death.  But the grace of God, life
@c    everlasting in Christ Jesus our Lord.



@c    Romans Chapter 7


@c    We are released by Christ from the law and from the guilt of sin,
@c    though the inclination to it still tempts us.

@c    7:1. Know you not, brethren (for I speak to them that know the law)
@c    that the law hath dominion over a man as long as it liveth?

@c    As long as it liveth;. . .or, as long as he liveth.

@c    7:2. For the woman that hath an husband, whilst her husband liveth is
@c    bound to the law.  But if her husband be dead, she is loosed from the
@c    law of her husband.

@c    7:3. Therefore, whilst her husband liveth, she shall be called an
@c    adulteress, if she be with another man:  but if her husband be dead, she
@c    is delivered from the law of her husband:  so that she is not an
@c    adulteress, if she be with another man.

@c    7:4. Therefore, my brethren, you also are become dead to the law, by
@c    the body of Christ:  that you may belong to another, who is risen again
@c    from the dead that we may bring forth fruit to God.

@c    7:5. For when we were in the flesh, the passions of sins, which were by
@c    the law, did work in our members, to bring forth fruit unto death.

@c    7:6. But now we are loosed from the law of death wherein we were
@c    detained; so that we should serve in newness of spirit, and not in the
@c    oldness of the letter.

@c    7:7. What shall we say, then?  Is the law sin?  God forbid!  But I do not
@c    know sin, but by the law.  For I had not known concupiscence, if the law
@c    did not say:  Thou shalt not covet.

@c    7:8. But sin, taking occasion by the commandment, wrought in me all
@c    manner of concupiscence.  For without the law sin was dead.

@c    Sin taking occasion. . .Sin, or concupiscence, which is called sin,
@c    because it is from sin, and leads to sin, which was asleep before, was
@c    weakened by the prohibition:  the law not being the cause thereof, nor
@c    properly giving occasion to it:  but occasion being taken by our corrupt
@c    nature to resist the commandment laid upon us.

@c    7:9. And I lived some time without the law.  But when the commandment
@c    came, sin revived,

@c    7:10. And I died.  And the commandment that was ordained to life, the
@c    same was found to be unto death to me.

@c    7:11. For sin, taking occasion by the commandment, seduced me:  and by
@c    it killed me.

@c    7:12. Wherefore the law indeed is holy:  and the commandment holy and
@c    just and good.

@c    7:13. Was that then which is good made death unto me?  God forbid!  But
@c    sin, that it may appear sin, by that which is good, wrought death in
@c    me:  that sin, by the commandment, might become sinful above measure.

@c    That it may appear sin, or that sin may appear, viz. . .To be the
@c    monster it is, which is even capable to take occasion from that which
@c    is good, to work death.

@c    7:14. For we know that the law is spiritual.  But I am carnal, sold
@c    under sin.

@c    7:15. For that which I work, I understand not.  For I do not that good
@c    which I will:  but the evil which I hate, that I do.

@c    I do not that good which I will, etc. . .The apostle here describes the
@c    disorderly motions of passion and concupiscence; which oftentimes in us
@c    get the start of reason:  and by means of which even good men suffer in
@c    the inferior appetite what their will abhors:  and are much hindered in
@c    the accomplishment of the desires of their spirit and mind.  But these
@c    evil motions, (though they are called the law of sin, because they come
@c    from original sin, and violently tempt and incline to sin,) as long as
@c    the will does not consent to them, are not sins, because they are not
@c    voluntary.

@c    7:16. If then I do that which I will not, I consent to the law, that it
@c    is good.

@c    7:17. Now then it is no more I that do it:  but sin that dwelleth in me.

@c    7:18. For I know that there dwelleth not in me, that is to say, in my
@c    flesh, that which is good.  For to will is present with me:  but to
@c    accomplish that which is good, I find not.

@c    7:19. For the good which I will, I do not:  but the evil which I will
@c    not, that I do.

@c    7:20. Now if I do that which I will not, it is no more I that do it:
@c    but sin that dwelleth in me.

@c    7:21. I find then a law, that when I have a will to do good, evil is
@c    present with me.

@c    7:22. For I am delighted with the law of God, according to the inward
@c    man:

@c    7:23. But I see another law in my members, fighting against the law of
@c    my mind and captivating me in the law of sin that is in my members.

@c    7:24. Unhappy man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this
@c    death?

@c    7:25. The grace of God, by Jesus Christ our Lord.  Therefore, I myself,
@c    with the mind serve the law of God:  but with the flesh, the law of sin.



@c    Romans Chapter 8


@c    There is no condemnation to them that, being justified by Christ, walk
@c    not according to the flesh, but according to the spirit.  Their strong
@c    hope and love of God.

@c    8:1. There is now therefore no condemnation to them that are in Christ
@c    Jesus, who walk not according to the flesh.

@c    8:2. For the law of the spirit of life, in Christ Jesus, hath delivered
@c    me from the law of sin and of death.

@c    8:3. For what the law could not do, in that it was weak through the
@c    flesh, God, sending his own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh and of
@c    sin, hath condemned sin in the flesh.

@c    8:4. That the justification of the law might be fulfilled in us who
@c    walk not according to the flesh, but according to the spirit.

@c    8:5. For they that are according to the flesh mind the things that are
@c    of the flesh:  but they that are according to the spirit mind the things
@c    that are of the spirit.

@c    8:6. For the wisdom of the flesh is death:  but the wisdom of the spirit
@c    is life and peace.

@c    8:7. Because the wisdom of the flesh is an enemy to God.  For it is not
@c    subject to the law of God:  neither can it be.

@c    8:8. And they who are in the flesh cannot please God.

@c    8:9. But you are not in the flesh, but the spirit, if so be that the
@c    Spirit of God dwell in you.  Now if any man have not the Spirit of
@c    Christ, he is none of his.

@c    8:10. And if Christ be in you, the body indeed is dead, because of sin:
@c    but the spirit liveth, because of justification.

@c    8:11. And if the Spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the dead dwell
@c    in you; he that raised up Jesus Christ, from the dead shall quicken
@c    also your mortal bodies, because of his Spirit that dwelleth in you.

@c    8:12. Therefore, brethren, we are debtors, not to the flesh to live
@c    according to the flesh.

@c    8:13. For if you live according to the flesh, you shall die:  but if by
@c    the Spirit you mortify the deeds of the flesh, you shall live.

@c    8:14. For whosoever are led by the Spirit of God, they are the sons of
@c    God.

@c    8:15. For you have not received the spirit of bondage again in fear:
@c    but you have received the spirit of adoption of sons, whereby we cry:
@c    Abba (Father).

@c    8:16. For the Spirit himself giveth testimony to our spirit that we are
@c    the sons of God.

@c    The Spirit himself, etc. . .By the inward motions of divine love, and
@c    the peace of conscience, which the children of God experience, they
@c    have a kind of testimony of God's favour; by which they are much
@c    strengthened in their hope of their justification and salvation; but
@c    yet not so as to pretend to an absolute assurance:  which is not usually
@c    granted in this mortal life:  during which we are taught to work out our
@c    salvation with fear and trembling.  Phil. 2.12.  And that he that
@c    thinketh himself to stand, must take heed lest he fall.  1 Cor. 10.12.
@c    See also, Rom. 11.20, 21, 22.

@c    8:17. And if sons, heirs also; heirs indeed of God and joint heirs with
@c    Christ:  yet so, if we suffer with him, that we may be also glorified
@c    with him.

@c    8:18. For I reckon that the sufferings of this time are not worthy to
@c    be compared with the glory to come that shall be revealed in us.

@c    8:19. For the expectation of the creature waiteth for the revelation of
@c    the sons of God.

@c    The expectation of the creature, etc. . .He speaks of the corporeal
@c    creation, made for the use and service of man; and, by occasion of his
@c    sin, made subject to vanity, that is, to a perpetual instability,
@c    tending to corruption and other defects; so that by a figure of speech
@c    it is here said to groan and be in labour, and to long for its
@c    deliverance, which is then to come, when sin shall reign no more; and
@c    God shall raise the bodies and unite them to their souls never more to
@c    separate, and to be in everlasting happiness in heaven.

@c    8:20. For the creature was made subject to vanity:  not willingly, but
@c    by reason of him that made it subject, in hope.

@c    8:21. Because the creature also itself shall be delivered from the
@c    servitude of corruption, into the liberty of the glory of the children
@c    of God.

@c    8:22. For we know that every creature groaneth and travaileth in pain,
@c    even till now.

@c    8:23. And not only it, but ourselves also, who have the firstfruits of
@c    the Spirit:  even we ourselves groan within ourselves, waiting for the
@c    adoption of the sons of God, the redemption of our body.

@c    8:24. For we are saved by hope.  But hope that is seen is not hope.  For
@c    what a man seeth, why doth he hope for?

@c    8:25. But if we hope for that which we see not, we wait for it with
@c    patience.

@c    8:26. Likewise, the Spirit also helpeth our infirmity.  For, we know not
@c    what we should pray for as we ought:  but the Spirit himself asketh for
@c    us with unspeakable groanings,

@c    Asketh for us. . .The Spirit is said to ask, and desire for the saints,
@c    and to pray in us; inasmuch as he inspireth prayer, and teacheth us to
@c    pray.

@c    8:27. And he that searcheth the hearts knoweth what the Spirit
@c    desireth:  because he asketh for the saints according to God.

@c    8:28. And we know that to them that love God all things work together
@c    unto good:  to such as, according to his purpose, are called to be
@c    saints.

@c    8:29. For whom he foreknew, he also predestinated to be made
@c    conformable to the image of his Son:  that he might be the Firstborn
@c    amongst many brethren.

@c    He also predestinated, etc. . .That is, God hath preordained that all
@c    his elect should be conformable to the image of his Son.  We must not
@c    here offer to pry into the secrets of God's eternal election; only
@c    firmly believe that all our good, in time and eternity, flows
@c    originally from God's free goodness; and all our evil from man's free
@c    will.

@c    8:30. And whom he predestinated, them he also called.  And whom he
@c    called, them he also justified.  And whom he justified, them he also
@c    glorified.

@c    8:31. What shall we then say to these things?  If God be for us, who is
@c    against us?

@c    8:32. He that spared not even his own Son, but delivered him up for us
@c    all, how hath he not also, with him, given us all things?

@c    8:33. Who shall accuse against the elect of God?  God is he that
@c    justifieth:

@c    8:34. Who is he that shall condemn?  Christ Jesus that died:  yea that is
@c    risen also again, who is at the right hand of God, who also maketh
@c    intercession for us.

@c    8:35. Who then shall separate us from the love of Christ?  Shall
@c    tribulation?  Or distress?  Or famine?  Or nakedness?  Or danger?  Or
@c    persecution?  Or the sword?

@c    8:36. (As it is written:  For thy sake, we are put to death all the day
@c    long.  We are accounted as sheep for the slaughter.)

@c    8:37. But in all these things we overcome, because of him that hath
@c    loved us.

@c    8:38. For I am sure that neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor
@c    principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor
@c    might,

@c    I am sure. . .That is, I am persuaded; as it is in the Greek, pepeismai.

@c    8:39. Nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to
@c    separate us from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.



@c    Romans Chapter 9


@c    The apostle's concern for the Jews.  God's election is free and not
@c    confined to their nation.

@c    9:1. I speak the truth in Christ:  I lie not, my conscience bearing me
@c    witness in the Holy Ghost:

@c    9:2. That I have great sadness and continual sorrow in my heart.

@c    9:3. For I wished myself to be an anathema from Christ, for my
@c    brethren:  who are my kinsmen according to the flesh:

@c    Anathema;. . .A curse.  The apostle's concern and love for his countrymen
@c    the Jews was so great, that he was willing to suffer even an anathema,
@c    or curse, for their sake; or any evil that could come upon him, without
@c    his offending God.

@c    9:4. Who are Israelites:  to whom belongeth the adoption as of children
@c    and the glory and the testament and the giving of the law and the
@c    service of God and the promises:

@c    9:5. Whose are the fathers and of whom is Christ, according to the
@c    flesh, who is over all things, God blessed for ever.  Amen.

@c    9:6. Not as though the word of God hath miscarried.  For all are not
@c    Israelites that are of Israel.

@c    All are not Israelites, etc. . .Not all, who are the carnal seed of
@c    Israel, are true Israelites in God's account:  who, as by his free
@c    grace, he heretofore preferred Isaac before Ismael, and Jacob before
@c    Esau, so he could, and did by the like free grace, election and mercy,
@c    raise up spiritual children by faith to Abraham and Israel, from among
@c    the Gentiles, and prefer them before the carnal Jews.

@c    9:7. Neither are all they that are the seed of Abraham, children:  but
@c    in Isaac shall thy seed be called.

@c    9:8. That is to say, not they that are the children of the flesh are
@c    the children of God:  but they that are the children of the promise are
@c    accounted for the seed.

@c    9:9. For this is the word of promise:  According to this time will I
@c    come.  And Sara shall have a son.

@c    9:10. And not only she.  But when Rebecca also had conceived at once of
@c    Isaac our father.

@c    9:11. For when the children were not yet born, nor had done any good or
@c    evil (that the purpose of God according to election might stand):

@c    Not yet born, etc. . .By this example of these twins, and the preference
@c    of the younger to the elder, the drift of the apostle is, to shew that
@c    God, in his election, mercy and grace, is not tied to any particular
@c    nation, as the Jews imagined; nor to any prerogative of birth, or any
@c    forgoing merits.  For as, antecedently to his grace, he sees no merits
@c    in any, but finds all involved in sin, in the common mass of
@c    condemnation; and all children of wrath:  there is no one whom he might
@c    not justly leave in that mass; so that whomsoever he delivers from it,
@c    he delivers in his mercy:  and whomsoever he leaves in it, he leaves in
@c    his justice.  As when, of two equally criminal, the king is pleased out
@c    of pure mercy to pardon one, whilst he suffers justice to take place in
@c    the execution of the other.

@c    9:12. Not of works, but of him that calleth, it was said to her:  The
@c    elder shall serve the younger.

@c    9:13. As it is written:  Jacob I have loved:  but Esau I have hated.

@c    9:14. What shall we say then?  Is there injustice with God?  God forbid!

@c    9:15. For he saith to Moses:  I will have mercy on whom I will have
@c    mercy.  And I will shew mercy to whom I will shew mercy.

@c    9:16. So then it is not of him that willeth, nor of him that runneth,
@c    but of God that sheweth mercy.

@c    Not of him that willeth, etc. . .That is, by any power or strength of
@c    his own, abstracting from the grace of God.

@c    9:17. For the scripture saith to Pharao:  To this purpose have I raised
@c    thee, that I may shew my power in thee and that my name may be declared
@c    throughout all the earth.

@c    To this purpose, etc. . .Not that God made him on purpose that he should
@c    sin, and so be damned; but foreseeing his obstinacy in sin, and the
@c    abuse of his own free will, he raised him up to be a mighty king, to
@c    make a more remarkable example of him:  and that his power might be
@c    better known, and his justice in punishing him, published throughout
@c    the earth.

@c    9:18. Therefore he hath mercy on whom he will.  And whom he will, he
@c    hardeneth.

@c    He hardeneth. . .Not by being the cause or author of his sin, but by
@c    withholding his grace, and so leaving him in his sin, in punishment of
@c    his past demerits.

@c    9:19. Thou wilt say therefore to me:  Why doth he then find fault?  For
@c    who resisteth his will?

@c    9:20. O man, who art thou that repliest against God?  Shall the thing
@c    formed say to him that formed it:  Why hast thou made me thus?

@c    9:21. Or hath not the potter power over the clay, of the same lump, to
@c    make one vessel unto honour and another unto dishonour?

@c    The potter. . .This similitude is used only to shew that we are not to
@c    dispute with our Maker, nor to reason with him why he does not give as
@c    much grace to one as to another; for since the whole lump of our clay
@c    is vitiated by sin, it is owing to his goodness and mercy, that he
@c    makes out of it so many vessels of honor; and it is no more than just,
@c    that others, in punishment of their unrepented sins, should be given up
@c    to be vessels of dishonor.

@c    9:22. What if God, willing to shew his wrath and to make his power
@c    known, endured with much patience vessels of wrath, fitted for
@c    destruction,

@c    9:23. That he might shew the riches of his glory on the vessels of
@c    mercy which he hath prepared unto glory?

@c    9:24. Even us, whom also he hath called, not only of the Jews but also
@c    of the Gentiles.

@c    9:25. As in Osee he saith:  I will call that which was not my people, my
@c    people; and her that was not beloved, beloved; and her that had not
@c    obtained mercy; one that hath obtained mercy.

@c    9:26. And it shalt be in the place where it was said unto them:  you are
@c    not my people; there they shall be called the sons of the living God.

@c    9:27. And Isaias cried out concerning Israel:  If the number of the
@c    children of Israel be as the sand of the sea, a remnant shall be saved.

@c    A remnant. . .That is, a small number only of the children of Israel
@c    shall be converted and saved.  How perversely is this text quoted for
@c    the salvation of men of all religions, when it speaks only of the
@c    converts of the children of Israel!

@c    9:28. For he shall finish his word and cut it short in justice:  because
@c    a short word shall the Lord make upon the earth.

@c    9:29. And Isaias foretold:  Unless the Lord of Sabbath had left us a
@c    seed, we had been made as Sodom and we had been like unto Gomorrha.

@c    9:30. What then shall we say?  That the Gentiles who followed not after
@c    justice have attained to justice, even the justice that is of faith.

@c    9:31. But Israel, by following after the law of justice, is not come
@c    unto the law of justice.

@c    9:32. Why so?  Because they sought it not by faith, but as it were of
@c    works.  For they stumbled at the stumblingstone.

@c    9:33. As it is written:  Behold I lay in Sion a stumbling-stone and a
@c    rock of scandal.  And whosoever believeth in him shall not be
@c    confounded.



@c    Romans Chapter 10


@c    The end of the law is faith in Christ.  which the Jews refusing to
@c    submit to, cannot be justified.

@c    10:1. Brethren, the will of my heart, indeed and my prayer to God is
@c    for them unto salvation.

@c    10:2. For I bear them witness that they have a zeal of God, but not
@c    according to knowledge.

@c    10:3. For they, not knowing the justice of God and seeking to establish
@c    their own, have not submitted themselves to the justice of God.

@c    The justice of God. . .That is, the justice which God giveth us through
@c    Christ; as on the other hand, the Jews' own justice is, that which they
@c    pretended to by their own strength, or by the observance of the law,
@c    without faith in Christ.

@c    10:4. For the end of the law is Christ:  unto justice to everyone that
@c    believeth.

@c    10:5. For Moses wrote that the justice which is of the law:  The man
@c    that shall do it shall live by it.

@c    10:6. But the justice which is of faith, speaketh thus:  Say not in thy
@c    heart:  Who shall ascend into heaven?  That is to bring Christ down;

@c    10:7. Or who shall descend into the deep?  That is, to bring up Christ
@c    again from the dead.

@c    10:8. But what saith the scripture?  The word is nigh thee; even in thy
@c    mouth and in thy heart.  This is the word of faith, which we preach.

@c    10:9. For if thou confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus and believe in
@c    thy heart that God hath raised him up from the dead, thou shalt be
@c    saved.

@c    Thou shalt be saved. . .To confess the Lord Jesus, and to call upon the
@c    name of the Lord (ver. 13) is not barely the professing a belief in the
@c    person of Christ; but moreover, implies a belief of his whole doctrine,
@c    and an obedience to his law; without which, the calling him Lord will
@c    save no man.  St. Matt. 7.21.

@c    10:10. For, with the heart, we believe unto justice:  but, with the
@c    mouth, confession is made unto salvation.

@c    10:11. For the scripture saith:  Whosoever believeth in him shall not be
@c    confounded.

@c    10:12. For there is no distinction of the Jew and the Greek:  for the
@c    same is Lord over all, rich unto all that call upon him.

@c    10:13. For whosoever shall call upon the name of the Lord shall be
@c    saved.

@c    10:14. How then shall they call on him in whom they have not believed?
@c    Or how shall they believe him of whom they have not heard?  And how
@c    shall they hear without a preacher?

@c    10:15. And how shall they preach unless they be sent, as it is written:
@c    How beautiful are the feet of them that preach the gospel of peace, of
@c    them that bring glad tidings of good things?

@c    Unless they be sent. . .Here is an evident proof against all new
@c    teachers, who have all usurped to themselves the ministry without any
@c    lawful mission, derived by succession from the apostles, to whom Christ
@c    said, John 20.21, As my Father hath sent me, I also send you.

@c    10:16. But all do not obey the gospel.  For Isaias saith:  Lord, who hath
@c    believed our report?

@c    10:17. Faith then cometh by hearing; and hearing by the word of Christ.

@c    10:18. But I say:  Have they not heard?  Yes, verily:  Their sound hath
@c    gone forth into all the earth:  and their words unto the ends of the
@c    whole world.

@c    10:19. But I say:  Hath not Israel known?  First, Moses saith:  I will
@c    provoke you to jealousy by that which is not a nation:  by a foolish
@c    nation I will anger you.

@c    10:20. But Isaias is bold, and saith:  I was found by them that did not
@c    seek me.  I appeared openly to them that asked not after me.

@c    10:21. But to Israel he saith:  All the day long have I spread my hands
@c    to a people that believeth not and contradicteth me.



@c    Romans Chapter 11


@c    God hath not cast off all Israel.  The Gentiles must not be proud but
@c    stand in faith and fear.

@c    11:1. I say then:  Hath God cast away his people?  God forbid!  For I
@c    also am an Israelite of the seed of Abraham, of the tribe of Benjamin.

@c    11:2. God hath not cast away his people which he foreknew.  Know you not
@c    what the scripture saith of Elias, how he calleth on God against
@c    Israel?

@c    11:3. Lord, they have slain thy prophets, they have dug down thy
@c    altars.  And I am left alone:  and they seek my life.

@c    11:4. But what saith the divine answer to him?  I have left me seven
@c    thousand men that have not bowed their knees to Baal.

@c    Seven thousand, etc. . .This is very ill alleged by some, against the
@c    perpetual visibility of the church of Christ; the more, because however
@c    the number of the faithful might be abridged by the persecution of
@c    Jezabel in the kingdom of the ten tribes, the church was at the same
@c    time in a most flourishing condition (under Asa and Josaphat) in the
@c    kingdom of Judah.

@c    11:5. Even so then, at this present time also, there is a remnant saved
@c    according to the election of grace.

@c    11:6. And if by grace, it is not now by works:  otherwise grace is no
@c    more grace.

@c    It is not now by works, etc. . .If salvation were to come by works, done
@c    by nature, without faith and grace, salvation would not be a grace or
@c    favour, but a debt; but such dead works are indeed of no value in the
@c    sight of God towards salvation.  It is not the same with regard to works
@c    done with, and by, God's grace; for to such works as these, he has
@c    promised eternal salvation.

@c    11:7. What then?  That which Israel sought, he hath not obtained:  but
@c    the election hath obtained it.  And the rest have been blinded.

@c    11:8. As it is written:  God hath given them the spirit of
@c    insensibility; eyes that they should not see and ears that they should
@c    not hear, until this present day.

@c    God hath given them, etc. . .Not by his working or acting in them; but
@c    by his permission, and by withdrawing his grace in punishment of their
@c    obstinacy.

@c    11:9. And David saith:  Let their table be made a snare and a trap and a
@c    stumbling block and a recompense unto them.

@c    11:10. Let their eyes be darkened, that they may not see:  and bow down
@c    their back always.

@c    11:11. I say then:  Have they so stumbled, that they should fall?  God
@c    forbid!  But by their offence salvation is come to the Gentiles, that
@c    they may be emulous of them.

@c    That they should fall. . .The nation of the Jews is not absolutely and
@c    without remedy cast off for ever; but in part only, (many thousands of
@c    them having been at first converted,) and for a time; which fall of
@c    theirs, God has been pleased to turn to the good of the Gentiles.

@c    11:12. Now if the offence of them be the riches of the world and the
@c    diminution of them the riches of the Gentiles:  how much more the
@c    fulness of them?

@c    11:13. For I say to you, Gentiles:  As long indeed as I am the apostle
@c    of the Gentiles, I will honour my ministry,

@c    11:14. If, by any means, I may provoke to emulation them who are my
@c    flesh and may save some of them.

@c    11:15. For if the loss of them be the reconciliation of the world, what
@c    shall the receiving of them be, but life from the dead?

@c    11:16. For if the firstfruit be holy, so is the lump also:  and if the
@c    root be holy, so are the branches.

@c    11:17. And if some of the branches be broken and thou, being a wild
@c    olive, art ingrafted in them and art made partaker of the root and of
@c    the fatness of the olive tree:

@c    11:18. Boast not against the branches.  But if thou boast, thou bearest
@c    not the root:  but the root thee.

@c    11:19. Thou wilt say then:  The branches were broken off that I might be
@c    grafted in.

@c    11:20. Well:  because of unbelief they were broken off.  But thou
@c    standest by faith.  Be not highminded, but fear.

@c    Thou standest by faith:  be not highminded, but fear. . .We see here that
@c    he who standeth by faith may fall from it; and therefore must live in
@c    fear, and not in the vain presumption and security of modern sectaries.

@c    11:21. For if God hath not spared the natural branches, fear lest
@c    perhaps also he spare not thee.

@c    11:22. See then the goodness and the severity of God:  towards them
@c    indeed that are fallen, the severity; but towards thee, the goodness of
@c    God, if thou abide in goodness.  Otherwise thou also shalt be cut off.

@c    Otherwise thou also shalt be cut off. . .The Gentiles are here
@c    admonished not to be proud, nor to glory against the Jews:  but to take
@c    occasion rather from their fall to fear and to be humble, lest they be
@c    cast off.  Not that the whole church of Christ can ever fall from him;
@c    having been secured by so many divine promises in holy writ; but that
@c    each one in particular may fall; and therefore all in general are to be
@c    admonished to beware of that, which may happen to any one in
@c    particular.

@c    11:23. And they also, if they abide not still in unbelief, shall be
@c    grafted in:  for God is able to graft them in again.

@c    11:24. For if thou were cut out of the wild olive tree, which is
@c    natural to thee; and, contrary to nature, wert grafted into the good
@c    olive tree:  how much more shall they that are the natural branches be
@c    grafted into their own olive tree?

@c    11:25. For I would not have you ignorant, brethren, of this mystery
@c    (lest you should be wise in your own conceits) that blindness in part
@c    has happened in Israel, until the fulness of the Gentiles should come
@c    in.

@c    11:26. And so all Israel should be saved, as it is written:  There shall
@c    come out of Sion, he that shall deliver and shall turn away ungodliness
@c    from Jacob.

@c    11:27. And this is to them my covenant:  when I shall take away their
@c    sins.

@c    11:28. As concerning the gospel, indeed, they are enemies for your
@c    sake:  but as touching the election, they are most dear for the sake of
@c    the fathers.

@c    11:29. For the gifts and the calling of God are without repentance.

@c    For the gifts and the calling of God are without. . .his repenting
@c    himself of them; for the promises of God are unchangeable, nor can he
@c    repent of conferring his gifts.

@c    11:30. For as you also in times past did not believe God, but now have
@c    obtained mercy, through their unbelief:

@c    11:31. So these also now have not believed, for your mercy, that they
@c    also may obtain mercy.

@c    11:32. For God hath concluded all in unbelief, that he may have mercy
@c    on all.

@c    Concluded all in unbelief. . .He hath found all nations, both Jews and
@c    Gentiles, in unbelief and sin; not by his causing, but by the abuse of
@c    their own free will; so that their calling and election is purely owing
@c    to his mercy.

@c    11:33. O the depth of the riches of the wisdom and of the knowledge of
@c    God!  How incomprehensible are his judgments, and how unsearchable his
@c    ways!

@c    11:34. For who hath known the mind of the Lord?  Or who hath been his
@c    counsellor?

@c    11:35. Or who hath first given to him, and recompense shall be made
@c    him?

@c    11:36. For of him, and by him, and in him, are all things:  to him be
@c    glory for ever.  Amen.



@c    Romans Chapter 12


@c    Lessons of Christian virtues.

@c    12:1. I beseech you therefore, brethren, by the mercy of God, that you
@c    present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, pleasing unto God, your
@c    reasonable service.

@c    12:2. And be not conformed to this world:  but be reformed in the
@c    newness of your mind, that you may prove what is the good and the
@c    acceptable and the perfect will of God.

@c    12:3. For I say, by the grace that is given me, to all that are among
@c    you, not to be more wise than it behoveth to be wise, but to be wise
@c    unto sobriety and according as God hath divided to every one the
@c    measure of faith.

@c    12:4. For as in one body we have many members, but all the members have
@c    not the same office:

@c    12:5. So we, being many, are one body in Christ; and every one members
@c    one of another:

@c    12:6. And having different gifts, according to the grace that is given
@c    us, either prophecy, to be used according to the rule of faith;

@c    12:7. Or ministry, in ministering; or he that teacheth, in doctrine;

@c    12:8. He that exhorteth, in exhorting; he that giveth, with simplicity;
@c    he that ruleth, with carefulness; he that sheweth mercy, with
@c    cheerfulness.

@c    12:9. Let love be without dissimulation.  Hating that which is evil,
@c    cleaving to that which is good,

@c    12:10. Loving one another with the charity of brotherhood:  with honour
@c    preventing one another.

@c    12:11. In carefulness not slothful.  In spirit fervent.  Serving the
@c    Lord.

@c    12:12. Rejoicing in hope.  Patient in tribulation.  Instant in prayer.

@c    12:13. Communicating to the necessities of the saints.  Pursuing
@c    hospitality.

@c    12:14. Bless them that persecute you:  bless, and curse not.

@c    12:15. Rejoice with them that rejoice:  weep with them that weep.

@c    12:16. Being of one mind one towards another.  Not minding high things,
@c    but consenting to the humble.  Be not wise in your own conceits.

@c    12:17. To no man rendering evil for evil.  Providing good things, not
@c    only in the sight of God but also in the sight of all men.

@c    12:18. If it be possible, as much as is in you, have peace with all
@c    men.

@c    12:19. Revenge not yourselves, my dearly beloved; but give place unto
@c    wrath, for it is written:  Revenge is mine, I will repay, saith the
@c    Lord.

@c    12:20. But if the enemy be hungry, give him to eat; if he thirst, give
@c    him to drink.  For, doing this, thou shalt heap coals of fire upon his
@c    head.

@c    12:21. Be not overcome by evil:  but overcome evil by good.



@c    Romans Chapter 13


@c    Lessons of obedience to superiors and mutual charity.

@c    13:1. Let every soul be subject to higher powers.  For there is no power
@c    but from God:  and those that are ordained of God.

@c    13:2. Therefore, he that resisteth the power resisteth the ordinance of
@c    God.  And they that resist purchase to themselves damnation.

@c    13:3. For princes are not a terror to the good work, but to the evil.
@c    Wilt thou then not be afraid of the power?  Do that which is good:  and
@c    thou shalt have praise from the same.

@c    13:4. For he is God's minister to thee, for good.  But if thou do that
@c    which is evil, fear:  for he beareth not the sword in vain.  For he is
@c    God's minister:  an avenger to execute wrath upon him that doth evil.

@c    13:5. Wherefore be subject of necessity:  not only for wrath, but also
@c    for conscience' sake.

@c    13:6. For therefore also you pay tribute.  For they are the ministers of
@c    God, serving unto this purpose.

@c    13:7. Render therefore to all men their dues.  Tribute, to whom tribute
@c    is due:  custom, to whom custom:  fear, to whom fear:  honour, to whom
@c    honour.

@c    13:8. Owe no man any thing, but to love one another.  For he that loveth
@c    his neighbour hath fulfilled the law.

@c    13:9. For:  Thou shalt not commit adultery:  Thou shalt not kill:  Thou
@c    shalt not steal:  Thou shalt not bear false witness:  Thou shalt not
@c    covet.  And if there be any other commandment, it is comprised in this
@c    word:  Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself.

@c    13:10. The love of our neighbour worketh no evil.  Love therefore is the
@c    fulfilling of the law.

@c    13:11. And that, knowing the season, that it is now the hour for us to
@c    rise from sleep.  For now our salvation is nearer than when we believed.

@c    13:12. The night is passed And the day is at hand.  Let us, therefore
@c    cast off the works of darkness and put on the armour of light.

@c    13:13. Let us walk honestly, as in the day:  not in rioting and
@c    drunkenness, not in chambering and impurities, not in contention and
@c    envy.

@c    13:14. But put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ:  and make not provision for
@c    the flesh in its concupiscences.



@c    Romans Chapter 14


@c    The strong must bear with the weak.  Cautions against judging and giving
@c    scandal.

@c    14:1. Now him that is weak in faith, take unto you:  not in disputes
@c    about thoughts.

@c    14:2. For one believeth that he may eat all things:  but he that is
@c    weak, let him eat herbs.

@c    Eat all things. . .Viz., without observing the distinction of clean and
@c    unclean meats, prescribed by the law of Moses:  which was now no longer
@c    obligatory.  Some weak Christians, converted from among the Jews, as we
@c    here gather from the apostle, made a scruple of eating such meats as
@c    were deemed unclean by the law; such as swine's flesh, etc., which the
@c    stronger sort of Christians did eat without scruple.  Now the apostle,
@c    to reconcile them together, exhorts the former not to judge or condemn
@c    the latter, using their Christian liberty; and the latter, to take care
@c    not to despise or scandalize their weaker brethren, either by bringing
@c    them to eat what in their conscience they think they should not, or by
@c    giving them such offence, as to endanger the driving them thereby from
@c    the Christian religion.

@c    14:3. Let not him that eateth despise him that eateth not:  and he that
@c    eateth not, let him not judge him that eateth.  For God hath taken him
@c    to him.

@c    14:4. Who art thou that judgest another man's servant?  To his own lord
@c    he standeth or falleth.  And he shall stand:  for God is able to make him
@c    stand.

@c    14:5. For one judgeth between day and day:  and another judgeth every
@c    day.  Let every man abound in his own sense.

@c    Between day, etc. . .Still observing the sabbaths and festivals of the
@c    law.

@c    14:6. He that regardeth the day regardeth it unto the Lord.  And he that
@c    eateth eateth to the Lord:  for he giveth thanks to God.  And he that
@c    eateth not, to the Lord he eateth not and giveth thanks to God.

@c    14:7. For none of us liveth to himself:  and no man dieth to himself.

@c    14:8. For whether we live, we live unto the Lord:  or whether we die, we
@c    die unto the Lord.  Therefore, whether we live or whether we die, we are
@c    the Lord's.

@c    14:9. For to this end Christ died and rose again:  that he might be Lord
@c    both of the dead and of the living.

@c    14:10. But thou, why judgest thou thy brother?  Or thou, why dost thou
@c    despise thy brother?  For we shall all stand before the judgment seat of
@c    Christ.

@c    14:11. For it is written:  As I live, saith the Lord, every knee shall
@c    bow to me and every tongue shall confess to God.

@c    14:12. Therefore every one of us shall render account to God for
@c    himself.

@c    14:13. Let us not therefore judge one another any more.  But judge this
@c    rather, that you put not a stumblingblock or a scandal in your
@c    brother's way.

@c    14:14. I know, and am confident in the Lord Jesus, that nothing is
@c    unclean of itself:  but to him that esteemeth any thing to be unclean,
@c    to him it is unclean.

@c    14:15. For if, because of thy meat, thy brother be grieved, thou
@c    walkest not now according to charity.  Destroy not him with thy meat,
@c    for whom Christ died.

@c    14:16. Let not then our good be evil spoken of.

@c    14:17. For the kingdom of God is not meat and drink:  but justice and
@c    peace and joy in the Holy Ghost.

@c    14:18. For he that in this serveth Christ pleaseth God and is approved
@c    of men.

@c    14:19. Therefore, let us follow after the things that are of peace and
@c    keep the things that are of edification, one towards another.

@c    14:20. Destroy not the work of God for meat.  All things indeed are
@c    clean:  but it is evil for that man who eateth with offence.

@c    14:21. It is good not to eat flesh and not to drink wine:  nor any thing
@c    whereby thy brother is offended or scandalized or made weak.

@c    14:22. Hast thou faith?  Have it to thyself before God.  Blessed is he
@c    that condemneth not himself in that which he alloweth.

@c    14:23. But he that discerneth, if he eat, is condemned; because not of
@c    faith.  For all that is not of faith is sin.

@c    Discerneth. . .That is, distinguisheth between meats, and eateth against
@c    his conscience, what he deems unclean.  Of faith. . .By faith is here
@c    understood judgment and conscience:  to act against which is always a
@c    sin.



@c    Romans Chapter 15


@c    He exhorts them to be all of one mind and promises to come and see
@c    them.

@c    15:1. Now, we that are stronger ought to bear the infirmities of the
@c    weak and not to please ourselves.

@c    15:2. Let every one of you Please his neighbour unto good, to
@c    edification.

@c    15:3. For Christ did not please himself:  but, as it is written:  The
@c    reproaches of them that reproached thee fell upon me.

@c    15:4. For what things soever were written were written for our
@c    learning:  that, through patience and the comfort of the scriptures, we
@c    might have hope.

@c    15:5. Now the God of patience and of comfort grant you to be of one
@c    mind, one towards another, according to Jesus Christ:

@c    15:6. That with one mind and with one mouth you may glorify God and the
@c    Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.

@c    15:7. Wherefore, receive one another, as Christ also hath received you,
@c    unto the honour of God.

@c    15:8. For I say that Christ Jesus was minister of the circumcision for
@c    the truth of God, to confirm the promises made unto the fathers:

@c    Minister of the circumcision. . .That is, executed his office and
@c    ministry towards the Jews, the people of the circumcision.

@c    15:9. But that the Gentiles are to glorify God for his mercy, as it is
@c    written:  Therefore will I confess to thee, O Lord, among the Gentiles
@c    and will sing to thy name.

@c    15:10. And again he saith:  rejoice ye Gentiles, with his people.

@c    15:11. And again:  praise the Lord, all ye Gentiles:  and magnify him,
@c    all ye people.

@c    15:12. And again, Isaias saith:  There shall be a root of Jesse; and he
@c    that shall rise up to rule the Gentiles, in him the Gentiles shall
@c    hope.

@c    15:13. Now the God of hope fill you with all joy and peace in
@c    believing:  that you may abound in hope and in the power of the Holy
@c    Ghost.

@c    15:14. And I myself also, my brethren, am assured of you that you also
@c    are full of love, replenished with all knowledge, so that you are able
@c    to admonish one another.

@c    15:15. But I have written to you, brethren, more boldly in some sort,
@c    as it were putting you in mind, because of the grace which is given me
@c    from God,

@c    15:16. That I should be the minister of Christ Jesus among the
@c    Gentiles:  sanctifying the gospel of God, that the oblation of the
@c    Gentiles may be made acceptable and sanctified in the Holy Ghost.

@c    15:17. I have therefore glory in Christ Jesus towards God.

@c    15:18. For I dare not to speak of any of those things which Christ
@c    worketh not by me, for the obedience of the Gentiles, by word and deed,

@c    15:19. By the virtue of signs and wonders, in the power of the Holy
@c    Ghost, so that from Jerusalem round about, as far as unto Illyricum, I
@c    have replenished the gospel of Christ.

@c    15:20. And I have so preached this gospel, not where Christ was named,
@c    lest I should build upon another man a foundation.

@c    15:21. But as it is written:  They to whom he was not spoken of shall
@c    see:  and they that have not heard shall understand.

@c    15:22. For which cause also, I was hindered very much from coming to
@c    you and have been kept away till now.

@c    15:23. But now, having no more place in these countries and having a
@c    great desire these many years past to come unto you,

@c    15:24. When I shall begin to take my journey into Spain, I hope that,
@c    as I pass, I shall see you and be brought on my way thither by you:  if
@c    first, in part, I shall have enjoyed you.

@c    15:25. But now I shall go to Jerusalem, to minister unto the saints.

@c    15:26. For it hath pleased them of Macedonia and Achaia to make a
@c    contribution for the poor of the saints that are in Jerusalem.

@c    15:27. For it hath pleased them:  and they are their debtors.  For, if
@c    the Gentiles have been made partakers of their spiritual things, they
@c    ought also in carnal things to minister to them.

@c    15:28. When therefore I shall have accomplished this and consigned to
@c    them this fruit, I will come by you into Spain.

@c    15:29. And I know that when I come to you I shall come in the abundance
@c    of the blessing of the gospel of Christ.

@c    15:30. I beseech you therefore, brethren, through our Lord Jesus Christ
@c    and by the charity of the Holy Ghost, that you help me in your prayers
@c    for me to God,

@c    15:31. That I may be delivered from the unbelievers that are in Judea
@c    and that the oblation of my service may be acceptable in Jerusalem to
@c    the saints.

@c    15:32. That I may come to you with joy, by the will of God, and may be
@c    refreshed with you.

@c    15:33. Now the God of peace be with, you all.  Amen.



@c    Romans Chapter 16


@c    He concludes with salutations, bidding them beware of all that should
@c    oppose the doctrine they had learned.

@c    16:1. And I commend to you Phebe, our sister, who is in the ministry of
@c    the church, that is in Cenchrae:

@c    16:2. That you receive her in the Lord as becometh saints and that you
@c    assist her in whatsoever business she shall have need of you.  For she
@c    also hath assisted many, and myself also.

@c    16:3. Salute Prisca and Aquila, my helpers, in Christ Jesus

@c    16:4. (Who have for my life laid down their own necks:  to whom not I
@c    only give thanks, but also all the churches of the Gentiles),

@c    16:5. And the church which is in their house.  Salute Epenetus, my
@c    beloved:  who is the firstfruits of Asia in Christ.

@c    16:6. Salute Mary, who hath laboured much among you.

@c    16:7. Salute Andronicus and Junias, my kinsmen and fellow prisoners:
@c    who are of note among the apostles, who also were in Christ before me.

@c    16:8. Salute Ampliatus, most beloved to me in the Lord.

@c    16:9. Salute Urbanus, our helper in Christ Jesus and Stachys, my
@c    beloved.

@c    16:10. Salute Apellas, approved in Christ.

@c    16:11. Salute them that are of Aristobulus' household.  Salute Herodian,
@c    my kinsman.  Salute them that are of Narcissus' household, who are in
@c    the Lord.

@c    16:12. Salute Tryphaena and Tryphosa, who labour in the Lord.  Salute
@c    Persis, the dearly beloved, who hath much laboured in the Lord.

@c    16:13. Salute Rufus, elect in the Lord, and his mother and mine.

@c    16:14. Salute Asyncritus, Phlegon, Hermas, Patrobas, Hermes:  and the
@c    brethren that are with them.

@c    16:15. Salute Philologus and Julia, Nereus and his sister, and
@c    Olympias:  and all the saints that are with them.

@c    16:16. Salute one another with an holy kiss.  All the churches of Christ
@c    salute you.

@c    16:17. Now I beseech you, brethren, to mark them who make dissensions
@c    and offences contrary to the doctrine which you have learned and avoid
@c    them.

@c    16:18. For they that are such serve not Christ our Lord but their own
@c    belly:  and by pleasing speeches and good words seduce the hearts of the
@c    innocent.

@c    16:19. For your obedience is published in every place.  I rejoice
@c    therefore in you.  But I would have you to be wise in good and simple in
@c    evil.

@c    16:20. And the God of peace crush Satan under your feet speedily.  The
@c    grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you.

@c    16:21. Timothy, my fellow labourer, saluteth you:  and Lucius and Jason
@c    and Sosipater, my kinsmen.

@c    16:22. I, Tertius, who wrote this epistle, salute you in the Lord.

@c    16:23. Caius, my host, and the whole church saluteth you.  Erastus, the
@c    treasurer of the city, saluteth you:  and Quartus, a brother.

@c    16:24. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all.  Amen.

@c    16:25. Now to him that is able to establish you, according to my gospel
@c    and the preaching of Jesus Christ, according to the revelation of the
@c    mystery which was kept secret from eternity;

@c    16:26. (Which now is made manifest by the scriptures of the prophets,
@c    according to the precept of the eternal God, for the obedience of
@c    faith) known among all nations:

@c    16:27. To God, the only wise, through Jesus Christ, to whom be honour
@c    and glory for ever and ever.  Amen.
