@c    THE EPISTLE OF ST. PAUL TO TITUS



@c    St. Paul, having preached the faith in the island of Crete, he ordained
@c    his beloved disciple and companion, Titus, bishop, and left him there
@c    to finish the work which he had begun.  Afterwards the Apostle, on a
@c    journey to Nicopolis, a city of Macedonia, wrote this Epistle to Titus,
@c    in which he directs him to ordain bishops and priests for the different
@c    cities, shewing him the principal qualities necessary for a bishop.  He
@c    also gives him particular advice for his own conduct to his flock,
@c    exhorting him to hold to strictness of discipline, but seasoned with
@c    lenity.  It was written about thirty-three years after our Lord's
@c    Ascension.



@c    Titus Chapter 1


@c    What kind of men he is to ordain priests.  Some men are to be sharply
@c    rebuked.

@c    1:1. Paul, a servant of God and an apostle of Jesus Christ, according
@c    to the faith of the elect of God and the acknowledging of the truth,
@c    which is according to godliness:

@c    1:2. Unto the hope of life everlasting, which God, who lieth not, hath
@c    promised before the times of the world:

@c    1:3. But hath in due times manifested his word in preaching, which is
@c    committed to me according to the commandment of God our Saviour:

@c    1:4. To Titus, my beloved son according to the common faith, grace and
@c    peace, from God the Father and from Christ Jesus our Saviour.

@c    1:5. For this cause I left thee in Crete:  that thou shouldest set in
@c    order the things that are wanting and shouldest ordain priests in every
@c    city, as I also appointed thee:

@c    1:6. If any be without crime, the husband of one wife.  having faithful
@c    children, not accused of riot or unruly.

@c    1:7. For a bishop must be without crime, as the steward of God:  not
@c    proud, not subject to anger, nor given to wine, no striker, not greedy
@c    of filthy lucre:

@c    1:8. But given to hospitality, gentle, sober, just, holy, continent:

@c    1:9. Embracing that faithful word which is according to doctrine, that
@c    he may be able to exhort in sound doctrine and to convince the
@c    gainsayers.

@c    1:10. For there are also many disobedient, vain talkers and seducers:
@c    especially they who are of the circumcision.

@c    1:11. Who must be reproved, who subvert whole houses, teaching things
@c    which they ought not, for filthy lucre's sake.

@c    1:12. One of them a prophet of their own, said:  The Cretans are always
@c    liars, evil beasts, slothful bellies.

@c    1:13. This testimony is true.  Wherefore, rebuke them sharply, that they
@c    may be sound in the faith:

@c    1:14. Not giving heed to Jewish fables and commandments of men who turn
@c    themselves away from the truth.

@c    1:15. All things are clean to the clean:  but to them that are defiled
@c    and to unbelievers, nothing is clean:  but both their mind and their
@c    conscience are defiled.

@c    1:16. They profess that they know God:  but in their works they deny
@c    him:  being abominable and incredulous and to every good work reprobate.



@c    Titus Chapter 2


@c    How he is to instruct both old and young.  The duty of servants.  The
@c    Christian's rule of life.

@c    2:1. But speak thou the things that become sound doctrine:

@c    2:2. That the aged men be sober, chaste, prudent, sound in faith, in
@c    love, in patience.

@c    2:3. The aged women, in like manner, in holy attire, not false
@c    accusers, not given to much wine, teaching well:

@c    2:4. That they may teach the young women to be wise, to love their
@c    husbands, to love their children.

@c    2:5. To be discreet, chaste, sober, having a care of the house, gentle,
@c    obedient to their husbands:  that the word of God be not blasphemed.

@c    2:6. Young men, in like manner, exhort that they be sober.

@c    2:7. In all things shew thyself an example of good works, in doctrine,
@c    in integrity, in gravity,

@c    2:8. The sound word that can not be blamed:  that he who is on the
@c    contrary part may be afraid, having no evil to say of us.

@c    2:9. Exhort servants to be obedient to their masters:  in all things
@c    pleasing, not gainsaying:

@c    2:10. Not defrauding, but in all things shewing good fidelity, that
@c    they may adorn the doctrine of God our Saviour in all things.

@c    2:11. For the grace of God our Saviour hath appeared to all men:

@c    2:12. Instructing us, that, denying ungodliness and worldly desires, we
@c    should live soberly and justly and godly in this world,

@c    2:13. Looking for the blessed hope and coming of the glory of the great
@c    God and our Saviour Jesus Christ.

@c    2:14. Who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all
@c    iniquity and might cleanse to himself a people acceptable, a pursuer of
@c    good works.

@c    2:15. These things speak and exhort and rebuke with all authority.  Let
@c    no man despise thee.



@c    Titus Chapter 3


@c    Other instructions and directions for life and doctrine.

@c    3:1. Admonish them to be subject to princes and powers, to obey at a
@c    word, to be ready to every good work.

@c    3:2. To speak evil of no man, not to be litigious but gentle:  shewing
@c    all mildness towards all men.

@c    3:3. For we ourselves also were some time unwise, incredulous, erring,
@c    slaves to divers desires and pleasures, living in malice and envy,
@c    hateful and hating one another.

@c    3:4. But when the goodness and kindness of God our Saviour appeared:

@c    3:5. Not by the works of justice which we have done, but according to
@c    his mercy, he saved us, by the laver of regeneration and renovation of
@c    the Holy Ghost.

@c    3:6. Whom he hath poured forth upon us abundantly, through Jesus Christ
@c    our Saviour:

@c    3:7. That, being justified by his grace, we may be heirs according to
@c    hope of life everlasting.

@c    3:8. It is a faithful saying.  And these things I will have thee affirm
@c    constantly, that they who believe in God may be careful to excel in
@c    good works.  These things are good and profitable unto men.

@c    3:9. But avoid foolish questions and genealogies and contentions and
@c    strivings about the law.  For they are unprofitable and vain.

@c    3:10. A man that is a heretic, after the first and second admonition,
@c    avoid:

@c    3:11. Knowing that he that is such an one is subverted and sinneth,
@c    being condemned by his own judgment.

@c    By his own judgment. . .Other offenders are judged, and cast out of the
@c    church, by the sentence of the pastors of the same church.  Heretics,
@c    more unhappy, run out of the church of their own accord, and by doing
@c    so, give judgment and sentence against their own souls.

@c    3:12. When I shall send to thee Artemas or Tychicus, make haste to come
@c    unto me to Nicopolis.  For there I have determined to winter.

@c    3:13. Send forward Zenas the lawyer and Apollo, with care that nothing
@c    be wanting to them.

@c    3:14. And let our men also learn to excel in good works for necessary
@c    uses:  that they be not unfruitful.

@c    3:15. All that are with me salute thee.  Salute them that love us in the
@c    faith.  The grace of God be with you all.  Amen.
