@c    THE FIRST BOOK OF SAMUEL, OTHERWISE CALLED THE FIRST BOOK OF KINGS



@c    This and the following Book are called by the Hebrews the books of
@c    Samuel, because they contain the history of Samuel, and of the two
@c    kings, Saul and David, whom he anointed.  They are more commonly named
@c    by the Fathers, the first and second book of kings.  As to the writer of
@c    them, it is the common opinion that Samuel composed the first book, as
@c    far as the twenty-fifth chapter; and that the prophets Nathan and Gad
@c    finished the first, and wrote the second book.  See 1 Paralipomenon,
@c    alias 1 Chronicles, 29.29.



@c    1 Kings Chapter 1


@c    Anna the wife of Elcana being barren, by vow and prayer obtaineth a
@c    son:  whom she calleth Samuel:  and presenteth him to the service of God
@c    in Silo, according to her vow.

@c    1:1. There was a man of Ramathaimsophim, of Mount Ephraim, and his name
@c    was Elcana, the son of Jeroham, the son of Eliu, the son of Thohu, the
@c    son of Suph, an Ephraimite:

@c    An Ephraimite. . .He was of the tribe of Levi, 1.  Par. 6.34, but is
@c    called an Ephraimite from dwelling in mount Ephraim.

@c    1:2. And he had two wives, the name of one was Anna, and the name of
@c    the other Phenenna.  Phenenna had children:  but Anna had no children.

@c    1:3. And this man went up out of his city upon the appointed days, to
@c    adore and to offer sacrifice to the Lord of hosts in Silo.  And the two
@c    sons of Heli, Ophni and Phinees, were there priests of the Lord.

@c    1:4. Now the day came, and Elcana offered sacrifice, and gave to
@c    Phenenna, his wife, and to all her sons and daughters, portions:

@c    1:5. But to Anna he gave one portion with sorrow, because he loved
@c    Anna.  And the Lord had shut up her womb.

@c    1:6. Her rival also afflicted her, and troubled her exceedingly,
@c    insomuch that she upbraided her, that the Lord had shut up her womb:

@c    1:7. And thus she did every year, when the time returned, that they
@c    went up to the temple of the Lord:  and thus she provoked her:  but Anna
@c    wept, and did not eat.

@c    1:8. Then Elcana, her husband, said to her:  Anna, why weepest thou?  and
@c    why dost thou not eat?  and why dost thou afflict thy heart?  Am not I
@c    better to thee than ten children?

@c    1:9. So Anna arose after she had eaten and drunk in Silo:  And Heli, the
@c    priest, sitting upon a stool before the door of the temple of the Lord;

@c    1:10. As Anna had her heart full of grief, she prayed to the Lord,
@c    shedding many tears,

@c    1:11. And she made a vow, saying:  O Lord of hosts, if thou wilt look
@c    down, and wilt be mindful of me, and not forget thy handmaid, and wilt
@c    give to thy servant a manchild:  I will give him to the Lord all the
@c    days of his life, and no razor shall come upon his head.

@c    1:12. And it came to pass, as she multiplied prayers before the Lord,
@c    that Heli observed her mouth.

@c    1:13. Now Anna spoke in her heart, and only her lips moved, but her
@c    voice was not heard at all.  Heli therefore thought her to be drunk,

@c    1:14. And said to her:  How long wilt thou be drunk?  digest a little the
@c    wine, of which thou hast taken too much.

@c    1:15. Anna answering, said:  Not so, my lord:  for I am an exceeding
@c    unhappy woman, and have drunk neither wine nor any strong drink, but I
@c    have poured out my soul before the Lord.

@c    1:16. Count not thy handmaid for one of the daughters of Belial:  for
@c    out of the abundance of my sorrow and grief have I spoken till now.

@c    1:17. Then Heli said to her:  Go in peace:  and the God of Israel grant
@c    thee thy petition, which thou hast asked of him.

@c    1:18. And she said:  Would to God thy handmaid may find grace in thy
@c    eyes.  So the woman went on her way, and ate, and her countenance was no
@c    more changed.

@c    1:19. And they rose in the morning, and worshipped before the Lord:  and
@c    they returned, and came into their house at Ramatha.  And Elcana knew
@c    Anna his wife:  And the Lord remembered her.

@c    1:20. And it came to pass when the time was come about, Anna conceived
@c    and bore a son, and called his name Samuel:  because she had asked him
@c    of the Lord.

@c    Samuel. . .This name imports, asked of God.

@c    1:21. And Elcana, her husband, went up, and all his house, to offer to
@c    the Lord the solemn sacrifice, and his vow.

@c    1:22. But Anna went not up:  for she said to her husband:  I will not go
@c    till the child be weaned, and till I may carry him, that he may appear
@c    before the Lord, and may abide always there.

@c    1:23. And Elcana, her husband, said to her:  Do what seemeth good to
@c    thee, and stay till thou wean him:  and I pray that the Lord may fulfil
@c    his word.  So the woman staid at home, and gave her son suck, till she
@c    weaned him.

@c    1:24. And after she had weaned him, she carried him with her, with
@c    three calves, and three bushels of flour, and a bottle of wine, and she
@c    brought him to the house of the Lord in Silo.  Now the child was as yet
@c    very young:

@c    1:25. And they immolated a calf, and offered the child to Heli.

@c    1:26. And Anna said:  I beseech thee, my lord, as thy soul liveth, my
@c    lord:  I am that woman, who stood before thee here praying to the Lord.

@c    1:27. For this child did I pray, and the Lord hath granted me my
@c    petition, which I asked of him.

@c    1:28. Therefore I also have lent him to the Lord all the days of his
@c    life, he shall be lent to the Lord.  And they adored the Lord there.  And
@c    Anna prayed, and said:



@c    1 Kings Chapter 2


@c    The canticle of Anna.  The wickedness of the sons of Heli:  for which
@c    they are not duly corrected by their father.  A prophecy against the
@c    house of Heli.

@c    2:1. My heart hath rejoiced in the Lord, and my horn is exalted in my
@c    God:  my mouth is enlarged over my enemies:  because I have joyed in thy
@c    salvation.

@c    My horn. . .The horn in the scriptures signifies strength, power, the
@c    horn is said to be exalted, when a person receives an increase of
@c    strength or glory.

@c    2:2. There is none holy as the Lord is:  for there is no other beside
@c    thee, and there is none strong like our God.

@c    2:3. Do not multiply to speak lofty things, boasting:  let old matters
@c    depart from your mouth:  for the Lord is a God of all knowledge, and to
@c    him are thoughts prepared.

@c    2:4. The bow of the mighty is overcome, and the weak are girt with
@c    strength.

@c    2:5. They that were full before, have hired out themselves for bread:
@c    and the hungry are filled, so that the barren hath borne many:  and she
@c    that had many children is weakened.

@c    2:6. The Lord killeth and maketh alive, he bringeth down to hell, and
@c    bringeth back again.

@c    2:7. The Lord maketh poor and maketh rich, he humbleth and he exalteth:

@c    2:8. He raiseth up the needy from the dust, and lifteth up the poor
@c    from the dunghill:  that he may sit with princes, and hold the throne of
@c    glory.  For the poles of the earth are the Lord's, and upon them he hath
@c    set the world.

@c    2:9. He will keep the feet of his saints, and the wicked shall be
@c    silent in darkness; because no man shall prevail by his own strength.

@c    2:10. The adversaries of the Lord shall fear him:  and upon them shall
@c    he thunder in the heavens:  The Lord shall judge the ends of the earth,
@c    and he shall give empire to his king, and shall exalt the horn of his
@c    Christ.

@c    2:11. And Elcana went to Ramatha, to his house:  but the child
@c    ministered in the sight of the Lord before the face of Heli the priest.

@c    2:12. Now the sons of Heli were children of Belial, not knowing the
@c    Lord,

@c    2:13. Nor the office of the priests to the people:  but whosoever had
@c    offered a sacrifice, the servant of the priest came, while the flesh
@c    was in boiling, with a fleshhook of three teeth in his hand,

@c    2:14. And thrust it into the kettle, or into the cauldron, or into the
@c    pot, or into the pan:  and all that the fleshhook brought up, the priest
@c    took to himself.  Thus did they to all Israel that came to Silo.

@c    2:15. Also before they burnt the fat, the servant of the priest came,
@c    and said to the man that sacrificed:  Give me flesh to boil for the
@c    priest:  for I will not take of thee sodden flesh, but raw.

@c    2:16. And he that sacrificed said to him:  Let the fat first be burnt to
@c    day, according to the custom, and then take to thee as much as thy soul
@c    desireth.  But he answered, and said to him:  Not so:  but thou shalt
@c    give it me now, or else I will take it by force.

@c    2:17. Wherefore the sin of the young men was exceeding great before the
@c    Lord:  because they withdrew men from the sacrifice of the Lord.

@c    2:18. But Samuel ministered before the face of the Lord:  being a child
@c    girded with a linen ephod.

@c    2:19. And his mother made him a little coat, which she brought to him
@c    on the appointed days, when she went up with her husband, to offer the
@c    solemn sacrifice.

@c    2:20. And Heli blessed Elcana and his wife:  and he said to him:  The
@c    Lord give thee seed of this woman, for the loan thou hast lent to the
@c    Lord.  And they went to their own home.

@c    2:21. And the Lord visited Anna, and she conceived, and bore three
@c    sons, and two daughters:  and the child Samuel became great before the
@c    Lord.

@c    2:22. Now Heli was very old, and he heard all that his sons did to all
@c    Israel:  and how they lay with the women that waited at the door of the
@c    tabernacle:

@c    2:23. And he said to them:  Why do ye these kinds of things, which I
@c    hear, very wicked things, from all the people?

@c    2:24. Do not so, my sons:  for it is no good report that I hear, that
@c    you make the people of the Lord to transgress.

@c    2:25. If one man shall sin against another, God may be appeased in his
@c    behalf:  but if a man shall sin against the Lord, who shall pray for
@c    him?  And they hearkened not to the voice of their father, because the
@c    Lord would slay them.

@c    Who shall pray for him. . .By this word Heli would have his sons
@c    understand, that by their wicked abuse of sacred things, and of the
@c    very sacrifices which were appointed to appease the Lord, they deprived
@c    themselves of the ordinary means of reconciliation with God; which was
@c    by sacrifices.  The more, because they were the chief priests whose
@c    business it was to intercede for all others, they had no other to offer
@c    sacrifices and to make atonement for them.  Ibid.  Because the Lord would
@c    slay them. . .In consequence of their manifold sacrileges, he would not
@c    soften their hearts with his efficacious grace, but was determined to
@c    destroy them.

@c    2:26. But the child Samuel advanced, and grew on, and pleased both the
@c    Lord and men.

@c    2:27. And there came a man of God to Heli, and said to him:  Thus saith
@c    the Lord:  Did I not plainly appear to thy father's house, when they
@c    were in Egypt in the house of Pharao?

@c    2:28. And I chose him out of all the tribes of Israel to be my priest,
@c    to go up to my altar, and burn incense to me, and to wear the ephod
@c    before me:  and I gave to thy father's house of all the sacrifices of
@c    the children of Israel.

@c    2:29. Why have you kicked away my victims, and my gifts which I
@c    commanded to be offered in the temple:  and thou hast rather honoured
@c    thy sons than me, to eat the firstfruits of every sacrifice of my
@c    people Israel?

@c    2:30. Wherefore thus saith the Lord the God of Israel:  I said indeed
@c    that thy house, and the house of thy father, should minister in my
@c    sight, for ever.  But now saith the Lord:  Far be this from me:  but
@c    whosoever shall glorify me, him will I glorify:  but they that despise
@c    me, shall be despised.

@c    2:31. Behold the days come:  and I will cut off thy arm, and the arm of
@c    thy father's house, that there shall not be an old man in thy house.

@c    2:32. And thou shalt see thy rival in the temple, in all the prosperity
@c    of Israel, and there shall not be an old man in thy house for ever.

@c    Thy rival. . .A priest of another race.  This was partly fulfilled, when
@c    Abiathar, of the race of Heli, was removed from the priesthood, and
@c    Sadoc, who was of another line, was substituted in his place.  But it
@c    was more fully accomplished in the New Testament, when the priesthood
@c    of Aaron gave place to that of Christ.

@c    2:33. However, I will not altogether take away a man of thee from my
@c    altar:  but that thy eyes may faint, and thy soul be spent:  and a great
@c    part of thy house shall die, when they come to man's estate.

@c    2:34. And this shall be a sign to thee, that shall come upon thy two
@c    sons, Ophni and Phinees:  in one day they shall both of them die.

@c    2:35. And I will raise me up a faithful priest, who shall do according
@c    to my heart, and my soul and I will build him a faithful house, and he
@c    shall walk all days before my anointed.

@c    2:36. And it shall come to pass, that whosoever shall remain in thy
@c    house shall come that he may be prayed for, and shall offer a piece of
@c    silver, and a roll of bread, and shall say:  Put me, I beseech thee, to
@c    somewhat of the priestly office, that I may eat a morsel of bread.



@c    1 Kings Chapter 3


@c    Samuel is four times called by the Lord:  who revealeth to him the evil
@c    that shall fall on Heli, and his house.

@c    3:1. Now the child Samuel ministered to the Lord before Heli, and the
@c    word of the Lord was precious in those days, there was no manifest
@c    vision.

@c    Precious. . .That is, rare.

@c    3:2. And it came to pass one day when Heli lay in his place, and his
@c    eyes were grown dim, that he could not see:

@c    3:3. Before the lamp of God went out, Samuel slept in the temple of the
@c    Lord, where the ark of God was.

@c    3:4. And the Lord called Samuel.  And he answered:  Here am I.

@c    3:5. And he ran to Heli, and said:  Here am I:  for thou didst call me.
@c    He said:  I did not call:  go back and sleep.  And he went and slept.

@c    3:6. And the Lord called Samuel again.  And Samuel arose and went to
@c    Heli, and said:  Here am I:  for thou calledst me.  He answered:  I did
@c    not call thee, my son:  return and sleep.

@c    3:7. Now Samuel did not yet know the Lord, neither had the word of the
@c    Lord been revealed to him.

@c    3:8. And the Lord called Samuel again the third time.  And he arose up
@c    and went to Heli,

@c    3:9. And said:  Here am I:  for thou didst call me.  Then Heli understood
@c    that the Lord called the child, and he said to Samuel:  Go, and sleep:
@c    and if he shall call thee any more, thou shalt say:  Speak, Lord, for
@c    thy servant heareth.  So Samuel went, and slept in his place.

@c    3:10. And the Lord came, and stood, and he called, as he had called the
@c    other times, Samuel, Samuel.  And Samuel said:  Speak, Lord, for thy
@c    servant heareth.

@c    3:11. And the Lord said to Samuel:  Behold I do a thing in Israel:  and
@c    whosoever shall hear it, both his ears shall tingle.

@c    3:12. In that day I will raise up against Heli all the things I have
@c    spoken concerning his house:  I will begin, and I will make an end.

@c    3:13. For I have foretold unto him, that I will judge his house for
@c    ever, for iniquity, because he knew that his sons did wickedly, and did
@c    not chastise them.

@c    3:14. Therefore have I sworn to the house of Heli, that the iniquity of
@c    his house shall not be expiated with victims nor offerings for ever.

@c    3:15. And Samuel slept till morning, and opened the doors of the house
@c    of the Lord.  And Samuel feared to tell the vision to Heli.

@c    3:16. Then Heli called Samuel, and said:  Samuel, my son.  And he
@c    answered:  Here am I.

@c    3:17. And he asked him:  What is the word that the Lord hath spoken to
@c    thee?  I beseech thee hide it not from me.  May God do so and so to thee,
@c    and add so and so, if thou hide from me one word of all that were said
@c    to thee.

@c    3:18. So Samuel told him all the words, and did not hide them from him.
@c    And he answered:  It is the Lord:  let him do what is good in his sight.

@c    3:19. And Samuel grew, and the Lord was with him, and not one of his
@c    words fell to the ground.

@c    3:20. And all Israel, from Dan to Bersabee, knew that Samuel was a
@c    faithful prophet of the Lord.

@c    3:21. And the Lord again appeared in Silo, for the Lord revealed
@c    himself to Samuel in Silo, according to the word of the Lord.  And the
@c    word of Samuel came to pass to all Israel.



@c    1 Kings Chapter 4


@c    The Israelites being overcome by the Philistines, send for the ark of
@c    God:  but they are beaten again, the sons of Heli are killed, and the
@c    ark taken:  upon the hearing of the news Heli falleth backward and
@c    dieth.

@c    4:1. And it came to pass in those days, that the Philistines gathered
@c    themselves together to fight:  and Israel went out to war against the
@c    Philistines, and camped by the Stone of help.  And the Philistines came
@c    to Aphec,

@c    The Stone of help. . .In Hebrew Eben-ezer; so called from the help which
@c    the Lord was pleased afterwards to give to his people Israel in that
@c    place, by the prayers of Samuel, chap. 7.12.

@c    4:2. And put their army in array against Israel.  And when they had
@c    joined battle, Israel turned their backs to the Philistines:  and there
@c    were slain in that fight, here and there in the fields, about four
@c    thousand men.

@c    4:3. And the people returned to the camp:  and the ancients of Israel
@c    said:  Why hath the Lord defeated us to day before the Philistines?  Let
@c    us fetch unto us the ark of the covenant of the Lord from Silo, and let
@c    it come in the midst of us, that it may save us from the hand of our
@c    enemies.

@c    4:4. So the people sent to Silo, and they brought from thence the ark
@c    of the covenant of the Lord of hosts, sitting upon the cherubims:  and
@c    the two sons of Heli, Ophni and Phinees, were with the ark of the
@c    covenant of God.

@c    4:5. And when the ark of the covenant of the Lord was come into the
@c    camp, all Israel shouted with a great shout, and the earth rang again.

@c    4:6. And the Philistines heard the noise of the shout, and they said:
@c    What is this noise of a great shout in the camp of the Hebrews?  And
@c    they understood that the ark of the Lord was come into the camp.

@c    4:7. And the Philistines were afraid, saying:  God is come into the
@c    camp.  And sighing, they said:

@c    4:8. Woe to us:  for there was no such great joy yesterday, and the day
@c    before:  Woe to us.  Who shall deliver us from the hand of these high
@c    Gods?  these are the Gods that struck Egypt with all the plagues in the
@c    desert.

@c    4:9. Take courage, and behave like men, ye Philistines:  lest you come
@c    to be servants to the Hebrews, as they have served you:  take courage
@c    and fight.

@c    4:10. So the Philistines fought, and Israel was overthrown, and every
@c    man fled to his own dwelling:  and there was an exceeding great
@c    slaughter; for there fell of Israel thirty thousand footmen.

@c    4:11. And the ark of God was taken:  and the two sons of Heli, Ophni and
@c    Phinees, were slain.

@c    4:12. And there ran a man of Benjamin out of the army, and came to Silo
@c    the same day, with his clothes rent, and his head strewed with dust.

@c    4:13. And when he was come, Heli sat upon a stool over against the way,
@c    watching.  For his heart was fearful for the ark of God.  And when the
@c    man was come into the city, he told it:  and all the city cried out.

@c    4:14. And Heli heard the noise of the cry, and he said:  What meaneth
@c    the noise of this uproar?  But he made haste, and came, and told Heli.

@c    4:15. Now Heli was ninety and eight years old, and his eyes were dim,
@c    and he could not see.

@c    4:16. And he said to Heli:  I am he that came from the battle, and have
@c    fled out of the field this day.  And he said to him:  What is there done,
@c    my son?

@c    4:17. And he that brought the news answered, and said:  Israel is fled
@c    before the Philistines, and there has been a great slaughter of the
@c    people:  moreover thy two sons, Ophni and Phinees, are dead:  and the ark
@c    of God is taken.

@c    4:18. And when he had named the ark of God, he fell from his stool
@c    backwards by the door, and broke his neck and died.  For he was an old
@c    man, and far advanced in years:  And he judged Israel forty years.

@c    Named the ark, etc. . .There is great reason, by all these
@c    circumstances, to hope that Heli died in a state of grace; and by his
@c    temporal punishments escaped the eternal.

@c    4:19. And his daughter in law, the wife of Phinees, was big with child,
@c    and near her time:  and hearing the news that the ark of God was taken,
@c    and her father in law, and her husband, were dead, she bowed herself
@c    and fell in labour:  for her pains came upon her on a sudden.

@c    4:20. And when she was upon the point of death, they that stood about
@c    her said to her:  Fear not, for thou hast borne a son.  She answered them
@c    not, nor gave heed to them.

@c    4:21. And she called the child Ichabod, saying:  The glory is gone from
@c    Israel, because the ark of God was taken, and for her father in law,
@c    and for her husband:

@c    Ichabod. . .That is, Where is the glory?  or, there is no glory.  We see
@c    how much the Israelites lamented the loss of the ark, which was but the
@c    symbol of God's presence among them.  How much more ought Christians to
@c    lament the loss of God himself, when by sin they have driven him out of
@c    their souls.

@c    4:22. And she said:  The glory is departed from Israel, because the ark
@c    of God was taken.



@c    1 Kings Chapter 5


@c    Dagon twice falleth down before the ark.  The Philistines are grievously
@c    afflicted, wherever the ark cometh.

@c    5:1. And the Philistines took the ark of God, and carried it from the
@c    Stone of help into Azotus.

@c    5:2. And the Philistines took the ark of God, and brought it into the
@c    temple of Dagon, and set it by Dagon.

@c    5:3. And when the Azotians arose early the next day, behold Dagon lay
@c    upon his face on the ground before the ark of the Lord:  and they took
@c    Dagon, and set him again in his place.

@c    5:4. And the next day again, when they rose in the morning, they found
@c    Dagon lying upon his face on the earth before the ark of the Lord:  and
@c    the head of Dagon, and both the palms of his hands, were cut off upon
@c    the threshold:

@c    5:5. And only the stump of Dagon remained in its place.  For this cause
@c    neither the priests of Dagon, nor any that go into the temple, tread on
@c    the threshold of Dagon in Azotus unto this day.

@c    5:6. And the hand of the Lord was heavy upon the Azotians, and he
@c    destroyed them, and afflicted Azotus and the coasts thereof with
@c    emerods.  And in the villages and fields in the midst of that country,
@c    there came forth a multitude of mice, and there was the confusion of a
@c    great mortality in the city.

@c    5:7. And the men of Azotus seeing this kind of plague, said:  The ark of
@c    the God of Israel shall not stay with us:  for his hand is heavy upon
@c    us, and upon Dagon, our god.

@c    5:8. And sending, they gathered together all the lords of the
@c    Philistines to them, and said:  What shall we do with the ark of the God
@c    of Israel?  And the Gethites answered:  Let the ark of the God of Israel
@c    be carried about.  And they carried the ark of the God of Israel about.

@c    5:9. And while they were carrying it about, the hand of the Lord came
@c    upon every city with an exceeding great slaughter:  and he smote the men
@c    of every city, both small and great, and they had emerods in their
@c    secret parts.  And the Gethites consulted together, and made themselves
@c    seats of skins.

@c    5:10. Therefore they sent the ark of God into Accaron.  And when the ark
@c    of God was come into Accaron, the Accaronites cried out, saying:  They
@c    have brought the ark of the God of Israel to us, to kill us and our
@c    people.

@c    5:11. They sent therefore, and gathered together all the lords of the
@c    Philistines:  and they said:  Send away the ark of the God of Israel, and
@c    let it return into its own place, and not kill us and our people.

@c    5:12. For there was the fear of death in every city, and the hand of
@c    God was exceeding heavy.  The men also that did not die, were afflicted
@c    with the emerods:  and the cry of every city went up to heaven.



@c    1 Kings Chapter 6


@c    The ark is sent back to Bethsames:  where many are slain for looking
@c    through curiosity into it.

@c    6:1. Now the ark of God was in the land of the Philistines seven
@c    months.

@c    6:2. And the Philistines called for the priests and the diviners,
@c    saying:  What shall we do with the ark of the Lord?  tell us how we are
@c    to send it back to its place.  And they said:

@c    6:3. If you send back the ark of the God of Israel, send it not away
@c    empty, but render unto him what you owe for sin, and then you shall be
@c    healed:  and you shall know why his hand departeth not from you.

@c    6:4. They answered:  What is it we ought to render unto him for sin?  and
@c    they answered:

@c    6:5. According to the number of the provinces of the Philistines you
@c    shall make five golden emerods, and five golden mice:  for the same
@c    plague hath been upon you all, and upon your lords.  And you shall make
@c    the likeness of your emerods, and the likeness of the mice, that have
@c    destroyed the land, and you shall give glory to the God of Israel:  to
@c    see if he will take off his hand from you, and from your gods, and from
@c    your land.

@c    6:6. Why do you harden your hearts, as Egypt and Pharao hardened their
@c    hearts?  did not he, after he was struck, then let them go, and they
@c    departed?

@c    6:7. Now, therefore, take and make a new cart:  and two kine that have
@c    calved, on which there hath come no yoke, tie to the cart, and shut up
@c    their calves at home.

@c    6:8. And you shall take the ark of the Lord, and lay it on the cart,
@c    and the vessels of gold, which you have paid him for sin, you shall put
@c    into a little box at the side thereof:  and send it away, that it may
@c    go.

@c    6:9. And you shall look:  and if it go up by the way of his own coasts,
@c    towards Bethsames, then he hath done us this great evil:  but if not, we
@c    shall know that it is not his hand hath touched us, but it hath
@c    happened by chance.

@c    6:10. They did therefore in this manner:  and taking two kine, that had
@c    sucking calves, they yoked them to the cart, and shut up their calves
@c    at home.

@c    6:11. And they laid the ark of God upon the cart, and the little box
@c    that had in it the golden mice, and the likeness of the emerods.

@c    6:12. And the kine took the straight way, that leadeth to Bethsames,
@c    and they went along the way, lowing as they went:  and turned not aside
@c    neither to the right hand nor to the left:  and the lords of the
@c    Philistines followed them as far as the borders of Bethsames.

@c    6:13. Now the Bethsamites were reaping wheat in the valley:  and lifting
@c    up their eyes, they saw the ark, and rejoiced to see it.

@c    6:14. And the cart came into the field of Josue, a Bethsamite, and
@c    stood there.  And there was a great stone, and they cut in pieces the
@c    wood of the cart, and laid the kine upon it a holocaust to the Lord.

@c    6:15. And the Levites took down the ark of God, and the little box that
@c    was at the side of it, wherein were the vessels of gold, and they put
@c    them upon the great stone.  The men also of Bethsames offered
@c    holocausts, and sacrificed victims that day to the Lord.

@c    6:16. And the five princes of the Philistines saw, and they returned to
@c    Accaron the same day.

@c    6:17. And these are the golden emerods, which the Philistines returned
@c    for sin to the Lord:  For Azotus one, for Gaza one, for Ascalon one, for
@c    Geth one, for Accaron one:

@c    6:18. And the golden mice, according to the number of the cities of the
@c    Philistines, of the five provinces, from the fenced city to the village
@c    that was without wall, and to the great Abel (the stone) whereon they
@c    set down the ark of the Lord, which was till that day in the field of
@c    Josue the Bethsamite.

@c    6:19. But he slew of the men of Bethsames, because they had seen the
@c    ark of the Lord, and he slew of the people seventy men, and fifty
@c    thousand of the common people.  And the people lamented, because the
@c    Lord had smitten the people with a great slaughter.

@c    Seen. . .And curiously looked into.  It is likely this plague reached to
@c    all the neighbouring country, as well as the city of Bethsames.

@c    6:20. And the men of Bethsames said:  Who shall be able to stand before
@c    the Lord this holy God?  and to whom shall he go up from us?

@c    6:21. And they sent messengers to the inhabitants of Cariathiarim,
@c    saying:  The Philistines have brought back the ark of the Lord, come ye
@c    down and fetch it up to you.



@c    1 Kings Chapter 7


@c    The ark is brought to Cariathiarim.  By Samuel's exhortation the people
@c    cast away their idols and serve God alone.  The Lord defeateth the
@c    Philistines, while Samuel offereth sacrifice.

@c    7:1. And the men of Cariathiarim came, and fetched up the ark of the
@c    Lord, and carried it into the house of Abinadab, in Gabaa:  and they
@c    sanctified Eleazar, his son, to keep the ark of the Lord.

@c    In Gabaa. . .That is, on the hill, for Gabaa signifieth a hill.

@c    7:2. And it came to pass, that from the day the ark of the Lord abode
@c    in Cariathiarim, days were multiplied (for it was now the twentieth
@c    year) and all the house of Israel rested, following the Lord.

@c    7:3. And Samuel spoke to all the house of Israel, saying:  If you turn
@c    to the Lord with all your heart, put away the strange gods from among
@c    you, Baalim and Astaroth:  and prepare your hearts unto the Lord, and
@c    serve him only, and he will deliver you out of the hand of the
@c    Philistines.

@c    7:4. Then the children of Israel put away Baalim and Astaroth, and
@c    served the Lord only.

@c    7:5. And Samuel said:  Gather all Israel to Masphath, that I may pray to
@c    the Lord for you.

@c    7:6. And they gathered together to Masphath, and they drew water, and
@c    poured it out before the Lord, and they fasted on that day, and they
@c    said there:  We have sinned against the Lord.  And Samuel judged the
@c    children of Israel in Masphath.

@c    7:7. And the Philistines heard that the children of Israel were
@c    gathered together to Masphath, and the lords of the Philistines went up
@c    against Israel.  And when the children of Israel heard this, they were
@c    afraid of the Philistines.

@c    7:8. And they said to Samuel:  Cease not to cry to the Lord our God for
@c    us, that he may save us out of the hand of the Philistines.

@c    7:9. And Samuel took a sucking lamb, and offered it whole for a
@c    holocaust to the Lord:  and Samuel cried to the Lord for Israel, and the
@c    Lord heard him.

@c    7:10. And it came to pass, when Samuel was offering the holocaust, the
@c    Philistines began the battle against Israel:  but the Lord thundered
@c    with a great thunder on that day upon the Philistines, and terrified
@c    them, and they were overthrown before the face of Israel.

@c    7:11. And the men of Israel going out of Masphath, pursued after the
@c    Philistines, and made slaughter of them till they came under Bethchar.

@c    7:12. And Samuel took a stone, and laid it between Masphath and Sen:
@c    and he called the place The stone of help.  And he said:  Thus far the
@c    Lord hath helped us.

@c    7:13. And the Philistines were humbled, and they did not come any more
@c    into the borders of Israel.  And the hand of the Lord was against the
@c    Philistines, all the days of Samuel.

@c    7:14. And the cities which the Philistines had taken from Israel, were
@c    restored to Israel, from Accaron to Geth, and their borders:  and he
@c    delivered Israel from the hand of the Philistines, and there was peace
@c    between Israel and the Amorrhites.

@c    7:15. And Samuel judged Israel all the days of his life:

@c    7:16. And he went every year about to Bethel and to Galgal and to
@c    Masphath, and he judged Israel in the foresaid places.

@c    7:17. And he returned to Ramatha:  for there was his house, and there he
@c    judged Israel:  he built also there an altar to the Lord.



@c    1 Kings Chapter 8


@c    Samuel growing old, and his sons not walking in his ways, the people
@c    desire a king.

@c    8:1. And it came to pass, when Samuel was old, that he appointed his
@c    sons to be judges over Israel.

@c    8:2. Now the name of his firstborn son was Joel:  and the name of the
@c    second was Abia, judges in Bersabee.

@c    8:3. And his sons walked not in his ways:  but they turned aside after
@c    lucre, and took bribes, and perverted judgment.

@c    8:4. Then all the ancients of Israel being assembled came to Samuel to
@c    Ramatha.

@c    8:5. And they said to him:  Behold thou art old, and thy sons walk not
@c    in thy ways:  make us a king, to judge us, as all nations have.

@c    8:6. And the word was displeasing in the eyes of Samuel, that they
@c    should say:  Give us a king to judge us.  And Samuel prayed to the Lord.

@c    8:7. And the Lord said to Samuel:  Hearken to the voice of the people in
@c    all that they say to thee.  For they have not rejected thee, but me,
@c    that I should not reign over them.

@c    Rejected, etc. . .The government of Israel hitherto had been a
@c    theocracy, in which God himself immediately ruled, by laws which he had
@c    enacted, and by judges extraordinarily raised up by himself; and
@c    therefore he complains that his people rejected him, in desiring a
@c    change of government.

@c    8:8. According to all their works, they have done from the day that I
@c    brought them out of Egypt until this day:  as they have forsaken me, and
@c    served strange gods, so do they also unto thee.

@c    8:9. Now, therefore, hearken to their voice:  but yet testify to them,
@c    and foretell them the right of the king, that shall reign over them.

@c    The right. . .That is, the manner (misphat) after which he shall
@c    proceed, having no one to control him, when he has the power in his
@c    hand.

@c    8:10. Then Samuel told all the words of the Lord to the people that had
@c    desired a king of him,

@c    8:11. And said:  This will be the right of the king that shall reign
@c    over you:  He will take your sons, and put them in his chariots, and
@c    will make them his horsemen, and his running footmen, to run before his
@c    chariots,

@c    8:12. And he will appoint of them to be his tribunes, and his
@c    centurions, and to plough his fields, and to reap his corn, and to make
@c    him arms and chariots.

@c    8:13. Your daughters also he will take to make him ointments, and to be
@c    his cooks, and bakers.

@c    8:14. And he will take your fields, and your vineyards, and your best
@c    oliveyards, and give them to his servants.

@c    8:15. Moreover he will take the tenth of your corn, and of the revenues
@c    of your vineyards, to give to his eunuchs and servants.

@c    8:16. Your servants also, and handmaids, and your goodliest young men,
@c    and your asses, he will take away, and put them to his work.

@c    8:17. Your flocks also he will tithe, and you shall be his servants.

@c    8:18. And you shall cry out in that day from the face of the king, whom
@c    you have chosen to yourselves:  and the Lord will not hear you in that
@c    day, because you desired unto yourselves a king.

@c    8:19. But the people would not hear the voice of Samuel, and they said,
@c    Nay:  but there shall be a king over us,

@c    8:20. And we also will be like all nations:  and our king shall judge
@c    us, and go out before us, and fight our battles for us.

@c    8:21. And Samuel heard all the words of the people, and rehearsed them
@c    in the ears of the Lord.

@c    8:22. And the Lord said to Samuel:  Hearken to their voice, and make
@c    them a king.  And Samuel said to the men of Israel:  Let every man go to
@c    his city.



@c    1 Kings Chapter 9


@c    Saul seeking his father's asses, cometh to Samuel, by whom he is
@c    entertained.

@c    9:1. Now there was a man of Benjamin, whose name was Cis, the son of
@c    Abiel, the son of Seror, the son of Bechorath, the son of Aphia, the
@c    son of a man of Jemini, valiant and strong.

@c    9:2. And he had a son whose name was Saul, a choice and goodly man, and
@c    there was not among the children of Israel a goodlier person than he:
@c    from his shoulders and upward he appeared above all the people.

@c    9:3. And the asses of Cis, Saul's father, were lost:  and Cis said to
@c    his son Saul:  Take one of the servants with thee, and arise, go, and
@c    seek the asses.  And when they had passed through Mount Ephraim,

@c    9:4. And through the land of Salisa, and had not found them, they
@c    passed also through the land of Salim, and they were not there:  and
@c    through the land of Jemini, and found them not.

@c    9:5. And when they were come to the land of Suph, Saul said to the
@c    servant that was with him:  Come, let us return, lest perhaps my father
@c    forget the asses, and be concerned for us.

@c    9:6. And he said to him:  Behold there is a man of God in this city, a
@c    famous man:  all that he saith, cometh certainly to pass.  Now,
@c    therefore, let us go thither, perhaps he may tell us of our way, for
@c    which we are come.

@c    9:7. And Saul said to his servant:  Behold we will go:  but what shall we
@c    carry to the man of God?  the bread is spent in our bags:  and we have no
@c    present to make to the man of God, nor any thing at all.

@c    9:8. The servant answered Saul again, and said:  Behold there is found
@c    in my hand the fourth part of a sicle of silver, let us give it to the
@c    man of God, that he may tell us our way.

@c    9:9. Now in time past in Israel, when a man went to consult God, he
@c    spoke thus:  Come, let us go to the seer.  For he that is now called a
@c    prophet, in time past was called a seer.

@c    Seer. . .Because of his seeing by divine light hidden things and things
@c    to come.

@c    9:10. And Saul said to his servant:  Thy word is very good, come let us
@c    go.  And they went into the city, where the man of God was.

@c    9:11. And when they went up the ascent to the city, they found maids
@c    coming out to draw water, and they said to them:  Is the seer here?

@c    9:12. They answered and said to them:  He is:  behold he is before you,
@c    make haste now:  for he came to day into the city, for there is a
@c    sacrifice of the people to day in the high place.

@c    A sacrifice. . .The law did not allow of sacrifices in any other place,
@c    but at the tabernacle, or temple, in which the ark of the covenant was
@c    kept; but Samuel, by divine dispensation, offered sacrifices in other
@c    places.  For which dispensation this reason may be alleged, that the
@c    house of God in Silo, having lost the ark, was now cast off; as a
@c    figure of the reprobation of the Jews, Ps. 77.60, 67.  And in
@c    Cariathiarim where the ark was, there was neither tabernacle, nor
@c    altar.--Ibid.  The high place. . .Excelsum.  The excelsa, or high places,
@c    so often mentioned in scripture, were places of worship, in which were
@c    altars for sacrifice.  These were sometimes employed in the service of
@c    the true God, as in the present case:  but more frequently in the
@c    service of idols; and were called excelsa, which is commonly (though
@c    perhaps not so accurately) rendered high places; not because they were
@c    always upon hills, for the very worst of all, which was that of
@c    Topheth, or Geennom, (Jer. 19.) was in a valley; but because of the
@c    high altars, and pillars, or monuments, erected there, on which were
@c    set up the idols, or images of their deities.

@c    9:13. As soon as you come into the city, you shall immediately find
@c    him, before he go up to the high place to eat:  for the people will not
@c    eat till he come; because he blesseth the victim, and afterwards they
@c    eat that are invited.  Now, therefore, go up, for to day you shall find
@c    him.

@c    9:14. And they went up into the city.  And when they were walking in the
@c    midst of the city, behold Samuel was coming out over against them, to
@c    go up to the high place.

@c    9:15. Now the Lord had revealed to the ear of Samuel the day before
@c    Saul came, saying:

@c    9:16. To morrow about this same hour I will send thee a man of the land
@c    of Benjamin, and thou shalt anoint him to be ruler over my people
@c    Israel:  and he shall save my people out of the hand of the Philistines:
@c    for I have looked down upon my people, because their cry is come to me.

@c    9:17. And when Samuel saw Saul, the Lord said to him:  Behold the man,
@c    of whom I spoke to thee, this man shall reign over my people.

@c    9:18. And Saul came to Samuel in the midst of the gate, and said:  Tell
@c    me, I pray thee, where is the house of the seer?

@c    9:19. And Samuel answered Saul, saying:  I am the seer; go up before me
@c    to the high place, that you may eat with me to day, and I will let thee
@c    go in the morning:  and tell thee all that is in thy heart.

@c    9:20. And as for the asses, which were lost three days ago, be not
@c    solicitous, because they are found.  And for whom shall be all the best
@c    things of Israel?  Shall they not be for thee and for all thy father's
@c    house?

@c    9:21. And Saul answering, said:  Am not I a son of Jemini of the least
@c    tribe of Israel, and my kindred the last among all the families of the
@c    tribe of Benjamin?  Why then hast thou spoken this word to me?

@c    9:22. Then Samuel taking Saul, and his servant, brought them into the
@c    parlour, and gave them a place at the head of them that were invited.
@c    For there were about thirty men.

@c    9:23. And Samuel said to the cook:  Bring the portion which I gave thee,
@c    and commanded thee to set it apart by thee.

@c    9:24. And the cook took up the shoulder, and set it before Saul.  And
@c    Samuel said:  Behold what is left, set it before thee, and eat; because
@c    it was kept of purpose for thee, when I invited the people.  And Saul
@c    ate with Samuel that day.

@c    9:25. And they went down from the high place into the town, and he
@c    spoke with Saul upon the top of the house:  and he prepared a bed for
@c    Saul on the top of the house and he slept.

@c    9:26. And when they were risen in the morning, and it began now to be
@c    light, Samuel called Saul on the top of the house, saying:  Arise, that
@c    I may let thee go.  And Saul arose:  and they went out both of them:  to
@c    wit, he and Samuel.

@c    9:27. And as they were going down in the end of the city, Samuel said
@c    to Saul:  Speak to the servant to go before us, and pass on:  but stand
@c    thou still a while, that I may tell thee the word of the Lord.



@c    1 Kings Chapter 10


@c    Saul is anointed.  He prophesieth, and is changed into another man.
@c    Samuel calleth the people together, to make a king:  the lot falleth on
@c    Saul.

@c    10:1. And Samuel took a little vial of oil, and poured it upon his
@c    head, and kissed him, and said:  Behold, the Lord hath anointed thee to
@c    be prince over his inheritance, and thou shalt deliver his people out
@c    of the hands of their enemies, that are round about them.  And this
@c    shall be a sign unto thee, that God hath anointed thee to be prince.

@c    10:2. When thou shalt depart from me this day, thou shalt find two men
@c    by the sepulchre of Rachel in the borders of Benjamin to the south, and
@c    they shall say to thee:  The asses are found which thou wentest to seek:
@c    and thy father, thinking no more of the asses, is concerned for you,
@c    and saith:  What shall I do for my son?

@c    10:3. And when thou shalt depart from thence, and go farther on, and
@c    shalt come to the oak of Thabor, there shall meet thee three men going
@c    up to God to Bethel, one carrying three kids, and another three loaves
@c    of bread, and another carrying a bottle of wine.

@c    Bethel. . .Where there was at that time an altar of God; it being one of
@c    the places where Samuel judged Israel.

@c    10:4. And they will salute thee, and will give thee two loaves, and
@c    thou shalt take them at their hand.

@c    10:5. After that thou shalt come to the hill of God, where the garrison
@c    of the Philistines is:  and when thou shalt be come there into the city,
@c    thou shalt meet a company of prophets coming down from the high place,
@c    with a psaltery, and a timbrel, and a pipe, and a harp before them, and
@c    they shall be prophesying.

@c    The hill of God. . .Gabaa, in which there was also at that time, a high
@c    place or altar.--Prophets. . .These were men whose office it was to sing
@c    hymns and praises to God; for such in holy writ are called prophets,
@c    and their singing praises to God is called prophesying.  See 1 Par.
@c    alias 1 Chr. 15.22, and 25.1.  Now there were in those days colleges, or
@c    schools for training up these prophets; and it seems there was one of
@c    these schools at this hill of God; and another at Najoth in Ramatha.
@c    See 1 Kings 19.20, 21, etc.

@c    10:6. And the Spirit of the Lord shall come upon thee, and thou shalt
@c    prophesy with them, and shalt be changed into another man.

@c    10:7. When therefore these signs shall happen to thee, do whatsoever
@c    thy hand shall find, for the Lord is with thee.

@c    10:8. And thou shalt go down before me to Galgal, (for I will come down
@c    to thee), that thou mayst offer an oblation, and sacrifice victims of
@c    peace:  seven days shalt thou wait, till I come to thee, and I will shew
@c    thee what thou art to do.

@c    Galgal. . .Here also by dispensation was an altar of God.

@c    10:9. So when he had turned his back to go from Samuel, God gave unto
@c    him another heart, and all these things came to pass that day.

@c    10:10. And they came to the foresaid hill, and behold a company of
@c    prophets met him:  and the Spirit of the Lord came upon him, and he
@c    prophesied in the midst of them.

@c    10:11. And all that had known him yesterday and the day before, seeing
@c    that he was with the prophets, and prophesied, said to each other:  What
@c    is this that hath happened to the son of Cis?  is Saul also among the
@c    prophets?

@c    10:12. And one answered another, saying:  And who is their father?
@c    therefore it became a proverb:  Is Saul also among the prophets?

@c    Their father. . .That is, their teacher, or superior.  As much as to say,
@c    Who could bring about such a wonderful change as to make Saul a
@c    prophet?

@c    10:13. And when he had made an end of prophesying, he came to the high
@c    place.

@c    10:14. And Saul's uncle said to him, and to his servant:  Whither went
@c    you?  They answered:  To seek the asses:  and not finding them, we went
@c    to Samuel.

@c    10:15. And his uncle said to him:  Tell me what Samuel said to thee.

@c    10:16. And Saul said to his uncle:  He told us that the asses were
@c    found.  But of the matter of the kingdom of which Samuel had spoken to
@c    him, he told him not.

@c    10:17. And Samuel called together the people to the Lord in Maspha:

@c    10:18. And he said to the children of Israel:  Thus saith the Lord the
@c    God of Israel:  I brought up Israel out of Egypt, and delivered you from
@c    the hand of the Egyptians, and from the hand of all the kings who
@c    afflicted you.

@c    10:19. But you this day have rejected your God, who only hath saved you
@c    out of all your evils and your tribulations:  and you have said:  Nay:
@c    but set a king over us.  Now therefore stand before the Lord by your
@c    tribes, and by your families.

@c    10:20. And Samuel brought to him all the tribes of Israel, and the lot
@c    fell on the tribe of Benjamin.

@c    10:21. And he brought the tribe of Benjamin and the kindreds thereof,
@c    and the lot fell upon the kindred of Metri, and it came to Saul, the
@c    son of Cis.  They sought him therefore, and he was not found.

@c    10:22. And after this they consulted the Lord whether he would come
@c    thither.  And the Lord answered:  Behold he is hidden at home.

@c    10:23. And they ran and fetched him thence:  and he stood in the midst
@c    of the people, and he was higher than any of the people from the
@c    shoulders and upward.

@c    10:24. And Samuel said to all the people:  Surely you see him whom the
@c    Lord hath chosen, that there is none like him among all the people.  And
@c    all the people cried and said:  God save the king.

@c    10:25. And Samuel told the people the law of the kingdom, and wrote it
@c    in a book, and laid it up before the Lord:  and Samuel sent away all the
@c    people, every one to his own house.

@c    10:26. Saul also departed to his own house in Gabaa:  and there went
@c    with him a part of the army, whose hearts God had touched.

@c    10:27. But the children of Belial said:  Shall this fellow be able to
@c    save us?  And they despised him, and brought him no presents; but he
@c    dissembled as though he heard not.



@c    1 Kings Chapter 11


@c    Saul defeateth the Ammonites, and delivereth Jabes Galaad.

@c    11:1. And it came to pass about a month after this, that Naas, the
@c    Ammonite, came up, and began to fight against Jabes Galaad.  And all the
@c    men of Jabes said to Naas:  Make a covenant with us, and we will serve
@c    thee.

@c    11:2. And Naas, the Ammonite, answered them:  On this condition will I
@c    make a covenant with you, that I may pluck out all your right eyes, and
@c    make you a reproach in all Israel.

@c    11:3. And the ancients of Jabes said to him:  Allow us seven days, that
@c    we may send messengers to all the coasts of Israel:  and if there be no
@c    one to defend us, we will come out to thee.

@c    11:4. The messengers therefore came to Gabaa of Saul:  and they spoke
@c    these words in the hearing of the people:  and all the people lifted up
@c    their voices, and wept.

@c    11:5. And behold Saul came, following oxen out of the field, and he
@c    said:  What aileth the people that they weep?  And they told him the
@c    words of the men of Jabes.

@c    11:6. And the Spirit of the Lord came upon Saul, when he had heard
@c    these words, and his anger was exceedingly kindled.

@c    11:7. And taking both the oxen, he cut them in pieces, and sent them
@c    into all the coasts of Israel, by messengers, saying:  Whosoever shall
@c    not come forth, and follow Saul and Samuel, so shall it be done to his
@c    oxen.  And the fear of the Lord fell upon the people, and they went out
@c    as one man.

@c    11:8. And he numbered them in Bezec:  and there were of the children of
@c    Israel three hundred thousand:  and of the men of Juda thirty thousand.

@c    11:9. And they said to the messengers that came:  Thus shall you say to
@c    the men of Jabes Galaad:  To morrow, when the sun shall be hot, you
@c    shall have relief.  The messengers therefore came, and told the men of
@c    Jabes, and they were glad.

@c    11:10. And they said:  In the morning we will come out to you:  and you
@c    shall do what you please with us.

@c    11:11. And it came to pass, when the morrow was come, that Saul put the
@c    people in three companies:  and he came into the midst of the camp in
@c    the morning watch, and he slew the Ammonites until the day grew hot,
@c    and the rest were scattered, so that two of them were not left
@c    together.

@c    11:12. And the people said to Samuel:  Who is he that said:  Shall Saul
@c    reign over us?  Bring the men, and we will kill them.

@c    11:13. And Saul said:  No man shall be killed this day:  because the Lord
@c    this day hath wrought salvation in Israel:

@c    11:14. And Samuel said to the people:  Come, and let us go to Galgal,
@c    and let us renew the kingdom there.

@c    11:15. And all the people went to Galgal, and there they made Saul
@c    king, before the Lord in Galgal, and they sacrificed there victims of
@c    peace before the Lord.  And there Saul and all the men of Israel
@c    rejoiced exceedingly.



@c    1 Kings Chapter 12


@c    Samuel's integrity is acknowledged.  God sheweth by a sign from heaven
@c    that they had done ill in asking for a king.

@c    12:1. And Samuel said to all Israel:  Behold I have hearkened to your
@c    voice in all that you said to me, and have made a king over you.

@c    12:2. And now the king goeth before you:  but I am old and greyheaded:
@c    and my sons are with you:  having then conversed with you from my youth
@c    until this day, behold here I am.

@c    12:3. Speak of me before the Lord, and before his anointed, whether I
@c    have taken any man's ox, or ass:  if I have wronged any man, if I have
@c    oppressed any man, if I have taken a bribe at any man's hand:  and I
@c    will despise it this day, and will restore it to you.

@c    12:4. And they said:  Thou hast not wronged us, nor oppressed us, nor
@c    taken ought at any man's hand.

@c    12:5. And he said to them:  The Lord is witness against you, and his
@c    anointed is witness this day, that you have not found any thing in my
@c    hand.  And they said:  He is witness.

@c    12:6. And Samuel said to the people:  It is the Lord who made Moses and
@c    Aaron, and brought our fathers out of the land of Egypt.

@c    12:7. Now, therefore, stand up, that I may plead in judgment against
@c    you before the Lord, concerning all the kindness of the Lord, which he
@c    hath shewn to you, and to your fathers:

@c    12:8. How Jacob went into Egypt, and your fathers cried to the Lord:
@c    and the Lord sent Moses and Aaron, and brought your fathers out of
@c    Egypt, and made them dwell in this place.

@c    12:9. And they forgot the Lord their God, and he delivered them into
@c    the hands of Sisara, captain of the army of Hasor, and into the hands
@c    of the Philistines, and into the hand of the king of Moab, and they
@c    fought against them.

@c    12:10. But afterwards they cried to the Lord, and said:  We have sinned,
@c    because we have forsaken the Lord, and have served Baalim and Astaroth:
@c    but now deliver us from the hand of our enemies, and we will serve
@c    thee.

@c    12:11. And the Lord sent Jerobaal, and Badan, and Jephte, and Samuel,
@c    and delivered you from the hand of your enemies round about, and you
@c    dwelt securely.

@c    Jerobaal and Badan. . .That is, Gedeon and Samson called here Badan or
@c    Bedan, because he was of Dan.

@c    12:12. But seeing that Naas, king of the children of Ammon, was come
@c    against you, you said to me:  Nay, but a king shall reign over us:
@c    whereas the Lord your God was your king.

@c    12:13. Now, therefore, your king is here, whom you have chosen and
@c    desired:  Behold the Lord hath given you a king.

@c    12:14. If you will fear the Lord, and serve him, and hearken to his
@c    voice, and not provoke the mouth of the Lord:  then shall both you, and
@c    the king who reigneth over you, be followers of the Lord your God.

@c    12:15. But if you will not hearken to the voice of the Lord, but will
@c    rebel against his words, the hand of the Lord shall be upon you, and
@c    upon your fathers.

@c    12:16. Now then stand, and see this great thing which the Lord will do
@c    in your sight.

@c    12:17. Is it not wheat harvest to day?  I will call upon the Lord, and
@c    he shall send thunder and rain:  and you shall know, and see that you
@c    yourselves have done a great evil in the sight of the Lord, in desiring
@c    a king over you.

@c    Wheat harvest. . .At which time of the year, it never thunders or rains
@c    in those countries.

@c    12:18. And Samuel cried unto the Lord, and the Lord sent thunder and
@c    rain that day.

@c    12:19. And all the people greatly feared the Lord and Samuel.  And all
@c    the people said to Samuel:  Pray for thy servants to the Lord thy God,
@c    that we may not die, for we have added to all our sins this evil, to
@c    ask for a king.

@c    12:20. And Samuel said to the people:  Fear not, you have done all this
@c    evil:  but yet depart not from following the Lord, but serve the Lord
@c    with all your heart.

@c    12:21. And turn not aside after vain things, which shall never profit
@c    you, nor deliver you, because they are vain.

@c    12:22. And the Lord will not forsake his people for his great name's
@c    sake:  because the Lord hath sworn to make you his people.

@c    12:23. And far from me be this sin against the Lord, that I should
@c    cease to pray for you:  and I will teach you the good and right way.

@c    12:24. Therefore fear the Lord, and serve him in truth, and with your
@c    whole heart, for you have seen the great works which he hath done among
@c    you.

@c    12:25. But if you will still do wickedly:  both you and your king shall
@c    perish together.



@c    1 Kings Chapter 13


@c    The war between Saul and the Philistines.  The distress of the
@c    Israelites.  Saul offereth sacrifice before the coming of Samuel:  for
@c    which he is reproved.

@c    13:1. Saul was a child of one year when he began to reign, and he
@c    reigned two years over Israel.

@c    Of one year. . .That is, he was good and like an innocent child, and for
@c    two years continued in that innocency.

@c    13:2. And Saul chose him three thousand men of Israel:  and two thousand
@c    were with Saul in Machmas, and in mount Bethel:  and a thousand with
@c    Jonathan in Gabaa of Benjamin:  and the rest of the people he sent back
@c    every man to their dwellings.

@c    13:3. And Jonathan smote the garrison of the Philistines which was in
@c    Gabaa.  And when the Philistines had heard of it, Saul sounded the
@c    trumpet over all the land, saying:  Let the Hebrews hear.

@c    13:4. And all Israel heard this report:  Saul hath smitten the garrison
@c    of the Philistines:  and Israel took courage against the Philistines.
@c    And the people were called together after Saul to Galgal.

@c    13:5. The Philistines also were assembled to fight against Israel,
@c    thirty thousand chariots, and six thousand horsemen, and a multitude of
@c    people besides, like the sand on the seashore for number.  And going up
@c    they camped in Machmas, at the east of Bethaven.

@c    13:6. And when the men of Israel saw that they were straitened (for the
@c    people were distressed), they hid themselves in caves, and in thickets,
@c    and in rocks, and in dens, and in pits.

@c    13:7. And some of the Hebrews passed over the Jordan into the land of
@c    Gad and Galaad.  And when Saul was yet in Galgal, all the people that
@c    followed him were greatly afraid.

@c    13:8. And he waited seven days, according to the appointment of Samuel,
@c    and Samuel came not to Galgal, and the people slipt away from him.

@c    13:9. Then Saul said:  Bring me the holocaust, and the peace offerings.
@c    And he offered the holocaust.

@c    13:10. And when he had made an end of offering the holocaust, behold
@c    Samuel came:  and Saul went forth to meet him and salute him.

@c    13:11. And Samuel said to him:  What hast thou done?  Saul answered:
@c    Because I saw that the people slipt from me, and thou wast not come
@c    according to the days appointed, and the Philistines were gathered
@c    together in Machmas,

@c    13:12. I said:  Now will the Philistines come down upon me to Galgal,
@c    and I have not appeased the face of the Lord.  Forced by necessity, I
@c    offered the holocaust.

@c    13:13. And Samuel said to Saul:  Thou hast done foolishly, and hast not
@c    kept the commandments of the Lord thy God, which he commanded thee.  And
@c    if thou hadst not done thus, the Lord would now have established thy
@c    kingdom over Israel for ever:

@c    13:14. But thy kingdom shall not continue.  The Lord hath sought him a
@c    man according to his own heart:  and him hath the Lord commanded to be
@c    prince over his people, because thou hast not observed that which the
@c    Lord commanded.

@c    13:15. And Samuel arose and went up from Galgal to Gabaa of Benjamin.
@c    And the rest of the people went up after Saul, to meet the people who
@c    fought against them, going from Galgal to Gabaa, in the hill of
@c    Benjamin.  And Saul numbered the people, that were found with him, about
@c    six hundred men.

@c    13:16. And Saul, and Jonathan his son, and the people that were present
@c    with them, were in Gabaa of Benjamin:  But the Philistines encamped in
@c    Machmas.

@c    13:17. And there went out of the camp of the Philistines three
@c    companies to plunder.  One company went towards the way of Ephra to the
@c    land of Sual;

@c    13:18. And another went by the way of Bethoron, and the third turned to
@c    the way of the border, above the valley of Seboim towards the desert.

@c    13:19. Now there was no smith to be found in all the land of Israel,
@c    for the Philistines had taken this precaution, lest the Hebrews should
@c    make them swords or spears.

@c    13:20. So all Israel went down to the Philistines, to sharpen every man
@c    his ploughshare, and his spade, and his axe, and his rake.

@c    13:21. So that their shares, and their spades, and their forks, and
@c    their axes, were blunt, even to the goad, which was to be mended.

@c    13:22. And when the day of battle was come, there was neither sword nor
@c    spear found in the hand of any of the people that were with Saul and
@c    Jonathan, except Saul and Jonathan his son.

@c    13:23. And the army of the Philistines went out in order to advance
@c    further in Machmas.



@c    1 Kings Chapter 14


@c    Jonathan attacketh the Philistines.  A miraculous victory.  Saul's
@c    unadvised oath, by which Jonathan is put in danger of his life, but is
@c    delivered by the people.

@c    14:1. Now it came to pass one day that Jonathan, the son of Saul, said
@c    to the young man that bore his armour:  Come, and let us go over to the
@c    garrison of the Philistines, which is on the other side of yonder
@c    place.  But he told not this to his father.

@c    14:2. And Saul abode in the uttermost part of Gabaa, under the
@c    pomegranate tree, which was in Magron:  and the people with him were
@c    about six hundred men.

@c    14:3. And Achias, the son of Achitob, brother of Ichabod the son of
@c    Phinees, the son of Heli, the priest of the Lord in Silo, wore the
@c    ephod.  And the people knew not whither Jonathan was gone.

@c    14:4. Now there were between the ascents, by which Jonathan sought to
@c    go over to the garrison of the Philistines, rocks standing up on both
@c    sides, and steep cliffs like teeth on the one side, and on the other,
@c    the name of the one was Boses, and the name of the other was Sene:

@c    14:5. One rock stood out toward the north, over against Machmas, and
@c    the other to the south, over against Gabaa.

@c    14:6. And Jonathan said to the young man that bore his armour:  Come,
@c    let us go over to the garrison of these uncircumcised, it may be the
@c    Lord will do for us:  because it is easy for the Lord to save either by
@c    many, or by few.

@c    14:7. And his armourbearer said to him:  Do all that pleaseth thy mind:
@c    go whither thou wilt, and I will be with thee wheresoever thou hast a
@c    mind.

@c    14:8. And Jonathan said:  Behold we will go over to these men.  And when
@c    we shall be seen by them,

@c    14:9. If they shall speak thus to us:  Stay till we come to you:  let us
@c    stand still in our place, and not go up to them.

@c    14:10. But if they shall say:  Come up to us:  let us go up, because the
@c    Lord hath delivered them into our hands, this shall be a sign unto us.

@c    This shall be a sign. . .It is likely Jonathan was instructed by divine
@c    inspiration to make a choice of this sign:  otherwise the observation of
@c    omens is superstitious and sinful.

@c    14:11. So both of them discovered themselves to the garrison of the
@c    Philistines:  and the Philistines said:  Behold the Hebrews come forth
@c    out of the holes wherein they were hid.

@c    14:12. And the men of the garrison spoke to Jonathan, and to his
@c    armourbearer, and said:  Come up to us, and we will shew you a thing.
@c    And Jonathan said to his armourbearer:  Let us go up, follow me:  for the
@c    Lord hath delivered them into the hands of Israel.

@c    14:13. And Jonathan went up creeping on his hands and feet, and his
@c    armourbearer after him.  And some fell before Jonathan, others his
@c    armourbearer slew as he followed him.

@c    14:14. And the first slaughter which Jonathan and his armourbearer
@c    made, was of about twenty men, within half an acre of land, which a
@c    yoke of oxen is wont to plough in a day.

@c    14:15. And there was a miracle in the camp, in the fields:  and all the
@c    people of their garrison, who had gone out to plunder, were amazed, and
@c    the earth trembled:  and it happened as a miracle from God.

@c    14:16. And the watchmen of Saul, who were in Gabaa of Benjamin looked,
@c    and behold a multitude overthrown, and fleeing this way and that.

@c    14:17. And Saul said to the people that were with him:  Look, and see
@c    who is gone from us.  And when they had sought, it was found that
@c    Jonathan and his armourbearer were not there.

@c    14:18. And Saul said to Achias:  Bring the ark of the Lord.  (For the ark
@c    of God was there that day with the children of Israel.)

@c    14:19. And while Saul spoke to the priest, there arose a great uproar
@c    in the camp of the Philistines:  and it increased by degrees, and was
@c    heard more clearly.  And Saul said to the priest:  Draw in thy hand.

@c    14:20. Then Saul, and all the people that were with him, shouted
@c    together, and they came to the place of the fight:  and behold every
@c    man's sword was turned upon his neighbour, and there was a very great
@c    slaughter.

@c    14:21. Moreover, the Hebrews that had been with the Philistines
@c    yesterday and the day before, and went up with them into the camp,
@c    returned to be with the Israelites, who were with Saul and Jonathan.

@c    14:22. And all the Israelites that had hid themselves in mount Ephraim,
@c    hearing that the Philistines fled, joined themselves with their
@c    countrymen in the fight.  And there were with Saul about ten thousand
@c    men.

@c    14:23. And the Lord saved Israel that day.  And the fight went on as far
@c    as Bethaven.

@c    14:24. And the men of Israel were joined together that day:  and Saul
@c    adjured the people, saying:  Cursed be the man that shall eat food till
@c    evening, till I be revenged of my enemies.  So none of the people tasted
@c    any food.

@c    14:25. And all the common people came into a forest, in which there was
@c    honey upon the ground.

@c    14:26. And when the people came into the forest, behold the honey
@c    dropped, but no man put his hand to his mouth.  For the people feared
@c    the oath.

@c    14:27. But Jonathan had not heard when his father adjured the people:
@c    and he put forth the end of the rod, which he had in his hand, and dipt
@c    it in a honeycomb:  and he carried his hand to his mouth, and his eyes
@c    were enlightened.

@c    14:28. And one of the people answering, said:  Thy father hath bound the
@c    people with an oath, saying:  Cursed be the man that shall eat any food
@c    this day.  (And the people were faint.)

@c    14:29. And Jonathan said:  My father hath troubled the land:  you have
@c    seen yourselves that my eyes are enlightened, because I tasted a little
@c    of this honey:

@c    14:30. How much more if the people had eaten of the prey of their
@c    enemies, which they found?  had there not been made a greater slaughter
@c    among the Philistines?

@c    14:31. So they smote that day the Philistines, from Machmas to Aialon.
@c    And the people were wearied exceedingly.

@c    14:32. And falling upon the spoils, they took sheep, and oxen, and
@c    calves, and slew them on the ground:  and the people ate them with the
@c    blood.

@c    14:33. And they told Saul that the people had sinned against the Lord,
@c    eating with the blood.  And he said:  You have transgressed:  roll here
@c    to me now a great stone.

@c    14:34. And Saul said:  Disperse yourselves among the people, and tell
@c    them to bring me every man his ox and his ram and slay them upon this
@c    stone, and eat, and you shall not sin against the Lord, in eating with
@c    the blood.  So all the people brought every man his ox with him till the
@c    night:  and slew them there.

@c    14:35. And Saul built an altar to the Lord:  and he then first began to
@c    build an altar to the Lord.

@c    14:36. And Saul said:  Let us fall upon the Philistines by night, and
@c    destroy them till the morning light, and let us not leave a man of
@c    them.  And the people said:  Do all that seemeth good in thy eyes.  And
@c    the priest said:  Let us draw near hither unto God.

@c    14:37. And Saul consulted the Lord:  Shall I pursue after the
@c    Philistines?  wilt thou deliver them into the hands of Israel?  And he
@c    answered him not that day.

@c    14:38. And Saul said:  Bring hither all the corners of the people:  and
@c    know, and see by whom this sin hath happened to day.

@c    14:39. As the Lord liveth, who is the Saviour of Israel, if it was done
@c    by Jonathan, my son, he shall surely die.  In this none of the people
@c    gainsayed him.

@c    14:40. And he said to all Israel:  Be you on one side and I, with
@c    Jonathan, my son, will be on the other side.  And the people answered
@c    Saul:  Do what seemeth good in thy eyes.

@c    14:41. And Saul said to the Lord:  O Lord God of Israel, give a sign, by
@c    which we may know, what the meaning is, that thou answerest not thy
@c    servant to day:  If this iniquity be in me, or in my son Jonathan, give
@c    a proof:  or if this iniquity be in thy people, give holiness.  And
@c    Jonathan and Saul were taken, and the people escaped.

@c    14:42. And Saul said:  (Cast lots between me, and Jonathan, my son.  And
@c    Jonathan was taken.

@c    Jonathan was taken. . .Though Jonathan was excused from sin, through
@c    ignorance of the prohibition, yet God was pleased on this occasion to
@c    let the lot fall upon him, to shew unto all the great obligation of
@c    obedience to princes and parents.

@c    14:43. And Saul said to Jonathan:  Tell me what thou hast done.  And
@c    Jonathan told him, and said:  I did but taste a little honey with the
@c    end of the rod, which was in my hand, and behold I must die.

@c    14:44. And Saul said:  May God do so and so to me, and add still more:
@c    for dying thou shalt die, O Jonathan.

@c    14:45. And the people said to Saul:  Shall Jonathan then die, who hath
@c    wrought this great salvation in Israel?  this must not be:  As the Lord
@c    liveth, there shall not one hair of his head fall to the ground, for he
@c    hath wrought with God this day.  So the people delivered Jonathan, that
@c    he should not die.

@c    14:46. And Saul went back, and did not pursue after the Philistines:
@c    and the Philistines went to their own places.

@c    14:47. And Saul having his kingdom established over Israel, fought
@c    against all his enemies round about, against Moab, and against the
@c    children of Ammon, and Edom, and the kings of Soba, and the
@c    Philistines:  and whithersoever he turned himself, he overcame.

@c    14:48. And gathering together an army, he defeated Amalec, and
@c    delivered Israel from the hand of them that spoiled them.

@c    14:49. And the sons of Saul, were Jonathan, and Jessui, and Melchisua:
@c    and the names of his two daughters, the name of the firstborn was
@c    Merob, and the name of the younger Michol.

@c    14:50. And the name of Saul's wife was Achinoam, the daughter of
@c    Achimaas; and the name of the captain of his army was Abner, the son of
@c    Ner, the cousin german of Saul.

@c    14:51. For Cis was the father of Saul, and Ner, the father of Abner,
@c    was son of Abiel.

@c    14:52. And there was a great war against the Philistines all the days
@c    of Saul.  For whomsoever Saul saw to be a valiant man, and fit for war,
@c    he took him to himself.



@c    1 Kings Chapter 15


@c    Saul is sent to destroy Amalec:  he spareth their king and the best of
@c    their cattle:  for which disobedience he is cast off by the Lord.

@c    15:1. And Samuel said to Saul:  The Lord sent me to anoint thee king
@c    over his people Israel:  now therefore hearken thou unto the voice of
@c    the Lord:

@c    15:2. Thus saith the Lord of hosts:  I have reckoned up all that Amalec
@c    hath done to Israel:  how he opposed them in the way when they came up
@c    out of Egypt.

@c    15:3. Now therefore go, and smite Amalec, and utterly destroy all that
@c    he hath:  spare him not, nor covet anything that is his:  but slay both
@c    man and woman, child and suckling, ox and sheep, camel and ass.

@c    Child. . .The great Master of life and death (who cuts off one half of
@c    all mankind whilst they are children) has been pleased sometimes to
@c    ordain that children should be put to the sword, in detestation of the
@c    crimes of their parents, and that they might not live to follow the
@c    same wicked ways.  But without such ordinance of God it is not
@c    allowable, in any wars, how just soever, to kill children.

@c    15:4. So Saul commanded the people, and numbered them as lambs:  two
@c    hundred thousand footmen, and ten thousand of the men of Juda.

@c    15:5. And when Saul was come to the city of Amalec, he laid ambushes in
@c    the torrent.

@c    15:6. And Saul said to the Cinite:  Go, depart, and get ye down from
@c    Amalec:  lest I destroy thee with him.  For thou hast shewn kindness to
@c    all the children of Israel, when they came up out of Egypt.  And the
@c    Cinite departed from the midst of Amalec.

@c    15:7. And Saul smote Amalec from Hevila, until thou comest to Sur,
@c    which is over against Egypt.

@c    15:8. And he took Agag, the king of Amalec, alive:  but all the common
@c    people he slew with the edge of the sword.

@c    15:9. And Saul and the people spared Agag, and the best of the flocks
@c    of sheep, and of the herds, and the garments and the rams, and all that
@c    was beautiful, and would not destroy them:  but every thing that was
@c    vile, and good for nothing, that they destroyed.

@c    15:10. And the word of the Lord came to Samuel,

@c    15:11. It repenteth me that I have made Saul king:  for he hath forsaken
@c    me, and hath not executed my commandments.  And Samuel was grieved, and
@c    he cried unto the Lord all night.

@c    15:12. And when Samuel rose early, to go to Saul in the morning, it was
@c    told Samuel that Saul was come to Carmel, and had erected for himself a
@c    triumphant arch, and returning had passed on, and gone down to Galgal.
@c    And Samuel came to Saul, and Saul was offering a holocaust to the Lord,
@c    out of the choicest of the spoils, which he had brought from Amalec.

@c    15:13. And when Samuel was come to Saul, Saul said to him:  Blessed be
@c    thou of the Lord, I have fulfilled the word of the Lord.

@c    15:14. And Samuel said:  What meaneth then this bleating of the flocks,
@c    which soundeth in my ears, and the lowing of the herds, which I hear?

@c    15:15. And Saul said:  They have brought them from Amalec:  for the
@c    people spared the best of the sheep and of the herds, that they might
@c    be sacrificed to the Lord thy God, but the rest we have slain.

@c    15:16. And Samuel said to Saul:  Suffer me, and I will tell thee what
@c    the Lord hath said to me this night.  And he said to him:  Speak.

@c    15:17. And Samuel said:  When thou wast a little one in thy own eyes,
@c    wast thou not made the head of the tribes of Israel?  And the Lord
@c    anointed thee to be king over Israel.

@c    15:18. And the Lord sent thee on the way, and said:  Go, and kill the
@c    sinners of Amalec, and thou shalt fight against them until thou hast
@c    utterly destroyed them.

@c    15:19. Why then didst thou not hearken to the voice of the Lord:  but
@c    hast turned to the prey, and hast done evil in the eyes of the Lord?

@c    15:20. And Saul said to Samuel:  Yea, I have hearkened to the voice of
@c    the Lord, and have walked in the way by which the Lord sent me, and
@c    have brought Agag, the king of Amalec, and Amalec I have slain.

@c    15:21. But the people took of the spoils, sheep and oxen, as the
@c    firstfruits of those things that were slain, to offer sacrifice to the
@c    Lord their God in Galgal.

@c    15:22. And Samuel said:  Doth the Lord desire holocausts and victims,
@c    and not rather that the voice of the Lord should be obeyed?  For
@c    obedience is better than sacrifices:  and to hearken rather than to
@c    offer the fat or rams.

@c    15:23. Because it is like the sin of witchcraft, to rebel:  and like the
@c    crime of idolatry, to refuse to obey.  Forasmuch, therefore, as thou
@c    hast rejected the word of the Lord, the Lord hath also rejected thee
@c    from being king.

@c    15:24. And Saul said to Samuel:  I have sinned, because I have
@c    transgressed the commandment of the Lord, and thy words, fearing the
@c    people, and obeying their voice.

@c    15:25. But now bear, I beseech thee, my sin, and return with me, that I
@c    may adore the Lord.

@c    15:26. And Samuel said to Saul:  I will not return with thee, because
@c    thou hath rejected the word of the Lord, and the Lord hath rejected
@c    thee from being king over Israel.

@c    15:27. And Samuel turned about to go away:  but he laid hold upon the
@c    skirt of his mantle, and it rent.

@c    15:28. And Samuel said to him:  The Lord hath rent the kingdom of Israel
@c    from thee this day, and hath given it to thy neighbour who is better
@c    than thee.

@c    15:29. But the triumpher in Israel will not spare, and will not be
@c    moved to repentance:  for he is not a man that he should repent.

@c    15:30. Then he said:  I have sinned:  yet honour me now before the
@c    ancients of my people, and before Israel, and return with me, that I
@c    may adore the Lord thy God.

@c    15:31. So Samuel turned again after Saul:  and Saul adored the Lord.

@c    15:32. And Samuel said:  Bring hither to me Agag, the king of Amalec.
@c    And Agag was presented to him very fat, and trembling.  And Agag said:
@c    Doth bitter death separate in this manner?

@c    15:33. And Samuel said:  As thy sword hath made women childless, so
@c    shall thy mother be childless among women.  And Samuel hewed him in
@c    pieces before the Lord in Galgal.

@c    15:34. And Samuel departed to Ramatha:  but Saul went up to his house in
@c    Gabaa.

@c    15:35. And Samuel saw Saul no more till the day of his death:
@c    nevertheless, Samuel mourned for Saul, because the Lord repented that
@c    he had made him king over Israel.

@c    Saw Saul no more till the day of his death. . .That is, he went no more
@c    to see him:  he visited him no more.



@c    1 Kings Chapter 16


@c    Samuel is sent to Bethlehem, where he anointeth David:  who is taken
@c    into Saul's family.

@c    16:1. And the Lord said to Samuel:  How long wilt thou mourn for Saul,
@c    whom I have rejected from reigning over Israel?  fill thy horn with oil,
@c    and come, that I may send thee to Isai, the Bethlehemite:  for I have
@c    provided me a king among his sons.

@c    16:2. And Samuel said:  How shall I go?  for Saul will hear of it, and he
@c    will kill me.  And the Lord said:  Thou shalt take with thee a calf of
@c    the herd, and thou shalt say:  I am come to sacrifice to the Lord.

@c    16:3. And thou shalt call Isai to the sacrifice, and I will shew thee
@c    what thou art to do, and thou shalt anoint him whom I shall shew to
@c    thee.

@c    16:4. Then Samuel did as the Lord had said to him.  And he came to
@c    Bethlehem, and the ancients of the city wondered, and meeting him, they
@c    said:  Is thy coming hither peaceable?

@c    16:5. And he said:  It is peaceable:  I am come to offer sacrifice to the
@c    Lord, be ye sanctified, and come with me to the sacrifice.  And he
@c    sanctified Isai and his sons, and called them to the sacrifice.

@c    16:6. And when they were come in, he saw Eliab, and said:  Is the Lord's
@c    anointed before him?

@c    16:7. And the Lord said to Samuel:  Look not on his countenance, nor on
@c    the height of his stature:  because I have rejected him, nor do I judge
@c    according to the look of man:  for man seeth those things that appear,
@c    but the Lord beholdeth the heart.

@c    16:8. And Isai called Abinadab, and brought him before Samuel.  And he
@c    said:  Neither hath the Lord chosen this,

@c    16:9. And Isai brought Samma, and he said of him:  Neither hath the Lord
@c    chosen this.

@c    16:10. Isai therefore brought his seven sons before Samuel:  and Samuel
@c    said to Isai:  The Lord hath not chosen any one of these.

@c    16:11. And Samuel said to Isai:  Are here all thy sons?  He answered:
@c    There remaineth yet a young one, who keepeth the sheep.  And Samuel said
@c    to Isai:  Send, and fetch him:  for we will not sit down till he come
@c    hither.

@c    16:12. He sent therefore and brought him.  Now he was ruddy and
@c    beautiful to behold, and of a comely face.  And the Lord said:  Arise,
@c    and anoint him, for this is he.

@c    16:13. Then Samuel took the horn of oil, and anointed him in the midst
@c    of his brethren:  and the Spirit of the Lord came upon David from that
@c    day forward:  and Samuel rose up, and went to Ramatha.

@c    16:14. But the Spirit of the Lord departed from Saul, and an evil
@c    spirit from the Lord troubled him.

@c    From the Lord. . .An evil spirit, by divine permission, and for his
@c    punishment, either possessed or obsessed him.

@c    16:15. And the servants of Saul said to him:  Behold now an evil spirit
@c    from God troubleth thee.

@c    16:16. Let our lord give orders, and thy servants who are before thee,
@c    will seek out a man skilful in playing on the harp, that when the evil
@c    spirit from the Lord is upon thee, he may play with his hand, and thou
@c    mayst bear it more easily.

@c    16:17. And Saul said to his servants:  Provide me then some man that can
@c    play well, and bring him to me.

@c    16:18. And one of the servants answering, said:  Behold I have seen a
@c    son of Isai, the Bethlehemite, a skilful player, and one of great
@c    strength, and a man fit for war, and prudent in his words, and a comely
@c    person:  and the Lord is with him.

@c    16:19. Then Saul sent messengers to Isai, saying:  Send me David, thy
@c    son, who is in the pastures.

@c    16:20. And Isai took an ass laden with bread, and a bottle of wine, and
@c    a kid of the flock, and sent them by the hand of David, his son, to
@c    Saul.

@c    16:21. And David came to Saul, and stood before him:  and he loved him
@c    exceedingly, and made him his armourbearer.

@c    16:22. And Saul sent to Isai, saying:  Let David stand before me:  for he
@c    hath found favour in my sight.

@c    16:23. So whensoever the evil spirit from the Lord was upon Saul, David
@c    took his harp, and played with his hand, and Saul was refreshed, and
@c    was better, for the evil spirit departed from him.

@c    Departed from him. . .Chased away by David's devotion.



@c    1 Kings Chapter 17


@c    War with the Philistines.  Goliath challengeth Israel.  He is slain by
@c    David.

@c    17:1. Now the Philistines gathering together their troops to battle,
@c    assembled at Socho of Juda:  and camped between Socho and Azeca, in the
@c    borders of Dommim.

@c    17:2. And Saul and the children of Israel being gathered together, came
@c    to the valley of Terebinth, and they set the army in array to fight
@c    against the Philistines.

@c    17:3. And the Philistines stood on a mountain on the one side, and
@c    Israel stood on a mountain on the other side:  and there was a valley
@c    between them.

@c    17:4. And there went out a man baseborn from the camp of the
@c    Philistines, named Goliath, of Geth, whose height was six cubits and a
@c    span:

@c    17:5. And he had a helmet of brass upon his head, and he was clothed
@c    with a coat of mail with scales, and the weight of his coat of mail was
@c    five thousand sicles of brass:

@c    17:6. And he had greaves of brass on his legs, and a buckler of brass
@c    covered his shoulders.

@c    17:7. And the staff of his spear was like a weaver's beam, and the head
@c    of his spear weighed six hundred sicles of iron:  and his armourbearer
@c    went before him.

@c    17:8. And standing, he cried out to the bands of Israel, and said to
@c    them:  Why are you come out prepared to fight?  am not I a Philistine,
@c    and you the servants of Saul?  Choose out a man of you, and let him come
@c    down and fight hand to hand.

@c    17:9. If he be able to fight with me, and kill me, we will be servants
@c    to you:  but if I prevail against him, and kill him, you shall be
@c    servants, and shall serve us.

@c    17:10. And the Philistine said:  I have defied the bands of Israel this
@c    day:  give me a man, and let him fight with me hand to hand.

@c    17:11. And Saul and all the Israelites hearing these words of the
@c    Philistine, were dismayed, and greatly afraid.

@c    17:12. Now David was the son of that Ephrathite, of Bethlehem Juda,
@c    before mentioned, whose name was Isai, who had eight sons, and was an
@c    old man in the days of Saul, and of great age among men.

@c    17:13. And his three eldest sons followed Saul to the battle:  and the
@c    names of his three sons that went to the battle, were Eliab, the
@c    firstborn, and the second, Abinadab, and the third Samma:

@c    17:14. But David was the youngest.  So the three eldest having followed
@c    Saul,

@c    17:15. David went, and returned from Saul, to feed his father's flock
@c    at Bethlehem.

@c    17:16. Now the Philistine came out morning and evening, and presented
@c    himself forty days.

@c    17:17. And Isai said to David, his son:  Take for thy brethren an ephi
@c    of frumenty, and these ten loaves, and run to the camp to thy brethren,

@c    17:18. And carry these ten little cheeses to the tribune:  and go see
@c    thy brethren, if they are well:  and learn with whom they are placed.

@c    17:19. But Saul, and they, and all the children of Israel, were in the
@c    valley of Terebinth, fighting against the Philistines.

@c    17:20. David, therefore, arose in the morning, and gave the charge of
@c    the flock to the keeper:  and went away loaded, as Isai had commanded
@c    him.  And he came to the place of Magala, and to the army, which was
@c    going out to fight, and shouted for the battle.

@c    17:21. For Israel had put themselves in array, and the Philistines who
@c    stood against them were prepared.

@c    17:22. And David leaving the vessels which he had brought, under the
@c    care of the keeper of the baggage, ran to the place of the battle, and
@c    asked if all things went well with his brethren.

@c    17:23. And as he talked with them, that baseborn man, whose name was
@c    Goliath, the Philistine, of Geth, shewed himself coming up from the
@c    camp of the Philistines:  and he spoke according to the same words, and
@c    David heard them,

@c    17:24. And all the Israelites, when they saw the man, fled from his
@c    face, fearing him exceedingly.

@c    17:25. And some one of Israel said:  Have you seen this man that is come
@c    up, for he is come up to defy Israel.  And the man that shall slay him,
@c    the king will enrich with great riches, and will give him his daughter,
@c    and will make his father's house free from tribute in Israel.

@c    17:26. And David spoke to the men that stood by him, saying:  What shall
@c    be given to the man that shall kill this Philistine, and shall take
@c    away the reproach from Israel?  for who is this uncircumcised
@c    Philistine, that he should defy the armies of the living God?

@c    17:27. And the people answered him the same words, saying:  These things
@c    shall be given to the man that shall slay him.

@c    17:28. Now when Eliab his eldest brother heard this, when he was
@c    speaking with others, he was angry with David, and said:  Why camest
@c    thou hither?  and why didst thou leave those few sheep in the desert?  I
@c    know thy pride, and the wickedness of thy heart:  that thou art come
@c    down to see the battle.

@c    17:29. And David said:  What have I done?  is there not cause to speak?

@c    17:30. And he turned a little aside from him to another:  and said the
@c    same word.  And the people answered him as before.

@c    17:31. And the words which David spoke were heard, and were rehearsed
@c    before Saul.

@c    17:32. And when he was brought to Saul, he said to him.  Let not any
@c    man's heart be dismayed in him:  I thy servant will go, and will fight
@c    against the Philistine.

@c    17:33. And Saul said to David:  Thou art not able to withstand this
@c    Philistine, nor to fight against him:  for thou art but a boy, but he is
@c    a warrior from his youth.

@c    17:34. And David said to Saul:  Thy servant kept his father's sheep, and
@c    there came a lion, or a bear, and took a ram out of the midst of the
@c    flock:

@c    17:35. And I pursued after them, and struck them, and delivered it out
@c    of their mouth:  and they rose up against me, and I caught them by the
@c    throat, and I strangled, and killed them.

@c    17:36. For I thy servant have killed both a lion and a bear:  and this
@c    uncircumcised Philistine shall be also as one of them.  I will go now,
@c    and take away the reproach of the people:  for who is this uncircumcised
@c    Philistine, who hath dared to curse the army of the living God?

@c    17:37. And David said:  The Lord who delivered me out of the paw of the
@c    lion, and out of the paw of the bear, he will deliver me out of the
@c    hand of this Philistine.  And Saul said to David:  Go, and the Lord be
@c    with thee.

@c    17:38. And Saul clothed David with his garments, and put a helmet of
@c    brass upon his head, and armed him with a coat of mail.

@c    17:39. And David having girded his sword upon his armour, began to try
@c    if he could walk in armour:  for he was not accustomed to it.  And David
@c    said to Saul:  I cannot go thus, for I am not used to it.  And he laid
@c    them off,

@c    17:40. And he took his staff, which he had always in his hands:  and
@c    chose him five smooth stones out of the brook, and put them into the
@c    shepherd's scrip, which he had with him, and he took a sling in his
@c    hand, and went forth against the Philistine.

@c    17:41. And the Philistine came on, and drew nigh against David, and his
@c    armourbearer went before him.

@c    17:42. And when the Philistine looked, and beheld David, he despised
@c    him.  For he was a young man, ruddy, and of a comely countenance.

@c    17:43. And the Philistine said to David:  Am I a dog, that thou comest
@c    to me with a staff?  And the Philistine cursed David by his gods.

@c    17:44. And he said to David:  Come to me, and I will give thy flesh to
@c    the birds of the air, and to the beasts of the earth.

@c    17:45. And David said to the Philistine:  Thou comest to me with a
@c    sword, and with a spear, and with a shield:  but I come to thee in the
@c    name of the Lord of hosts, the God of the armies of Israel, which thou
@c    hast defied

@c    17:46. This day, and the Lord will deliver thee into my hand, and I
@c    will slay thee, and take away thy head from thee:  and I will give the
@c    carcasses of the army of the Philistines this day to the birds of the
@c    air, and to the beasts of the earth:  that all the earth may know that
@c    there is a God in Israel.

@c    17:47. And all this assembly shall know that the Lord saveth not with
@c    sword and spear:  for it is his battle, and he will deliver you into our
@c    hands.

@c    17:48. And when the Philistine arose, and was coming, and drew nigh to
@c    meet David, David made haste, and ran to the fight to meet the
@c    Philistine.

@c    17:49. And he put his hand into his scrip, and took a stone, and cast
@c    it with the sling, and fetching it about, struck the Philistine in the
@c    forehead, and he fell on his face upon the earth.

@c    17:50. And David prevailed over the Philistine, with a sling and a
@c    stone, and he struck, and slew the Philistine.  And as David had no
@c    sword in his hand,

@c    17:51. He ran, and stood over the Philistine, and took his sword, and
@c    drew it out of the sheath, and slew him, and cut off his head.  And the
@c    Philistines seeing that their champion was dead, fled away.

@c    17:52. And the men of Israel and Juda rising up shouted, and pursued
@c    after the Philistines till they came to the valley and to the gates of
@c    Accaron, and there fell many wounded of the Philistines in the way of
@c    Saraim, and as far as Geth, and as far as Accaron.

@c    17:53. And the children of Israel returning, after they had pursued the
@c    Philistines, fell upon their camp.

@c    17:54. And David taking the head of the Philistine, brought it to
@c    Jerusalem:  but his armour he put in his tent.

@c    17:55. Now at the time that Saul saw David going out against the
@c    Philistines, he said to Abner, the captain of the army:  Of what family
@c    is this young man descended, Abner?  And Abner said:  As thy soul liveth,
@c    O king, I know not.

@c    17:56. And the king said:  Inquire thou, whose son this young man is.

@c    17:57. And when David was returned, after the Philistine was slain,
@c    Abner took him, and brought him in before Saul, with the head of the
@c    Philistine in his hand.

@c    17:58. And Saul said to him:  Young man, of what family art thou?  And
@c    David said:  I am the son of thy servant Isai the Bethlehemite.



@c    1 Kings Chapter 18


@c    The friendship of Jonathan and David.  The envy of Saul, and his design
@c    upon David's life.  He marrieth him to his daughter Michol.

@c    18:1. And it came to pass, when he had made an end of speaking to Saul,
@c    the son of Jonathan was knit with the soul of David, and Jonathan loved
@c    him as his own soul.

@c    18:2. And Saul took him that day, and would not let him return to his
@c    father's house.

@c    18:3. And David and Jonathan made a covenant, for he loved him as his
@c    own soul.

@c    18:4. And Jonathan stripped himself of the coat with which he was
@c    clothed, and gave it to David, and the rest of his garments, even to
@c    his sword, and to his bow, and to his girdle.

@c    18:5. And David went out to whatsoever business Saul sent him, and he
@c    behaved himself prudently:  and Saul set him over the soldiers, and he
@c    was acceptable in the eyes of all the people, and especially in the
@c    eyes of Saul's servants.

@c    18:6. Now when David returned, after he slew the Philistine, the women
@c    came out of all the cities of Israel, singing and dancing, to meet king
@c    Saul, with timbrels of joy, and cornets.

@c    18:7. And the women sung as they played, and they said:  Saul slew his
@c    thousands, and David his ten thousands.

@c    18:8. And Saul was exceeding angry, and this word was displeasing in
@c    his eyes, and he said:  They have given David ten thousands, and to me
@c    they have given but a thousand, what can he have more but the kingdom?

@c    18:9. And Saul did not look on David with a good eye from that day and
@c    forward.

@c    18:10. And the day after, the evil spirit from God came upon Saul, and
@c    he prophesied in the midst of his house.  And David played with his hand
@c    as at other times.  And Saul held a spear in his hand,

@c    Prophesied. . .Acted the prophet in a mad manner.

@c    18:11. And threw it, thinking to nail David to the wall:  and David
@c    stept aside out of his presence twice.

@c    18:12. And Saul feared David, because the Lord was with him, and was
@c    departed from Saul himself.

@c    18:13. Therefore Saul removed him from him, and made him a captain over
@c    a thousand men, and he went out and came in before the people.

@c    18:14. And David behaved wisely in all his ways, and the Lord was with
@c    him.

@c    18:15. And Saul saw that he was exceeding prudent, and began to beware
@c    of him.

@c    18:16. But all Israel and Juda loved David, for he came in and went out
@c    before them.

@c    18:17. And Saul said to David:  Behold my elder daughter Merob, her will
@c    I give thee to wife:  only be a valiant man, and fight the battles of
@c    the Lord.  Now Saul said within himself:  Let not my hand be upon him,
@c    but let the hands of the Philistines be upon him.

@c    18:18. And David said to Saul:  Who am I, or what is my life, or my
@c    father's family in Israel, that I should be son in law of the king?

@c    18:19. And it came to pass at the time when Merob, the daughter of
@c    Saul, should have been given to David, that she was given to Hadriel,
@c    the Molathite, to wife.

@c    18:20. But Michol, the other daughter of Saul, loved David.  And it was
@c    told Saul, and it pleased him.

@c    18:21. And Saul said:  I will give her to him, that she may be a
@c    stumblingblock to him, and that the hand of the Philistines may be upon
@c    him.  And Saul said to David:  In two things thou shalt be my son in law
@c    this day.

@c    18:22. And Saul commanded his servants to speak to David privately,
@c    saying:  Behold, thou pleasest the king, and all his servants love thee.
@c    Now, therefore be the king's son in law.

@c    18:23. And the servants of Saul spoke all these words in the ear of
@c    David.  And David said:  Doth it seem to you a small matter to be the
@c    king's son in law?  But I am a poor man, and of small ability.

@c    18:24. And the servants of Saul told him, saying:  Such words as these
@c    hath David spoken.

@c    18:25. And Saul said:  Speak thus to David:  The king desireth not any
@c    dowry, but only a hundred foreskins of the Philistines, to be avenged
@c    of the king's enemies.  Now Saul thought to deliver David into the hands
@c    of the Philistines.

@c    18:26. And when his servants had told David the words that Saul had
@c    said, the word was pleasing in the eyes of David to be the king's son
@c    in law.

@c    18:27. And after a few days David rose up, and went with the men that
@c    were under him, and he slew of the Philistines two hundred men, and
@c    brought their foreskins and numbered them out to the king, that he
@c    might be his son in law.  Saul therefore gave him Michol, his daughter,
@c    to wife.

@c    18:28. And Saul saw, and understood that the Lord was with David.  And
@c    Michol, the daughter of Saul, loved him.

@c    18:29. And Saul began to fear David more:  and Saul became David's enemy
@c    continually.

@c    18:30. And the princes of the Philistines went forth:  and from the
@c    beginning of their going forth, David behaved himself more wisely than
@c    all the servants of Saul, and his name became very famous.



@c    1 Kings Chapter 19


@c    Other attempts of Saul upon David's life.  He cometh to Samuel.  Saul's
@c    messengers, and Saul himself prophesy.

@c    19:1. And Saul spoke to Jonathan, his son, and to all his servants,
@c    that they should kill David.  But Jonathan, the son of Saul, loved David
@c    exceedingly.

@c    19:2. And Jonathan told David, saying:  Saul, my father, seeketh to kill
@c    thee:  wherefore look to thyself, I beseech thee, in the morning and
@c    thou shalt abide in a secret place, and shalt be hid.

@c    19:3. And I will go out and stand beside my father in the field where
@c    thou art:  and I will speak of thee to my father, and whatsoever I shall
@c    see, I will tell thee.

@c    19:4. And Jonathan spoke good things of David to Saul, his father:  and
@c    said to him:  Sin not, O king, against thy servant, David, because he
@c    hath not sinned against thee, and his works are very good towards thee.

@c    19:5. And he put his life in his hand, and slew the Philistine, and the
@c    Lord wrought great salvation for all Israel.  Thou sawest it and didst
@c    rejoice.  Why therefore wilt thou sin against innocent blood, by killing
@c    David, who is without fault?

@c    19:6. And when Saul heard this, he was appeased with the words of
@c    Jonathan, and swore:  As the Lord liveth, he shall not be slain.

@c    19:7. Then Jonathan called David, and told him all these words:  and
@c    Jonathan brought in David to Saul, and he was before him, as he had
@c    been yesterday and the day before.

@c    19:8. And the war began again, and David went out, and fought against
@c    the Philistines, and defeated them with a great slaughter, and they
@c    fled from his face.

@c    19:9. And the evil spirit from the Lord came upon Saul; and he sat in
@c    his house, and held a spear in his hand:  and David played with his
@c    hand.

@c    19:10. And Saul endeavoured to nail David to the wall with his spear.
@c    And David slipt away out of the presence of Saul:  and the spear missed
@c    him, and was fastened in the wall, and David fled, and escaped that
@c    night.

@c    19:11. Saul therefore sent his guards to David's house to watch him,
@c    that he might be killed in the morning.  And when Michol, David's wife,
@c    had told him this, saying:  Unless thou save thyself this night, to
@c    morrow thou wilt die:

@c    19:12. She let him down through a window.  And he went and fled away,
@c    and escaped.

@c    19:13. And Michol took an image, and laid it on the bed, and put a
@c    goat's skin, with the hair at the head of it, and covered it with
@c    clothes.

@c    19:14. And Saul sent officers to seize David; and it was answered that
@c    he was sick.

@c    19:15. And again Saul sent to see David, saying:  Bring him to me in the
@c    bed, that he may be slain.

@c    19:16. And when the messengers were come in, they found an image upon
@c    the bed, and a goat skin at his head.

@c    19:17. And Saul said to Michol:  Why hast thou deceived me so, and let
@c    my enemy go and flee away?  And Michol answered Saul:  Because he said to
@c    me:  Let me go, or else I will kill thee.

@c    19:18. But David fled and escaped, and came to Samuel in Ramatha, and
@c    told him all that Saul had done to him:  and he and Samuel went and
@c    dwelt in Najoth.

@c    Najoth. . .It was probably a school or college of prophets, in or near
@c    Ramath under the direction of Samuel.

@c    19:19. And it was told Saul by some, saying:  Behold David is in Najoth,
@c    in Ramatha.

@c    19:20. So Saul sent officers to take David:  and when they saw a company
@c    of prophets prophesying, and Samuel presiding over them, the Spirit of
@c    the Lord came also upon them, and they likewise began to prophesy.

@c    Prophesying. . .That is, singing praises to God by a divine impulse.  God
@c    was pleased on this occasion that both Samuel's messengers and himself
@c    should experience the like impulse, that he might understand, by this
@c    instance of the divine power, how vain are the designs of man against
@c    him whom God protects.

@c    19:21. And when this was told Saul, he sent other messengers:  but they
@c    also prophesied.  And again Saul sent messengers the third time:  and
@c    they prophesied also.  And Saul being exceeding angry,

@c    19:22. Went also himself to Ramatha, and came as far as the great
@c    cistern, which is in Socho, and he asked, and said:  In what place are
@c    Samuel and David?  And it was told him:  Behold they are in Najoth, in
@c    Ramatha.

@c    19:23. And he went to Najoth, in Ramatha, and the Spirit of the Lord
@c    came upon him also, and he went on, and prophesied till he came to
@c    Najoth, in Ramatha.

@c    19:24. And he stripped himself also of his garments, and prophesied
@c    with the rest before Samuel, and lay down naked all that day and night.
@c    This gave occasion to a proverb:  What! is Saul too among the prophets?



@c    1 Kings Chapter 20


@c    Saul being obstinately bent upon killing David, he is sent away by
@c    Jonathan.

@c    20:1. But David fled from Najoth, which is in Ramatha, and came and
@c    said to Jonathan:  What have I done?  what is my iniquity, and what is my
@c    sin against thy father, that he seeketh my life?

@c    20:2. And he said to him:  (God forbid, thou shalt not die:  for my
@c    father will do nothing, great or little, without first telling me:  hath
@c    then my father hid this word only from me?  no, this shall not be.

@c    20:3. And he swore again to David.  And David said:  Thy father certainly
@c    knoweth that I have found grace in thy sight, and he will say:  Let not
@c    Jonathan know this, lest he be grieved.  But truly as the Lord liveth,
@c    and thy soul liveth, there is but one step (as I may say) between me
@c    and death.

@c    20:4. And Jonathan said to David:  Whatsoever thy soul shall say to me,
@c    I will do for thee.

@c    20:5. And David said to Jonathan:  Behold to morrow is the new moon, and
@c    I, according to custom, am wont to sit beside the king to eat:  let me
@c    go then that I may be hid in the field till the evening of the third
@c    day.

@c    To morrow is the new moon. . .The neomenia, or first day of the moon,
@c    kept according to the law, as a festival; and therefore Saul feasted on
@c    that day:  and expected the attendance of his family.

@c    20:6. If thy father look and inquire for me, thou shalt answer him:
@c    David asked me that he might run to Bethlehem, his own city:  because
@c    there are solemn sacrifices there for all of his tribe.

@c    20:7. If he shall say:  It is well:  thy servant shall have peace:  but
@c    if he be angry, know that his malice is come to its height.

@c    20:8. Deal mercifully then with thy servant:  for thou hast brought me,
@c    thy servant, into a covenant of the Lord with thee.  But if there be any
@c    iniquity in me, do thou kill me, and bring me not in to thy father.

@c    20:9. And Jonathan said:  Far be this from thee:  for if I should
@c    certainly know that evil is determined by my father against thee, I
@c    could do no otherwise than tell thee.

@c    20:10. And David answered Jonathan:  Who shall bring me word, if thy
@c    father should answer thee harshly concerning me?

@c    20:11. And Jonathan said to David:  Come, and let us go out into the
@c    field.  And when they were both of them gone out into the field,

@c    20:12. Jonathan said to David:  O Lord God of Israel, if I shall
@c    discover my father's mind, to morrow, or the day after, and there be
@c    any thing good for David, and I send not immediately to thee, and make
@c    it known to thee,

@c    20:13. May the Lord do so and so to Jonathan, and add still more.  But
@c    if my father shall continue in malice against thee, I will discover it
@c    to thy ear, and will send thee away, that thou mayst go in peace, and
@c    the Lord be with thee, as he hath been with my father.

@c    20:14. And if I live, thou shalt shew me the kindness of the Lord:  but
@c    if I die,

@c    20:15. Thou shalt not take away thy kindness from my house for ever,
@c    when the Lord shall have rooted out the enemies of David, every one of
@c    them from the earth, may he take away Jonathan from his house, and may
@c    the Lord require it at the hands of David's enemies.

@c    May he take away Jonathan, etc. . .It is a curse upon himself, if he
@c    should not be faithful to his promise.--Ibid.  Require it, etc. . .That
@c    is, revenge it upon David's enemies, and upon me, if I should fail of
@c    my word given to him.

@c    20:16. Jonathan therefore made a covenant with the house of David:  and
@c    the Lord required it at the hands of David's enemies.

@c    20:17. And Jonathan swore again to David, because he loved him:  for he
@c    loved him as his own soul.

@c    20:18. And Jonathan said to him:  To morrow is the new moon, and thou
@c    wilt be missed:

@c    20:19. For thy seat will be empty till after to morrow.  So thou shalt
@c    go down quickly, and come to the place where thou must he hid, on the
@c    day when it is lawful to work, and thou shalt remain beside the stone,
@c    which is called Ezel.

@c    20:20. And I will shoot three arrows near it, and will shoot as if I
@c    were exercising myself at a mark.

@c    20:21. And I will send a boy, saying to him:  Go and fetch me the
@c    arrows.

@c    20:22. If I shall say to the boy:  Behold the arrows are on this side of
@c    thee, take them up:  come thou to me, because there is peace to thee,
@c    and there is no evil, as the Lord liveth.  But if I shall speak thus to
@c    the boy:  Behold the arrows are beyond thee:  go in peace, for the Lord
@c    hath sent thee away.

@c    20:23. And concerning the word which I and thou have spoken, the Lord
@c    be between thee and me forever.

@c    20:24. So David was hid in the field, and the new moon came, and the
@c    king sat down to eat bread.

@c    20:25. And when the king sat down upon his chair, (according to custom)
@c    which was beside the wall, Jonathan arose, and Abner sat by Saul's
@c    side, and David's place appeared empty.

@c    20:26. And Saul said nothing that day, for he thought it might have
@c    happened to him, that he was not clean, nor purified.

@c    20:27. And when the second day after the new moon was come, David's
@c    place appeared empty again.  And Saul said to Jonathan, his son:  Why
@c    cometh not the son of Isai to meat neither yesterday, nor to day?

@c    20:28. And Jonathan answered Saul:  He asked leave of me earnestly to go
@c    to Bethlehem.

@c    20:29. And he said:  Let me go, for there is a solemn sacrifice in the
@c    city, one of my brethren hath sent for me:  and now if I have found
@c    favour in thy eyes, I will go quickly, and see my brethren.  For this
@c    cause he came not to the king's table.

@c    20:30. Then Saul being angry against Jonathan, said to him:  Thou son of
@c    a woman that is the ravisher of a man, do I not know that thou lovest
@c    the son of Isai to thy own confusion, and to the confusion of thy
@c    shameless mother?

@c    20:31. For as long as the son of Isai liveth upon earth, thou shalt not
@c    be established, nor thy kingdom.  Therefore now presently send, and
@c    fetch him to me:  for he is the son of death.

@c    The son of death. . .That is, one that deserveth death, and shall surely
@c    be put to death.

@c    20:32. And Jonathan answering Saul, his father, said:  Why shall he die?
@c    What hath he done?

@c    20:33. And Saul caught up a spear to strike him.  And Jonathan
@c    understood that it was determined by his father to kill David.

@c    20:34. So Jonathan rose from the table in great anger, and did not eat
@c    bread on the second day after the new moon.  For he was grieved for
@c    David, because his father had put him to confusion.

@c    20:35. And when the morning came, Jonathan went into the field
@c    according to the appointment with David, and a little boy with him.

@c    20:36. And he said to his boy:  Go, and fetch me the arrows which I
@c    shoot.  And when the boy ran, he shot another arrow beyond the boy.

@c    20:37. The boy therefore came to the place of the arrow which Jonathan
@c    had shot:  and Jonathan cried after the boy, and said:  Behold the arrow
@c    is there further beyond thee.

@c    20:38. And Jonathan cried again after the boy, saying:  Make haste
@c    speedily, stand not.  And Jonathan's boy gathered up the arrows, and
@c    brought them to his master:

@c    20:39. And he knew not at all what was doing:  for only Jonathan and
@c    David knew the matter.

@c    20:40. Jonathan therefore gave his arms to the boy, and said to him:
@c    Go, and carry them into the city.

@c    20:41. And when the boy was gone, David rose out of his place, which
@c    was toward the south, and falling on his face to the ground, adored
@c    thrice:  and kissing one another, they wept together; but David more.

@c    20:42. And Jonathan said to David:  Go in peace:  and let all stand that
@c    we have sworn both of us in the name of the Lord, saying:  The Lord be
@c    between me and thee, and between my seed and thy seed for ever.

@c    20:43. And David arose, and departed:  and Jonathan went into the city.



@c    1 Kings Chapter 21


@c    David receiveth holy bread of Achimelech, the priest:  and feigneth
@c    himself mad before Achis, king of Geth.

@c    21:1. And David came to Nobe, to Achimelech, the priest and Achimelech
@c    was astonished at David's coming.  And he said to him:  Why art thou
@c    alone, and no man with thee?

@c    Nobe. . .A city in the tribe of Benjamin, to which the tabernacle of the
@c    Lord had been translated from Silo.

@c    21:2. And David said to Achimelech, the priest:  The king hath commanded
@c    me a business, and said:  Let no man know the thing for which thou art
@c    sent by me, and what manner of commands I have given thee:  and I have
@c    appointed my servants to such and such a place.

@c    21:3. Now therefore if thou have any thing at hand, though it were but
@c    five loaves, give me, or whatsoever thou canst find.

@c    21:4. And the priest answered David, saying:  I have no common bread at
@c    hand, but only holy bread, if the young men be clean, especially from
@c    women?

@c    If the young men be clean, etc. . .If this cleanness was required of
@c    them that were to eat that bread, which was a figure of the bread of
@c    life which we receive in the blessed sacrament; how clean ought
@c    Christians to be when they approach to our tremendous mysteries.  And
@c    what reason hath the church of God to admit none to be her ministers to
@c    consecrate and daily receive this most pure sacrament, but such as
@c    devote themselves to a life of perpetual purity.

@c    21:5. And David answered the priest, and said to him:  Truly, as to what
@c    concerneth women, we have refrained ourselves from yesterday and the
@c    day before, when we came out, and the vessels of the young men were
@c    holy.  Now this way is defiled, but it shall also be sanctified this day
@c    in the vessels.

@c    The vessels. . .i.  e., the bodies, have been holy, that is, have been
@c    kept from impurity.--Ibid.  Is defiled. . .Is liable to expose us to
@c    dangers of uncleanness.--Ibid.  Be sanctified, etc. . .That is, we shall
@c    take care, notwithstanding these dangerous circumstances, to keep our
@c    vessels holy, that is, to keep our bodies from every thing that may
@c    defile us.

@c    21:6. The priest therefore gave him hallowed bread:  for there was no
@c    bread there, but only the loaves of proposition, which had been taken
@c    away from before the face of the Lord, that hot loaves might be set up.

@c    21:7. Now a certain man of the servants of Saul was there that day,
@c    within the tabernacle of the Lord:  and his name was Doeg, an Edomite,
@c    the chiefest of Saul's herdsmen.

@c    21:8. And David said to Achimelech:  Hast thou here at hand a spear, or
@c    a sword?  for I brought not my own sword, nor my own weapons with me,
@c    for the king's business required haste.

@c    21:9. And the priest said:  Lo, here is the sword of Goliath, the
@c    Philistine, whom thou slewest in the valley of Terebinth, wrapped up in
@c    a cloth behind the ephod:  if thou wilt take this, take it, for here
@c    there is no other but this.  And David said:  There is none like that,
@c    give it me.

@c    21:10. And David arose and fled that day from the face of Saul:  and
@c    came to Achis, the king of Geth:

@c    21:11. And the servants of Achis, when they saw David, said to him:  Is
@c    not this David, the king of the land?  Did they not sing to him in their
@c    dances, saying:  Saul hath slain his thousands, and David his ten
@c    thousands?

@c    21:12. But David laid up these words in his heart, and was exceedingly
@c    afraid at the face of Achis, the king of Geth.

@c    21:13. And he changed his countenance before them, and slipt down
@c    between their hands:  and he stumbled against the doors of the gate, and
@c    his spittle ran down upon his beard.

@c    21:14. And Achis said to his servants:  You saw the man was mad:  why
@c    have you brought him to me?

@c    21:15. Have we need of mad men, that you have brought in this fellow,
@c    to play the madman in my presence?  shall this fellow come into my
@c    house?



@c    1 Kings Chapter 22


@c    Many resort to David.  Doeg accuseth Achimelech to Saul.  He ordereth him
@c    and all the other priests of Nobe to be slain.  Abiathar escapeth.

@c    22:1. David therefore went from thence, and fled to the cave of
@c    Odollam.  And when his brethren, and all his father's house, had heard
@c    of it, they went down to him thither.

@c    22:2. And all that were in distress, and oppressed with debt, and under
@c    affliction of mind, gathered themselves unto him:  and he became their
@c    prince, and there were with him about four hundred men.

@c    22:3. And David departed from thence into Maspha of Moab:  and he said
@c    to the king of Moab:  Let my father and my mother tarry with you, I
@c    beseech thee, till I know what God will do for me.

@c    22:4. And he left them under the eyes of the king of Moab, and they
@c    abode with him all the days that David was in the hold.

@c    The hold. . .The strong hold, or fortress of Maspha.

@c    22:5. And Gad the prophet said to David:  Abide not in the hold, depart,
@c    and go into the land of Juda.  And David departed, and came into the
@c    forest of Haret.

@c    22:6. And SauI heard that David was seen, and the men that were with
@c    him.  Now whilst Saul abode in Gabaa, and was in the wood, which is by
@c    Rama, having his spear in his hand, and all his servants were standing
@c    about him,

@c    22:7. He said to his servants that stood about him:  Hear me now, ye
@c    sons of Jemini:  will the son of Isai give every one of you fields, and
@c    vineyards, and make you all tribunes, and centurions:

@c    22:8. That all of you have conspired against me, and there is no one to
@c    inform me, especially when even my son hath entered into league with
@c    the son of Isai?  There is not one of you that pitieth my case, nor that
@c    giveth me any information:  because my son hath raised up my servant
@c    against me, plotting against me to this day.

@c    22:9. And Doeg, the Edomite, who stood by, and was the chief among the
@c    servants of Saul, answering, said:  I saw the son of Isai, in Nobe, with
@c    Achimelech, the son of Achitob, the priest.

@c    22:10. And he consulted the Lord for him, and gave him victuals, and
@c    gave him the sword of Goliath, the Philistine.

@c    22:11. Then the king sent to call for Achimelech, the priest, the son
@c    of Achitob, and all his father's house, the priests that were in Nobe,
@c    and they came all of them to the king.

@c    22:12. And Saul said to Achimelech:  Hear, thou son of Achitob.  He
@c    answered:  Here I am, my lord.

@c    22:13. And Saul said to him:  Why have you conspired against me, thou,
@c    and the son of Isai, and thou hast given him bread and a sword, and
@c    hast consulted the Lord for him, that he should rise up against me,
@c    continuing a traitor to this day.

@c    22:14. And Achimelech answering the king, said:  And who amongst all thy
@c    servants is so faithful as David, who is the king's son in law, and
@c    goeth forth at thy bidding, and is honourable in thy house?

@c    22:15. Did I begin to day to consult the Lord for him?  far be this from
@c    me:  let not the king suspect such a thing against his servant, or any
@c    one in all my father's house:  for thy servant knew nothing of this
@c    matter, either little or great.

@c    22:16. And the king said:  Dying thou shalt die, Achimelech, thou and
@c    all thy father's house.

@c    22:17. And the king said to the messengers that stood about him:  Turn,
@c    and kill the priests of the Lord, for their hand is with David, because
@c    they knew that he was fled, and they told it not to me.  And the king's
@c    servants would not put forth their hands against the priests of the
@c    Lord.

@c    22:18. And the king said to Doeg:  Turn thou, and fall upon the priests.
@c    And Doeg, the Edomite, turned, and fell upon the priests, and slew in
@c    that day eighty-five men that wore the linen ephod.

@c    22:19. And Nobe, the city of the priests, he smote with the edge of the
@c    sword, both men and women, children and sucklings, and ox, and ass, and
@c    sheep, with the edge of the sword.

@c    22:20. But one of the sons of Achimelech, the son of Achitob, whose
@c    name was Abiathar, escaped, and fled to David,

@c    22:21. And told him that Saul had slain the priests of the Lord.

@c    22:22. And David said to Abiathar:  I knew that day when Doeg, the
@c    Edomite, was there, that without doubt he would tell Saul:  I have been
@c    the occasion of the death of all the souls of thy father's house.

@c    22:23. Abide thou with me, fear not:  for he that seeketh my life,
@c    seeketh thy life also, and with me thou shalt be saved.



@c    1 Kings Chapter 23


@c    David relieveth Ceila, besieged by the Philistines.  He fleeth into the
@c    desert of Ziph.  Jonathan and he confirm their former covenant.  The
@c    Ziphites discover him to Saul, who pursuing close after him, is called
@c    away by an invasion from the Philistines.

@c    23:1. And they told David, saying:  Behold the Philistines fight against
@c    Ceila, and they rob the barns.

@c    23:2. Therefore David consulted the Lord, saying:  Shall I go and smite
@c    these Philistines?  And the Lord said to David:  Go, and thou shalt smite
@c    the Philistines, and shalt save Ceila.

@c    23:3. And the men that were with David, said to him:  Behold we are in
@c    fear here in Judea, how much more if we go to Ceila against the bands
@c    of the Philistines?

@c    23:4. Therefore David consulted the Lord again.  And he answered and
@c    said to him:  Arise, and go to Ceila:  for I will deliver the Philistines
@c    into thy hand.

@c    23:5. David, therefore, and his men, went to Ceila, and fought against
@c    the Philistines, and brought away their cattle, and made a great
@c    slaughter of them:  and David saved the inhabitants of Ceila.

@c    23:6. Now at that time, when Abiathar, the son of Achimelech, fled to
@c    David, to Ceila, he came down, having an ephod with him.

@c    An ephod. . .Or the ephod.  That is, the vestment of the high priest,
@c    with the urim and thummim, by which the Lord gave his oracle.

@c    23:7. And it was told Saul that David was come to Ceila:  and Saul said:
@c    The Lord hath delivered him into my hands, and he is shut up, being
@c    come into a city that hath gates and bars.

@c    23:8. And Saul commanded all the people to go down to fight against
@c    Ceila, and to besiege David and his men.

@c    23:9. Now when David understood that Saul secretly prepared evil
@c    against him, he said to Abiathar, the priest:  Bring hither the ephod.

@c    23:10. And David said:  O Lord God of Israel, thy servant hath heard a
@c    report, that Saul designeth to come to Ceila, to destroy the city for
@c    my sake:

@c    23:11. Will the men of Ceila deliver me into his hands?  and will Saul
@c    come down, as thy servant hath heard?  O Lord God of Israel, tell thy
@c    servant.  And the Lord said:  He will come down.

@c    23:12. And David said:  Will the men of Ceila deliver me and my men into
@c    the hands of Saul?  And the Lord said:  They will deliver thee up.

@c    23:13. Then David and his men, who were about six hundred, arose, and
@c    departing from Ceila, wandered up and down, uncertain where they should
@c    stay:  and it was told Saul that David was fled from Ceila, and had
@c    escaped:  wherefore he forbore to go out.

@c    23:14. But David abode in the desert in strong holds, and he remained
@c    in a mountain of the desert of Ziph, in a woody hill.  And Saul sought
@c    him always:  but the Lord delivered him not into his hands.

@c    23:15. And David saw that Saul was come out to seek his life.  And David
@c    was in the desert of Ziph, in a wood.

@c    23:16. And Jonathan, the son of Saul, arose, and went to David, into
@c    the wood, and strengthened his hands in God:  and he said to him:

@c    23:17. Fear not:  for the hand of my father, Saul, shall not find thee,
@c    and thou shalt reign over Israel, and I shall be next to thee; yea and
@c    my father knoweth this.

@c    23:18. And they two made a covenant before the Lord:  and David abode in
@c    the wood:  but Jonathan returned to his house.

@c    23:19. And the Ziphites went up to Saul, in Gabaa, saying:  Lo, doth not
@c    David lie hid with us in the strong holds of the wood, in mount
@c    Hachila, which is on the right hand of the desert.

@c    23:20. Now therefore come down, as thy soul hath desired to come down:
@c    and it shall be our business to deliver him into the king's hands.

@c    23:21. And Saul said:  Blessed be ye of the Lord, for you have pitied my
@c    case.

@c    23:22. Go, therefore, I pray you, and use all diligence, and curiously
@c    inquire, and consider the place where his foot is, and who hath seen
@c    him there:  for he thinketh of me, that I lie craftily in wait for him.

@c    23:23. Consider, and see all his lurking holes, wherein he is hid, and
@c    return to me with the certainty of the thing, that I may go with you.
@c    And if he should even go down into the earth to hide himself, I will
@c    search him out in all the thousands of Juda.

@c    23:24. And they arose, and went to Ziph before Saul:  and David and his
@c    men were in the desert of Maon, in the plain at the right hand of
@c    Jesimon.

@c    23:25. Then Saul and his men went to seek him:  and it was told David,
@c    and forthwith he went down to the rock, and abode in the wilderness of
@c    Maon:  and when Saul had heard of it, he pursued after David in the
@c    wilderness of Maon.

@c    23:26. And Saul went on this side of the mountain:  and David and his
@c    men were on the other side of the mountain:  and David despaired of
@c    being able to escape from the face of Saul:  and Saul and his men
@c    encompassed David and his men round about, to take them.

@c    23:27. And a messenger came to Saul, saying:  Make haste to come, for
@c    the Philistines have poured in themselves upon the land.

@c    23:28. Wherefore Saul returned, leaving the pursuit of David, and went
@c    to meet the Philistines.  For this cause they called that place the rock
@c    of division.



@c    1 Kings Chapter 24


@c    Saul seeketh David in the wilderness of Engaddi:  he goeth into a cave
@c    where David hath him in his power.

@c    24:1. Then David went up from thence, and dwelt in strong holds of
@c    Engaddi.

@c    24:2. And when Saul was returned from following the Philistines, they
@c    told him, saying:  Behold, David is in the desert of Engaddi.

@c    24:3. Saul, therefore, took three thousand chosen men out of all
@c    Israel, and went out to seek after David and his men, even upon the
@c    most craggy rocks, which are accessible only to wild goats.

@c    24:4. And he came to the sheepcotes which were in his way.  And there
@c    was a cave, into which Saul went, to ease nature:  now David and his men
@c    lay hid in the inner part of the cave.

@c    24:5. And the servants of David said to him:  Behold the day, of which
@c    the Lord said to thee:  I will deliver thy enemy unto thee, that thou
@c    mayst do to him as it shall seem good in thy eyes.  Then David arose,
@c    and secretly cut off the hem of Saul's robe.

@c    24:6. After which David's heart struck him, because he had cut off the
@c    hem of Saul's robe.

@c    Heart struck him. . .Viz., with remorse, as fearing he had done amiss.

@c    24:7. And he said to his men:  The Lord be merciful unto me, that I may
@c    do no such thing to my master, the Lord's anointed, as to lay my hand
@c    upon him, because he is the Lord's anointed.

@c    24:8. And David stopped his men with his words, and suffered them not
@c    to rise against Saul:  but Saul, rising up out of the cave, went on his
@c    way.

@c    24:9. And David also rose up after him:  and going out of the cave,
@c    cried after Saul, saying:  My lord the king.  And Saul looked behind him:
@c    and David bowing himself down to the ground, worshipped,

@c    24:10. And said to Saul:  Why dost thou hear the words of men that say:
@c    David seeketh thy hurt?

@c    24:11. Behold this day thy eyes have seen, that the Lord hath delivered
@c    thee into my hand, in the cave, and I had a thought to kill thee, but
@c    my eye hath spared thee.  For I said:  I will not put out my hand against
@c    my lord, because he is the Lord's anointed.

@c    A thought to kill thee. . .That is, a suggestion, to which I did not
@c    consent.

@c    24:12. Moreover, see and know, O my father, the hem of thy robe in my
@c    hand, that when I cut off the hem of thy robe, I would not put out my
@c    hand against thee.  Reflect, and see, that there is no evil in my hand,
@c    nor iniquity, neither have I sinned against thee:  but thou liest in
@c    wait for my life, to take it away.

@c    24:13. The Lord judge between me and thee and the Lord revenge me of
@c    thee:  but my hand shall not be upon thee.

@c    Revenge me of thee. . .Or, as it is in the Hebrew, will revenge me.  The
@c    meaning is, that he refers his whole cause to God, to judge and punish
@c    according to his justice:  yet so as to keep himself in the mean time,
@c    from all personal hatred to Saul, or desire of gratifying his own
@c    passion, by seeking revenge.  So far from it, that when Saul was
@c    afterwards slain, we find, that instead of rejoicing at his death, he
@c    mourned most bitterly for him.

@c    24:14. As also it is said in the old proverb:  From the wicked shall
@c    wickedness come forth:  therefore my hand shall not be upon thee.  After
@c    whom dost thou come out, O king of Israel?

@c    24:15. After whom dost thou pursue?  After a dead dog, after a flea.

@c    24:16. Be the Lord judge, and judge between me and thee, and see, and
@c    judge my cause, and deliver me out of thy hand.

@c    24:17. And when David had made an end of speaking these words to Saul,
@c    Saul said:  Is this thy voice, my son David?  And Saul lifted up his
@c    voice, and wept:

@c    24:18. And he said to David:  Thou art more just than I:  for thou hast
@c    done good to me, and I have rewarded thee with evil.

@c    24:19. And thou hast shewed this day what good things thou hast done to
@c    me:  how the Lord delivered me into thy hand, and thou hast not killed
@c    me.

@c    24:20. For who when he hath found his enemy, will let him go well away?
@c    But the Lord reward thee for this good turn, for what thou hast done to
@c    me this day.

@c    24:21. And now as I know that thou shalt surely be king, and have the
@c    kingdom of Israel in thy hand:

@c    24:22. Swear to me by the Lord, that thou wilt not destroy my seed
@c    after me, nor take away my name from the house of my father.

@c    24:23. And David swore to Saul.  So Saul went home:  and David and his
@c    men went up into safer places.



@c    1 Kings Chapter 25


@c    The death of Samuel.  David, provoked by Nabal, threateneth to destroy
@c    him:  but is appeased by Abigail.

@c    25:1. And Samuel died, and all Israel was gathered together, and they
@c    mourned for him, and buried him in his house in Ramatha.  And David
@c    rose, and went down into the wilderness of Pharan.

@c    25:2. Now there was a certain man in the wilderness of Maon, and his
@c    possessions were in Carmel, and the man was very great:  and he had
@c    three thousand sheep, and a thousand goats:  and it happened that he was
@c    shearing his sheep in Carmel.

@c    25:3. Now the name of the man was Nabal:  and the name of his wife was
@c    Abigail.  And she was a prudent and very comely woman:  but her husband
@c    was churlish, and very bad and ill natured:  and he was of the house of
@c    Caleb.

@c    25:4. And when David heard in the wilderness, that Nabal was shearing
@c    his sheep,

@c    25:5. He sent ten young men, and said to them:  Go up to Carmel, and go
@c    to Nabal, and salute him in my name with peace.

@c    25:6. And you shall say:  Peace be to my brethren, and to thee, and
@c    peace to thy house, and peace to all that thou hast.

@c    25:7. I have heard that thy shepherds that were with us in the desert
@c    were shearing:  we never molested them, neither was there ought missing
@c    to them of the flock at any time, all the while they were with us in
@c    Carmel.

@c    25:8. Ask thy servants, and they will tell thee.  Now therefore let thy
@c    servants find favour in thy eyes:  for we are come in a good day,
@c    whatsoever thy hand shall find give to thy servants, and to thy son
@c    David.

@c    25:9. And when David's servants came, they spoke to Nabal all these
@c    words in David's name, and then held their peace.

@c    25:10. But Nabal answering the servants of David, said:  Who is David?
@c    and what is the son of Isai?  servants are multiplied now days who flee
@c    from their masters.

@c    25:11. Shall I then take my bread, and my water, and the flesh of my
@c    cattle, which I have killed for my shearers, and give to men whom I
@c    know not whence they are?

@c    25:12. So the servants of David went back their way, and returning came
@c    and told him all the words that he said.

@c    25:13. Then David said to his young men:  Let every man gird on his
@c    sword.  And they girded on every man his sword.  And David also girded on
@c    his sword:  and there followed David about four hundred men, and two
@c    hundred remained with the baggage.

@c    25:14. But one of the servants told, Abigail, the wife of Nabal,
@c    saying:  Behold, David sent messengers out of the wilderness, to salute
@c    our master:  and he rejected them.

@c    25:15. These men were very good to us, and gave us no trouble:  Neither
@c    did we ever lose any thing all the time that we conversed with them in
@c    the desert.

@c    25:16. They were a wall unto us, both by night and day, all the while
@c    we were with them keeping the sheep.

@c    25:17. Wherefore consider, and think what thou hast to do:  for evil is
@c    determined against thy husband, and against thy house, and he is a son
@c    of Belial, so that no man can speak to him.

@c    25:18. Then Abigail made haste and took two hundred loaves, and two
@c    vessels of wine, and five sheep ready dressed, and five measures of
@c    parched corn, and a hundred clusters of raisins, and two hundred cakes
@c    of dry figs, and laid them upon asses:

@c    25:19. And she said to her servants:  Go before me:  behold, I will
@c    follow after you:  but she told not her husband, Nabal.

@c    25:20. And when she had gotten upon an ass, and was coming down to the
@c    foot of the mountain, David and his men came down over against her, and
@c    she met them.

@c    25:21. And David said:  Truly in vain have I kept all that belonged to
@c    this fellow in the wilderness, and nothing was lost of all that
@c    pertained unto him:  and he hath returned me evil for good.

@c    25:22. May God do so and so, and add more to the foes of David, if I
@c    leave of all that belong to him till the morning, any that pisseth
@c    against the wall.

@c    If I leave, etc. . .David certainly sinned in his designs against Nabal
@c    and his family, as he himself was afterwards sensible, when he blessed
@c    God for hindering him from executing the revenge he had proposed.

@c    25:23. And when Abigail saw David, she made haste and lighted off the
@c    ass, and fell before David, on her face, and adored upon the ground.

@c    25:24. And she fell at his feet, and said:  Upon me let this iniquity
@c    be, my lord:  let thy handmaid speak, I beseech thee, in thy ears, and
@c    hear the words of thy servant.

@c    25:25. Let not my lord the king, I pray thee, regard this naughty man,
@c    Nabal:  for according to his name, he is a fool, and folly is with him:
@c    but I, thy handmaid, did not see thy servants, my lord, whom thou
@c    sentest.

@c    His name. . .Nabal, in Hebrew, signifies a fool.

@c    25:26. Now therefore, my lord, the Lord liveth, and thy soul liveth,
@c    who hath withholden thee from coming to blood, and hath saved thy hand
@c    to thee:  and now let thy enemies be as Nabal, and all they that seek
@c    evil to my lord.

@c    25:27. Wherefore receive this blessing, which thy handmaid hath brought
@c    to thee, my lord:  and give it to the young men that follow thee, my
@c    lord.

@c    25:28. Forgive the iniquity of thy handmaid:  for the Lord will surely
@c    make for my lord a faithful house, because thou, my lord, fightest the
@c    battles of the Lord:  let not evil therefore be found in thee all the
@c    days of thy life.

@c    25:29. For if a man at any time shall rise, and persecute thee, and
@c    seek thy life, the soul of my lord shall be kept, as in the bundle of
@c    the living, with the Lord thy God:  but the souls of thy enemies shall
@c    be whirled, as with the violence and whirling of a sling.

@c    25:30. And when the Lord shall have done to thee, my lord, all the good
@c    that he hath spoken concerning thee, and shall have made thee prince
@c    over Israel,

@c    25:31. This shall not be an occasion of grief to thee, and a scruple of
@c    heart to my lord, that thou hast shed innocent blood, or hast revenged
@c    thyself:  and when the Lord shall have done well by my lord, thou shalt
@c    remember thy handmaid.

@c    25:32. And David said to Abigail:  Blessed be the Lord the God of
@c    Israel, who sent thee this day to meet me, and blessed be thy speech:

@c    25:33. And blessed be thou, who hast kept me to day from coming to
@c    blood, and revenging me with my own hand.

@c    25:34. Otherwise, as the Lord liveth, the God of Israel, who hath
@c    withholden me from doing thee any evil, if thou hadst not quickly come
@c    to meet me, there had not been left to Nabal by the morning light, any
@c    that pisseth against the wall.

@c    25:35. And David received at her hand all that she had brought him, and
@c    said to her:  Go in peace into thy house, behold I have heard thy voice,
@c    and honoured thy face.

@c    25:36. And Abigail came to Nabal:  and behold he had a feast in his
@c    house, like the feast of a king:  and Nabal's heart was merry, for he
@c    was very drunk:  and she told him nothing less or more until morning.

@c    25:37. But early in the morning, when Nabal had digested his wine, his
@c    wife told him these words, and his heart died within him, and he became
@c    as a stone.

@c    25:38. And after ten days had passed, the Lord struck Nabal, and he
@c    died.

@c    25:39. And when David had heard that Nabal was dead, he said:  Blessed
@c    be the Lord, who hath judged the cause of my reproach, at the hand of
@c    Nabal, and hath kept his servant from evil, and the Lord hath returned
@c    the wickedness of Nabal upon his head.  Then David sent and treated with
@c    Abigail, that he might take her to himself for a wife.

@c    Blessed be, etc. . .David praiseth God, on this occasion, not out of joy
@c    for the death of Nabal (which would have argued a rancour of heart),
@c    but because he saw that God had so visibly taken his cause in hand, in
@c    punishing the injury done to him; whilst, by a merciful providence he
@c    kept him from revenging himself.

@c    25:40. And David's servants came to Abigail, to Carmel, and spoke to
@c    her, saying:  David hath sent us to thee, to take thee to himself for a
@c    wife.

@c    25:41. And she arose, and bowed herself down with her face to the
@c    earth, and said:  Behold, let thy servant be a handmaid, to wash the
@c    feet of the servants of my lord.

@c    25:42. And Abigail arose, and made haste, and got upon an ass, and five
@c    damsels went with her, her waiting maids, and she followed the
@c    messengers of David, and became his wife.

@c    25:43. Moreover David took also Achinoam of Jezrahel:  and they were
@c    both of them his wives.

@c    25:44. But Saul gave Michol, his daughter, David's wife, to Phalti, the
@c    son of Lais, who was of Gallim.



@c    1 Kings Chapter 26


@c    Saul goeth out again after David, who cometh by night where Saul and
@c    his men are asleep, but suffereth him not to be touched.  Saul again
@c    confesseth his fault, and promiseth peace.

@c    26:1. And the men of Ziph came to Saul in Gabaa, saying:  Behold David
@c    is hid in the hill of Hachila, which is over against the wilderness.

@c    26:2. And Saul arose, and went down to the wilderness of Ziph having
@c    with him three thousand chosen men of Israel, to seek David in the
@c    wilderness of Ziph.

@c    26:3. And Saul encamped in Gabaa Hachila, which was over against the
@c    wilderness in the way:  and David abode in the wilderness.  And seeing
@c    that Saul was come after him into the wilderness,

@c    26:4. He sent spies, and learned that he was most certainly come
@c    thither.

@c    26:5. And David arose secretly, and came to the place where Saul was:
@c    and when he had beheld the place, wherein Saul slept, and Abner, the
@c    son of Ner, the captain of his army, and Saul sleeping in a tent, and
@c    the rest of the multitude round about him,

@c    26:6. David spoke to Achimelech, the Hethite, and Abisai, the son of
@c    Sarvia, the brother of Joab, saying:  Who will go down with me to Saul
@c    into the camp?  And Abisai said:  I will go with thee.

@c    26:7. So David and Abisai came to the people by night, and found Saul
@c    lying and sleeping in the tent, and his spear fixed in the ground at
@c    his head:  and Abner and the people sleeping round about him.

@c    26:8. And Abisai said to David:  God hath shut up thy enemy this day
@c    into thy hands:  now then I will run him through with my spear, even to
@c    the earth at once, and there shall be no need of a second time.

@c    26:9. And David said to Abisai:  Kill him not:  for who shall put forth
@c    his hand against the Lord's anointed, and shall be guiltless?

@c    26:10. And David said:  As the Lord liveth, unless the Lord shall strike
@c    him, or his day shall come to die, or he shall go down to battle, and
@c    perish:

@c    26:11. The Lord be merciful unto me, and keep me that I never put forth
@c    my hand against the Lord's anointed.  But now take the spear which is at
@c    his head, and the cup of water, and let us go.

@c    26:12. So David took the spear, and the cup of water which was at
@c    Saul's head, and they went away:  and no man saw it, or knew it, or
@c    awaked, but they were all asleep, for a deep sleep from the Lord was
@c    fallen upon them.

@c    26:13. And when David was gone over to the other side, and stood on the
@c    top of the hill afar off, and a good space was between them,

@c    26:14. David cried to the people, and to Abner, the son of Ner, saying:
@c    Wilt thou not answer, Abner?  And Abner answering, said:  Who art thou,
@c    that criest, and disturbest the king?

@c    26:15. And David said to Abner:  Art not thou a man?  and who is like
@c    unto thee in Israel?  why then hast thou not kept thy lord the king?  for
@c    there came one of the people in to kill the king thy lord.

@c    26:16. This thing is not good, that thou hast done:  as the Lord liveth,
@c    you are the sons of death, who have not kept your master, the Lord's
@c    anointed.  And now where is the king's spear, and the cup of water,
@c    which was at his head?

@c    26:17. And Saul knew David's voice, and said:  Is this thy voice, my son
@c    David?  And David said:  It is my voice, my lord the king.

@c    26:18. And he said:  Wherefore doth my lord persecute his servant?  What
@c    have I done?  or what evil is there in my hand?

@c    26:19. Now therefore hear, I pray thee, my lord the king, the words of
@c    thy servant:  If the Lord stir thee up against me, let him accept of
@c    sacrifice:  but if the sons of men, they are cursed in the sight of the
@c    Lord, who have cast me out this day, that I should not dwell in the
@c    inheritance of the Lord, saying:  Go, serve strange gods.

@c    26:20. And now let not my blood be shed upon the earth before the Lord:
@c    for the king of Israel is come out to seek a flea, as the partridge is
@c    hunted in the mountains.

@c    26:21. And Saul said:  I have sinned; return, my son David, for I will
@c    no more do thee harm, because my life hath been precious in thy eyes
@c    this day:  for it appeareth that I have done foolishly, and have been
@c    ignorant in very many things.

@c    26:22. And David answering, said:  Behold the king's spear:  let one of
@c    the king's servants come over and fetch it.

@c    26:23. And the Lord will reward every one according to his justice, and
@c    his faithfulness:  for the Lord hath delivered thee this day into my
@c    hand, and I would not put forth my hand against the Lord's anointed.

@c    26:24. And as thy life hath been much set by this day in my eyes, so
@c    let my life be much set by in the eyes of the Lord, and let him deliver
@c    me from all distress.

@c    26:25. Then Saul said to David:  Blessed art thou, my son David:  and
@c    truly doing thou shalt do, and prevailing thou shalt prevail.  And David
@c    went on his way, and Saul returned to his place.



@c    1 Kings Chapter 27


@c    David goeth again to Achis king of Geth, and obtaineth of him the city
@c    of Siceleg.

@c    27:1. And David said in his heart:  I shall one day or other fall into
@c    the hands of Saul:  is it not better for me to flee, and to be saved in
@c    the land of the Philistines, that Saul may despair of me, and cease to
@c    seek me in all the coasts of Israel?  I will flee then out of his hands.

@c    27:2. And David arose, and went away, both he and the six hundred men
@c    that were with him, to Achis, the son of Maoch, king of Geth.

@c    27:3. And David dwelt with Achis at Geth, he and his men; every man
@c    with his household, and David with his two wives, Achinoam, the
@c    Jezrahelitess, and Abigail, the wife of Nabal of Carmel.

@c    27:4. And it was told Saul that David was fled to Geth, and he sought
@c    no more after him.

@c    27:5. And David said to Achis:  If I have found favour in thy sight, let
@c    a place be given me in one of the cities of this country, that I may
@c    dwell there:  for why should thy servant dwell in the royal city with
@c    thee?

@c    27:6. Then Achis gave him Siceleg that day:  for which reason Siceleg
@c    belongeth to the kings of Juda unto this day.

@c    27:7. And the time that David dwelt in the country of the Philistines,
@c    was four months.

@c    27:8. And David and his men went up, and pillaged Gessuri, and Gerzi,
@c    and the Amalecites:  for these were of old the inhabitants of the
@c    countries, as men go to Sur, even to the land of Egypt.

@c    Pillaged Gessuri, etc. . .These probably were enemies of the people of
@c    God:  and some, if not all of them, were of the number of those whom God
@c    had ordered to be destroyed:  which justifies David's proceedings in
@c    their regard.  Though it is to be observed here, that we are not under
@c    an obligation of justifying every thing that he did:  for the scripture,
@c    in relating what was done, does not say that it was well done.  And even
@c    such as are true servants of God, are not to be imitated in all they
@c    do.

@c    27:9. And David wasted all the land, and left neither man nor woman
@c    alive:  and took away the sheep, and the oxen, and the asses, and the
@c    camels, and the apparel, and returned and came to Achis.

@c    27:10. And Achis said to him:  Whom hast thou gone against to day?  David
@c    answered:  Against the south of Juda, and against the south of Jerameel,
@c    and against the south of Ceni.

@c    27:11. And David saved neither man nor woman, neither brought he any of
@c    them to Geth, saying:  Lest they should speak against us.  So did David,
@c    and such was his proceeding all the days that he dwelt in the country
@c    of the Philistines.

@c    27:12. And Achis believed David, saying:  He hath done much harm to his
@c    people Israel:  Therefore he shall be my servant for ever.



@c    1 Kings Chapter 28


@c    The Philistines go out to war against Israel.  Saul being forsaken by
@c    God, hath recourse to a witch.  Samuel appeareth to him.

@c    28:1. And it came to pass in those days, that the Philistines gathered
@c    together their armies, to be prepared for war against Israel:  And Achis
@c    said to David:  Know thou now assuredly, that thou shalt go out with me
@c    to the war, thou, and thy men.

@c    28:2. And David said to Achis:  Now thou shalt know what thy servant
@c    will do.  And Achis said to David:  And I will appoint thee to guard my
@c    life for ever.

@c    28:3. Now Samuel was dead, and all Israel mourned for him, and buried
@c    him in Ramatha, his city.  And Saul had put away all the magicians and
@c    soothsayers out of the land.

@c    28:4. And the Philistines were gathered together, and came and encamped
@c    in Sunam:  and Saul also gathered together all Israel, and came to
@c    Gelboe.

@c    28:5. And Saul saw the army of the Philistines, and was afraid, and his
@c    heart was very much dismayed.

@c    28:6. And he consulted the Lord, and he answered him not, neither by
@c    dreams, nor by priests, nor by prophets.

@c    28:7. And Saul said to his servants:  Seek me a woman that hath a
@c    divining spirit, and I will go to her, and enquire by her.  And his
@c    servants said to him:  There is a woman that hath a divining spirit at
@c    Endor.

@c    28:8. Then he disguised himself:  and put on other clothes, and he went,
@c    and two men with him, and they came to the woman by night, and he said
@c    to her:  Divine to me by thy divining spirit, and bring me up him whom I
@c    shall tell thee.

@c    28:9. And the woman said to him:  Behold thou knowest all that Saul hath
@c    done, and how he hath rooted out the magicians and soothsayers from the
@c    land:  why then dost thou lay a snare for my life, to cause me to be put
@c    to death?

@c    28:10. And Saul swore unto her by the Lord, saying:  As the Lord liveth,
@c    there shall no evil happen to thee for this thing.

@c    28:11. And the woman said to him:  Whom shall I bring up to thee?  And he
@c    said, Bring me up Samuel.

@c    28:12. And when the woman saw Samuel, she cried out with a loud voice,
@c    and said to Saul:  Why hast thou deceived me?  for thou art Saul.

@c    28:13. And the king said to her:  Fear not:  what hast thou seen?  and
@c    the woman said to Saul:  I saw gods ascending out of the earth.

@c    28:14. And he said to her:  What form is he of?  And she said:  An old
@c    man cometh up, and he is covered with a mantle.  And Saul understood that
@c    it was Samuel, and he bowed himself with his face to the ground, and
@c    adored.

@c    Understood that it was Samuel. . .It is the more common opinion of the
@c    holy fathers, and interpreters, that the soul of Samuel appeared
@c    indeed:  and not, as some have imagined, an evil spirit in his shape.
@c    Not that the power of her magic could bring him thither, but that God
@c    was pleased for the punishment of Saul, that Samuel himself should
@c    denounce unto him the evils that were falling upon him.  See Eccli.
@c    46.23.

@c    28:15. And Samuel said to Saul:  Why hast thou disturbed my rest, that I
@c    should be brought up?  And Saul said:  I am in great distress:  for the
@c    Philistines fight against me, and God is departed from me, and would
@c    not hear me, neither by the hand of prophets, nor by dreams:  therefore
@c    I have called thee, that thou mayst shew me what I shall do.

@c    28:16. And Samuel said:  Why askest thou me, seeing the Lord has
@c    departed from thee, and is gone over to thy rival?

@c    28:17. For the Lord will do to thee as he spoke by me, and he will rend
@c    thy kingdom out of thy hand, and will give it to thy neighbour David:

@c    28:18. Because thou didst not obey the voice of the Lord, neither didst
@c    thou execute the wrath of his indignation upon Amalec.  Therefore hath
@c    the Lord done to thee what thou sufferest this day.

@c    28:19. And the Lord also will deliver Israel with thee into the hands
@c    of the Philistines:  and to morrow thou and thy sons shall be with me:
@c    and the Lord will also deliver the army of Israel into the hands of the
@c    Philistines.

@c    With me. . .That is, in the state of the dead, and in another world,
@c    though not in the same place.

@c    28:20. And forthwith Saul fell all along on the ground; for he was
@c    frightened with the words of Samuel, and there was no strength in him,
@c    for he had eaten no bread all that day.

@c    28:21. And the woman came to Saul, (for he was very much troubled) and
@c    said to him:  Behold thy handmaid hath obeyed thy voice, and I have put
@c    my life in my hand:  and I hearkened unto the words which thou spokest
@c    to me.

@c    28:22. Now therefore, I pray thee, hearken thou also to the voice of
@c    thy handmaid, and let me set before thee a morsel of bread, that thou
@c    mayst eat and recover strength, and be able to go on thy journey.

@c    28:23. But he refused, and said:  I will not eat.  But his servants and
@c    the woman forced him, and at length hearkening to their voice, he arose
@c    from the ground, and sat upon the bed.

@c    28:24. Now the woman had a fatted calf in the house, and she made haste
@c    and killed it:  and taking meal, kneaded it, and baked some unleavened
@c    bread,

@c    28:25. And set it before Saul, and before his servants.  And when they
@c    had eaten they rose up, and walked all that night.



@c    1 Kings Chapter 29


@c    David going with the Philistines is sent back by their princes.

@c    29:1. Now all the troops of the Philistines were gathered together to
@c    Aphec:  and Israel also encamped by the fountain, which is in Jezrahel.

@c    29:2. And the lords of the Philistines marched with their hundreds and
@c    their thousands:  but David and his men were in the rear with Achis.

@c    29:3. And the princes of the Philistines said to Achis:  What mean these
@c    Hebrews?  And Achis said to the princes of the Philistines:  Do you not
@c    know David who was the servant of Saul, the king of Israel, and hath
@c    been with me many days, or years, and I have found no fault in him,
@c    since the day that he fled over to me until this day?

@c    29:4. But the prices of the Philistines were angry with him, and they
@c    said to him:  Let this man return, and abide in his place, which thou
@c    hast appointed him, and let him not go down with us to battle, lest he
@c    be an adversary to us, when we shall begin to fight:  for how can he
@c    otherwise appease his master, but with our heads?

@c    29:5. Is not this David, to whom they sung in their dances, saying:
@c    Saul slew his thousands, and David his ten thousands?

@c    29:6. Then Achis called David, and said to him:  As the Lord liveth,
@c    thou art upright and good in my sight:  and so is thy going out, and thy
@c    coming in with me in the army:  and I have not found any evil in thee,
@c    since the day that thou camest to me unto this day:  but thou pleasest
@c    not the lords.

@c    29:7. Return therefore, and go in peace, and offend not the eyes of the
@c    princes of the Philistines.

@c    29:8. And David said to Achis:  But what have I done, or what hast thou
@c    found in me thy servant, from the day that I have been in thy sight
@c    until this day, that I may not go and fight against the enemies of my
@c    lord the king?

@c    29:9. And Achis answering, said to David:  I know that thou art good in
@c    my sight, as an angel of God:  But the princes of the Philistines have
@c    said:  He shall not go up with us to the battle.

@c    29:10. Therefore arise in the morning, thou, and the servants of thy
@c    lord, who came with thee:  and when you are up before day, and it shall
@c    begin to be light, go on your way.

@c    29:11. So David and his men arose in the night, that they might set
@c    forward in the morning, and returned to the land of the Philistines:
@c    and the Philistines went up to Jezrahel.



@c    1 Kings Chapter 30


@c    The Amalecites burn Siceleg, and carry off the prey:  David pursueth
@c    after them, and recovereth all out of their hands.

@c    30:1. Now when David and his men were come to Siceleg on the third day,
@c    the Amalecites had made an invasion on the south side upon Siceleg, and
@c    had smitten Siceleg, and burnt it with fire,

@c    30:2. And had taken the women captives that were in it, both little and
@c    great:  and they had not killed any person, but had carried them with
@c    them, and went on their way.

@c    30:3. So when David and his men came to the city, and found it burnt
@c    with fire, and that their wives, and their sons, and their daughters,
@c    were taken captives,

@c    30:4. David and the people that were with him, lifted up their voices,
@c    and wept till they had no more tears.

@c    30:5. For the two wives also of David were taken captives, Achinoam,
@c    the Jezrahelitess, and Abigail, the wife of Nabal of Carmel.

@c    30:6. And David was greatly afflicted:  for the people had a mind to
@c    stone him, for the soul of every man was bitterly grieved for his sons
@c    and daughters:  but David took courage in the Lord his God.

@c    30:7. And he said to Abiathar, the priest, the son of Achimelech:  Bring
@c    me hither the ephod.  And Abiathar brought the ephod to David.

@c    30:8. And David consulted the Lord, saying:  Shall I pursue after these
@c    robbers, and shall I overtake them, or not?  And the Lord said to him:
@c    Pursue after them:  for thou shalt surely overtake them and recover the
@c    prey.

@c    30:9. So David went, he and the six hundred men that were with him, and
@c    they came to the torrent Besor:  and some, being weary, stayed there.

@c    30:10. But David pursued, he and four hundred men:  for two hundred
@c    stayed, who, being weary, could not go over the torrent Besor.

@c    30:11. And they found an Egyptian in the field, and brought him to
@c    David:  and they gave him bread to eat, and water to drink,

@c    30:12. As also a piece of a cake of figs, and two bunches of raisins.
@c    And when he had eaten them, his spirit returned, and he was refreshed:
@c    for he had not eaten bread, nor drunk water, three days and three
@c    nights.

@c    30:13. And David said to him:  To whom dost thou belong; or whence dost
@c    thou come?  and whither art thou going?  He said:  I am a young man of
@c    Egypt, the servant of an Amalecite:  and my master left me, because I
@c    began to be sick three days ago.

@c    30:14. For we made an invasion on the south side of Cerethi, and upon
@c    Juda, and upon the south of Caleb, and we burnt Siceleg with fire.

@c    30:15. And David said to him:  Canst thou bring me to this company?  and
@c    he said:  Swear to me by God, that thou wilt not kill me, nor deliver me
@c    into the hands of my master, and I will bring thee to this company.  And
@c    David swore to him.

@c    30:16. And when he had brought him, behold they were lying spread
@c    abroad upon all the ground, eating and drinking, and as it were keeping
@c    a festival day, for all the prey and the spoils which they had taken
@c    out of the land of the Philistines, and out of the land of Juda.

@c    30:17. And David slew them from the evening unto the evening of the
@c    next day, and there escaped not a man of them, but four hundred young
@c    men, who had gotten upon camels, and fled.

@c    30:18. So David recovered all that the Amalecites had taken, and he
@c    rescued his two wives.

@c    30:19. And there was nothing missing small or great, neither of their
@c    sons or their daughters, nor of the spoils, and whatsoever they had
@c    taken, David recovered all.

@c    30:20. And he took all the flocks and the herds, and made them go
@c    before him:  and they said:  This is the prey of David.

@c    30:21. And David came to the two hundred men, who, being weary, had
@c    stayed, and were not able to follow David, and he had ordered them to
@c    abide at the torrent Besor:  and they came out to meet David, and the
@c    people that were with him.  And David coming to the people, saluted them
@c    peaceably.

@c    30:22. Then all the wicked and unjust men, that had gone with David,
@c    answering, said:  Because they came not with us, we will not give them
@c    any thing of the prey which we have recovered:  but let every man take
@c    his wife, and his children, and be contented with them, and go his way.

@c    30:23. But David said:  You shall not do so, my brethren, with these
@c    things, which the Lord hath given us, who hath kept us, and hath
@c    delivered the robbers that invaded us into our hands:

@c    30:24. And no man shall hearken to you in this matter.  But equal shall
@c    be the portion of him that went down to battle, and of him that abode
@c    at the baggage, and they shall divide alike.

@c    30:25. And this hath been done from that day forward, and since was
@c    made a statute and an ordinance, and as a law in Israel.

@c    30:26. Then David came to Siceleg, and sent presents of the prey to the
@c    ancients of Juda, his neighbours, saying:  Receive a blessing of the
@c    prey of the enemies of the Lord.

@c    30:27. To them that were in Bethel, and that were in Ramoth to the
@c    south, and to them that were in Jether.

@c    30:28. And to them that were in Aroer, and that were in Sephamoth, and
@c    that were in Esthamo,

@c    30:29. And that were in Rachal, and that were in the cities of
@c    Jerameel, and that were in the cities of Ceni,

@c    30:30. And that were in Arama, and that were in the lake Asan, and that
@c    were in Athach,

@c    30:31. And that were in Hebron, and to the rest that were in those
@c    places, in which David had abode with his men.



@c    1 Kings Chapter 31


@c    Israel is defeated by the Philistines:  Saul and his sons are slain.

@c    31:1. And the Philistines fought against Israel, and the men of Israel
@c    fled from before the Philistines, and fell down slain in mount Gelboe.

@c    31:2. And the Philistines fell upon Saul, and upon his sons, and they
@c    slew Jonathan, and Abinadab, and Melchisua, the sons of Saul.

@c    31:3. And the whole weight of the battle was turned upon Saul:  and the
@c    archers overtook him, and he was grievously wounded by the archers.

@c    31:4. Then Saul said to his armourbearer:  Draw thy sword, and kill me:
@c    lest these uncircumcised come, and slay me, and mock at me.  And his
@c    armourbearer would not:  for he was struck with exceeding great fear.
@c    Then Saul took his sword, and fell upon it.

@c    31:5. And when his armourbearer saw this, to wit, that Saul was dead,
@c    he also fell upon his sword and died with him.

@c    31:6. So Saul died, and his three sons, and his armourbearer, and all
@c    his men that same day together.

@c    31:7. And the men of Israel, that were beyond the valley, and beyond
@c    the Jordan, seeing that the Israelites were fled, and that Saul was
@c    dead, and his sons, forsook their cities, and fled:  and the Philistines
@c    came and dwelt there.

@c    31:8. And on the morrow the Philistines came to strip the slain, and
@c    they found Saul and his three sons lying in mount Gelboe.

@c    31:9. And they cut off Saul's head, and stripped him of his armour, and
@c    sent into the land of the Philistines round about, to publish it in the
@c    temples of their idols and among their people.

@c    31:10. And they put his armour in the temple of Astaroth, but his body
@c    they hung on the wall of Bethsan.

@c    31:11. Now when the inhabitants of Jabes Galaad had heard all that the
@c    Philistines had done to Saul,

@c    31:12. All the most valiant men arose, and walked all the night, and
@c    took the body of Saul, and the bodies of his sons, from the wall of
@c    Bethsan:  and they came to Jabes Galaad, and burnt them there.

@c    31:13. And they took their bones, and buried them in the wood of Jabes:
@c    and fasted seven days.
