@c    THE FIRST BOOK OF PARALIPOMENON



@c    These Books are called by the Greek interpreters, Paralipomenon, that
@c    is, of things left out, or omitted; because they are a kind of a
@c    supplement of such things as were passed over in the books of the
@c    Kings.  The Hebrews call them Dibre Haijamim, that is, The words of the
@c    days, or The Chronicles.--Not that they are the books which are so
@c    often quoted in the Kings, under the title of the words of the days of
@c    the kings of Israel, and of the kings of Juda:  for the books of
@c    Paralipomenon were written after the books of Kings:  but because in all
@c    probability they have been abridged from those ancient words of the
@c    days, by Esdras or some other sacred writer.



@c    1 Paralipomenon Chapter 1


@c    The genealogy of the patriarchs down to Abraham:  The posterity of
@c    Abraham and of Esau.

@c    1:1. Adam, Seth, Enos,

@c    1:2. Cainan, Malaleel, Jared,

@c    1:3. Henoc, Mathusale, Lamech,

@c    1:4. Noe, Sem, Cham, and Japheth.

@c    1:5. The sons of Japheth:  Gomer, and Magog, and Madai, and Javan,
@c    Thubal, Mosoch, Thiras.

@c    1:6. And the sons of Gomer:  Ascenez, and Riphath, and Thogorma.

@c    1:7. And the sons of Javan:  Elisa and Tharsis, Cethim and Dodanim.

@c    1:8. The sons of Cham:  Chus, and Mesrai, and Phut, and Chanaan.

@c    1:9. And the sons of Chus:  Saba, and Hevila, Sabatha, and Regma, and
@c    Sabathaca.  And the sons of Regma:  Saba, and Dadan.

@c    1:10. Now Chus begot Nemrod:  he began to be mighty upon earth.

@c    1:11. But Mesraim begot Ludim, and Anamim, and Laabim, and Nephtuim,

@c    1:12. Phetrusim also, and Casluim:  from whom came the Philistines, and
@c    Caphtorim.

@c    1:13. And Chanaan begot Sidon his firstborn, and the Hethite,

@c    1:14. And the Jebusite, and the Amorrhite, and the Gergesite,

@c    1:15. And the Hevite, and the Aracite, and the Sinite,

@c    1:16. And the Aradian, and the Samarite, and the Hamathite.

@c    1:17. The sons of Sem:  Elam and Asur, and Arphaxad, and Lud, and Aram,
@c    and Hus, and Hul, and Gether, and Mosoch.

@c    1:18. And Arphaxad begot Sale, and Sale begot Heber.

@c    1:19. And to Heber were born two sons, the name of the one was Phaleg,
@c    because in his days the earth was divided; and the name of his brother
@c    was Jectan.

@c    1:20. And Jectan begot Elmodad, and Saleph, and Asarmoth, and Jare,

@c    1:21. And Adoram, and Usal, and Decla,

@c    1:22. And Hebal, and Abimael, and Saba,

@c    1:23. And Ophir, and Hevila, and Jobab.  All these are the sons of
@c    Jectan.

@c    1:24. Sem, Arphaxad, Sale,

@c    1:25. Heber, Phaleg, Ragau,

@c    1:26. Serug, Nachor, Thare,

@c    1:27. Abram, this is Abraham.

@c    1:28. And the sons of Abraham, Isaac and Ismahel.

@c    1:29. And these are the generations of them.  The firstborn of Ismahel,
@c    Nabajoth, then Cedar, and Adbeel, and Mabsam,

@c    1:30. And Masma, and Duma, Massa, Hadad, and Thema,

@c    1:31. Jetur, Naphis, Cedma:  these are the sons of Ismahel.

@c    1:32. And the sons of Cetura, Abraham's concubine, whom she bore:
@c    Zamran, Jecsan, Madan, Madian, Jesboc, and Sue.  And the sons of Jecsan,
@c    Saba, and Dadan.  And the sons of Dadan:  Assurim, and Latussim, and
@c    Laomin.

@c    Concubine. . .She was his lawful wife, but of an inferior degree.

@c    1:33. And the sons of Madian:  Epha, and Epher, and Henoch, and Abida,
@c    and Eldaa.  All these are the sons of Cetura.

@c    1:34. And Abraham begot Isaac:  and his sons were Esau and Israel.

@c    1:35. The sons of Esau:  Eliphaz, Rahuel, Jehus, Ihelom, and Core.

@c    1:36. The sons of Eliphaz:  Theman, Omar, Sephi, Gathan, Cenez, and by
@c    Thamna, Amalec.

@c    1:37. The sons of Rahuel:  Nahath, Zara, Samma, Meza.

@c    1:38. The sons of Seir:  Lotan, Sobal, Sebeon, Ana, Dison, Eser, Disan.

@c    1:39. The sons of Lotan:  Hori, Homam.  And the sister of Lotan was
@c    Thamna.

@c    1:40. The sons of Sobal:  Alian, and Manahath, and Ebal, Sephi, and
@c    Onam.  The sons of Sebeon:  Aia, and Ana.  The son of Ana:  Dison.

@c    1:41. The sons of Dison:  Hamram, and Eseban, and Jethran, and Charan.

@c    1:42. The sons of Eser:  Balaan, and Zavan, and Jacan.  The sons of
@c    Disan:  Hus and Aran.

@c    1:43. Now these are the kings that reigned in the land of Edom, before
@c    there was a king over the children of Israel:  Bale the son of Beor:  and
@c    the name of his city was Denaba.

@c    1:44. And Bale died, and Jobab the son of Zare of Bosra, reigned in his
@c    stead.

@c    1:45. And when Jobab also was dead, Husam of the land of the Themanites
@c    reigned in his stead.

@c    1:46. And Husam also died, and Adad the son of Badad reigned in his
@c    stead, and he defeated the Madianites in the land of Moab:  the name of
@c    his city was Avith.

@c    1:47. And when Adad also was dead, Semla of Masreca reigned in his
@c    stead.

@c    1:48. Semla also died, and Saul of Rohoboth, which is near the river,
@c    reigned in his stead.

@c    1:49. And when Saul was dead, Balanan the son of Achobor reigned in his
@c    stead.

@c    1:50. He also died, and Adad reigned in his stead:  and the name of his
@c    city was Phau, and his wife was called Meetabel the daughter of Matred,
@c    the daughter of Mezaab.

@c    1:51. And after the death of Adad, there began to be dukes in Edom
@c    instead of kings:  duke Thamna, duke Alva, duke Jetheth,

@c    1:52. Duke Oolibama, duke Ela, duke Phinon,

@c    1:53. Duke Cenez, duke Theman, duke Mabsar,

@c    1:54. Duke Magdiel, duke Hiram.  These are the dukes of Edom.



@c    1 Paralipomenon Chapter 2


@c    The twelve tribes of Israel.  The genealogy of Juda down to David.  Other
@c    genealogies of the tribe of Juda.

@c    2:1. And these are the sons of Israel:  Ruben, Simeon, Levi, Juda,
@c    Issachar, and Zabulon,

@c    2:2. Dan, Joseph, Benjamin, Nephtali, Gad, and Aser.

@c    2:3. The sons of Juda:  Her, Onan and Sela.  These three were born to him
@c    of the Chanaanitess the daughter of Sue.  And Her the firstborn of Juda,
@c    was wicked in the sight of the Lord, and he slew him.

@c    2:4. And Thamar his daughter in law bore him Phares and Zara.  So all
@c    the sons of Juda were five.

@c    2:5. And the sons of Phares, were Hesron and Hamul.

@c    2:6. And the sons also of Zare:  Zamri, and Ethan, and Eman, and
@c    Chalchal, and Dara, five in all.

@c    2:7. And the sons of Charmi:  Achar, who troubled Israel, and sinned by
@c    the theft of the anathema.

@c    Achar. . .Alias Achan.  Jos. 7.--Ibid.  The anathema. . .The thing
@c    devoted or accursed, viz., the spoils of Jericho.

@c    2:8. The sons of Ethan:  Azarias,

@c    2:9. And the sons of Hesron that were born to him:  Jerameel, and Ram,
@c    and Calubi.

@c    2:10. And Ram begot Aminadab, and Aminadab begot Nahasson, prince of
@c    the children of Juda.

@c    Ram. . .He is commonly called Aram.  But it is to be observed here, once
@c    for all, that it was a common thing among the Hebrews for the same
@c    persons to have different names:  and that it is not impossible among so
@c    many proper names, as here occur in the first nine chapters of this
@c    book, that the transcribers of the ancient Hebrew copies may have made
@c    some slips in the orthography.

@c    2:11. And Nahasson begot Salma, the father of Booz.

@c    2:12. And Booz begot Obed, and Obed begot Isai.

@c    2:13. And Isai begot Eliab his firstborn, the second Abinadab, the
@c    third Simmaa,

@c    2:14. The fourth, Nathanael, the fifth Raddai,

@c    2:15. The sixth Asom, the seventh David.

@c    2:16. And their sisters were Sarvia, and Abigail.  The sons of Sarvia:
@c    Abisai, Joab, and Asael, three.

@c    2:17. And Abigail bore Amasa, whose father was Jether the Ismahelite.

@c    2:18. And Caleb the son of Hesron took a wife named Azuba, of whom he
@c    had Jerioth:  and her sons were Jaser, and Sobab, and Ardon.

@c    Caleb. . .Alias Calubi, ver. 9.

@c    2:19. And when Azuba was dead, Caleb took to wife Ephrata:  who bore him
@c    Hur.

@c    2:20. And Hur begot Uri:  and Uri begot Bezeleel.

@c    2:21. And afterwards Hesron went in to the daughter of Machir the
@c    father of Galaad, and took her to wife when he was threescore years
@c    old:  and she bore him Segub.

@c    2:22. And Segub begot Jair, and he had three and twenty cities in the
@c    land of Galaad.

@c    2:23. And he took Gessur, and Aram the towns of Jair, and Canath, and
@c    the villages thereof, threescore cities.  All these, the sons of Machir
@c    father of Galaad.

@c    2:24. And when Hesron was dead, Caleb went in to Ephrata.  Hesron also
@c    had to wife Abia who bore him Ashur the father of Thecua.

@c    2:25. And the sons of Jerameel the firstborn of Hesron, were Ram his
@c    firstborn, and Buna, and Aram, and Asom, and Achia.

@c    2:26. And Jerameel married another wife, named Atara, who was the
@c    mother of Onam.

@c    2:27. And the sons of Ram the firstborn of Jerameel, were Moos, Jamin,
@c    and Achar.

@c    2:28. And Onam had sons Semei, and Jada.  And the sons of Semei:  Nadab,
@c    and Abisur.

@c    2:29. And the name of Abisur's wife was Abihail, who bore him Ahobban,
@c    and Molid.

@c    2:30. And the sons of Nadab were Saled and Apphaim.  And Saled died
@c    without children.

@c    2:31. But the son of Apphaim was Jesi:  and Jesi begot Sesan.  And Sesan
@c    begot Oholai.

@c    2:32. And the sons of Jada the brother of Semei:  Jether and Jonathan.
@c    And Jether also died without children.

@c    2:33. But Jonathan begot Phaleth, and Ziza.  These were the sons of
@c    Jerameel.

@c    2:34. And Sesan had no sons, but daughters and a servant an Egyptian,
@c    named Jeraa.

@c    2:35. And he gave him his daughter to wife:  and she bore him Ethei.

@c    2:36. And Ethei begot Nathan, and Nathan begot Zabad.

@c    2:37. And Zabad begot Ophlal, and Ophlal begot Obed.

@c    2:38. Obed begot Jehu, Jehu begot Azarias.

@c    2:39. Azarias begot Helles, and Helles begot Elasa.

@c    2:40. Elasa begot Sisamoi, Sisamoi begot Sellum,

@c    2:41. Sellum begot Icamia, and Icamia begot Elisama.

@c    2:42. Now the sons of Caleb the brother of Jerameel were Mesa his
@c    firstborn, who was the father of Siph:  and the sons of Maresa father of
@c    Hebron.

@c    2:43. And the sons of Hebron, Core, and Thaphua, and Recem, and Samma.

@c    2:44. And Samma begot Raham, the father of Jercaam, and Recem begot
@c    Sammai.

@c    2:45. The son of Sammai, Maon:  and Maon the father of Bethsur.

@c    2:46. And Epha the concubine of Caleb bore Haran, and Mosa, and Gezez.
@c    And Haran begot Gezez.

@c    2:47. And the sons of Jahaddai, Rogom, and Joathan, and Gesan, and
@c    Phalet, and Epha, and Saaph.

@c    2:48. And Maacha the concubine of Caleb bore Saber, and Tharana.

@c    2:49. And Saaph the father of Madmena begot Sue the father of Machbena,
@c    and the father of Gabaa.  And the daughter of Caleb was Achsa.

@c    2:50. These were the sons of Caleb, the son of Hur the firstborn of
@c    Ephrata, Sobal the father of Cariathiarim.

@c    2:51. Salma the father of Bethlehem, Hariph the father of Bethgader.

@c    2:52. And Sobal the father of Cariathiarim had sons:  he that saw half
@c    of the places of rest.

@c    He that saw, etc. . .The Latin interpreter seems to have given us here,
@c    instead of the proper names, the meaning of those names in the Hebrew.
@c    He has done in like manner, ver. 55.

@c    2:53. And of the kindred of Cariathiarim, the Jethrites, and
@c    Aphuthites, and Semathites, and Maserites.  Of them came the Saraites,
@c    and Esthaolites.

@c    2:54. The sons of Salma, Bethlehem, and Netophathi, the crowns of the
@c    house of Joab, and half of the place of rest of Sarai.

@c    2:55. And the families of the scribes that dwell in Jabes, singing and
@c    making melody, and abiding in tents.  These are the Cinites, who came of
@c    Calor (Chamath) father of the house of Rechab.



@c    1 Paralipomenon Chapter 3


@c    The genealogy of the house of David.

@c    3:1. Now these were the sons of David that were born to him in Hebron:
@c    the firstborn Amnon of Achinoam the Jezrahelitess, the second Daniel of
@c    Abigail the Carmelitess.

@c    3:2. The third Absalom the son of Maacha the daughter of Tolmai king of
@c    Gessur, the fourth Adonias the son of Aggith,

@c    3:3. The fifth Saphatias of Abital, the sixth Jethrahem of Egla his
@c    wife.

@c    3:4. So six sons were born to him in Hebron, where he reigned seven
@c    years and six months.  And in Jerusalem he reigned three and thirty
@c    years.

@c    3:5. And these sons were born to him in Jerusalem:  Simmaa, and Sobab,
@c    and Nathan, and Solomon, four of Bethsabee the daughter of Ammiel.

@c    3:6. Jebaar also and Elisama,

@c    3:7. And Eliphaleth, and Noge, and Nepheg, and Japhia,

@c    3:8. And Elisama, and Eliada, and Elipheleth, nine:

@c    3:9. All these the sons of David, beside the sons of the concubines:
@c    and they had a sister Thamar.

@c    The concubines. . .The inferior wives.

@c    3:10. And Solomon's son was Roboam:  whose son Abia begot Asa.  And his
@c    son was Josaphat,

@c    3:11. The father of Joram:  and Joram begot Ochozias, of whom was born
@c    Joas:

@c    3:12. And his son Amasias begot Azarias.  And Joathan the son of Azarias

@c    3:13. Begot Achaz, the father of Ezechias, of whom was born Manasses.

@c    3:14. And Manasses begot Amon the father of Josias.

@c    3:15. And the sons of Josias were, the firstborn Johanan, the second
@c    Joakim, the third Sedecias, the fourth Sellum.

@c    3:16. Of Joakim was born Jechonias, and Sedecias.

@c    3:17. The sons of Jechonias were Asir, Salathiel,

@c    3:18. Melchiram, Phadaia, Senneser and Jecemia, Sama, and Nadabia.

@c    3:19. Of Phadaia were born Zorobabel and Semei.  Zorobabel begot
@c    Mosollam, Hananias, and Salomith their sister:

@c    3:20. Hasaba also, and Ohol, and Barachias, and Hasadias, Josabhesed,
@c    five.

@c    3:21. And the son of Hananias was Phaltias the father of Jeseias, whose
@c    son was Raphaia.  And his son was Arnan, of whom was born Obdia, whose
@c    son was Sechenias.

@c    3:22. The son of Sechenias was Semeia, whose sons were Hattus, and
@c    Jegaal, and Baria, and Naaria, and Saphat, six in number.

@c    Six. . .Counting the father in the number.

@c    3:23. The sons of Naaria, Elioenai, and Ezechias, and Ezricam, three.

@c    3:24. The sons of Elioenai, Oduia, and Eliasub, and Pheleia, and Accub,
@c    and Johanan, and Dalaia, and Anani, seven.



@c    1 Paralipomenon Chapter 4


@c    Other genealogies of Juda and Simeon, and their victories.

@c    4:1. The sons of Juda:  Phares, Hesron, and Charmi and Hur, and Sobal.

@c    4:2. And Raia the son of Sobal begot Jahath, of whom were born Ahumai,
@c    and Laad.  These are the families of Sarathi.

@c    4:3. And this is the posterity of Etam:  Jezrahel, and Jesema, And
@c    Jedebos:  and the name of their sister was Asalelphuni.

@c    4:4. And Phanuel the father of Gedor, and Ezar the father of Hosa,
@c    these are the sons of Hur the firstborn of Ephratha the father of
@c    Bethlehem.

@c    4:5. And Assur the father of Thecua had two wives, Halaa and Naara:

@c    4:6. And Naara bore him Ozam, and Hepher, and Themani, and Ahasthari:
@c    these are the sons of Naara.

@c    4:7. And the sons of Halaa, Sereth, Isaar, and Ethnan.

@c    4:8. And Cos begot Anob, and Soboba, and the kindred of Aharehel the
@c    son of Arum.

@c    4:9. And Jabes was more honourable than any of his brethren, and his
@c    mother called his name Jabes, saying:  Because I bore him with sorrow.

@c    Jabes. . .That is, sorrowful.

@c    4:10. And Jabes called upon the God of Israel, saying:  If blessing thou
@c    wilt bless me, and wilt enlarge my borders, and thy hand be with me,
@c    and thou save me from being oppressed by evil.  And God granted him the
@c    things he prayed for.

@c    4:11. And Caleb the brother of Sua begot Mahir, who was the father of
@c    Esthon.

@c    4:12. And Esthon begot Bethrapha, and Phesse, and Tehinna father of the
@c    city of Naas:  these are the men of Recha.

@c    4:13. And the sons of Cenez were Othoniel, and Saraia.  And the sons of
@c    Othoniel, Hathath, and Maonathi.

@c    4:14. Maonathi begot Ophra, and Saraia begot Joab the father of the
@c    Valley of artificers:  for artificers were there.

@c    4:15. And the sons of Caleb the son of Jephone, were Hir, and Ela, and
@c    Naham.  And the sons of Ela:  Cenez.

@c    4:16. The sons also of Jaleleel:  Ziph, and Zipha, Thiria and Asrael.

@c    4:17. And the sons of Esra, Jether, and Mered, and Epher, and Jalon,
@c    and he begot Mariam, and Sammai, and Jesba the father of Esthamo.

@c    4:18. And his wife Judaia, bore Jared the father of Gedor, and Heber
@c    the father of Socho, and Icuthiel the father of Zanoe.  And these are
@c    the sons of Bethia the daughter of Pharao, whom Mered took to wife.

@c    4:19. And the sons of his wife Odaia the sister of Naham the father of
@c    Celia, Garmi, and Esthamo, who was of Machathi.

@c    4:20. The sons also of Simon, Amnon, and Rinna the son of Hanan, and
@c    Thilon.  And the sons of Jesi Zoheth, and Benzoheth.

@c    4:21. The sons of Sela the son of Juda:  Her the father of Lecha, and
@c    Laada the father of Maresa, and the families of the house of them that
@c    wrought fine linen in the House of oath.

@c    4:22. And he that made the sun to stand, and the men of Lying, and
@c    Secure, and Burning, who were princes in Moab, and who returned into
@c    Lahem.  Now these are things of old.

@c    He that made, etc. . .Viz., Joazim, the meaning of whose name in Hebrew
@c    is, he that made the sun to stand.  In like manner the following names,
@c    Lying (Chozeba), Secure (Joas), and Burning (Saraph), are substituted
@c    in place of the Hebrew names of the same signification.

@c    4:23. These are the potters, and they dwelt in Plantations, and Hedges,
@c    with the king for his works, and they abode there.

@c    Plantations and Hedges. . .These are the proper names of the places
@c    where they dwelt.  In Hebrew Atharim and Gadira.

@c    4:24. The sons of Simeon:  Namuel and Jamin, Jarib, Zara, Saul:

@c    4:25. Sellum his son, Mapsam his son, Masma his son.

@c    4:26. The sons of Masma:  Hamuel his son, Zachur his son, Semei his son.

@c    4:27. The sons of Semei were sixteen, and six daughters:  but his
@c    brethren had not many sons, and the whole kindred could not reach to
@c    the sum of the children of Juda.

@c    4:28. And they dwelt in Bersabee, and Molada, and Hasarsuhal,

@c    4:29. And in Bala, and in Asom, and in Tholad,

@c    4:30. And in Bathuel, and in Horma, and in Siceleg,

@c    4:31. And in Bethmarchaboth, and in Hasarsusim, and in Bethberai, and
@c    in Saarim.  These were their cities unto the reign of David.

@c    4:32. Their towns also were Etam, and Aen, Remmon, and Thochen, and
@c    Asan, five cities.

@c    4:33. And all their villages round about these cities as far as Baal.
@c    This was their habitation, and the distribution of their dwellings.

@c    4:34. And Mosabab and Jemlech, and Josaphat, the son of Amasias,

@c    4:35. And Joel, and Jehu the son of Josabia the son of Saraia, the son
@c    of Asiel,

@c    4:36. And Elioenai, and Jacoba, and Isuhaia, and Asaia, and Adiel, and
@c    Ismiel, and Banaia,

@c    4:37. Ziza also the son of Sephei the son of Allon the son of Idaia the
@c    son of Semri the son of Samaia.

@c    4:38. These were named princes in their kindreds, and in the houses of
@c    their families were multiplied exceedingly.

@c    4:39. And they went forth to enter into Gador as far as to the east
@c    side of the valley, to seek pastures for their flocks.

@c    4:40. And they found fat pastures, and very good, and a country
@c    spacious, and quiet, and fruitful, in which some of the race of Cham
@c    had dwelt before.

@c    4:41. And these whose names are written above, came in the days of
@c    Ezechias king of Juda:  and they beat down their tents, and slew the
@c    inhabitants that were found there, and utterly destroyed them unto this
@c    day:  and they dwelt in their place, because they found there fat
@c    pastures.

@c    4:42. Some also of the children of Simeon, five hundred men, went into
@c    mount Seir, having for their captains Phaltias and Naaria and Raphaia
@c    and Oziel the sons of Jesi:

@c    4:43. And they slew the remnant of the Amalecites, who had been able to
@c    escape, and they dwelt there in their stead unto this day.



@c    1 Paralipomenon Chapter 5


@c    Genealogies of Ruben and Gad:  their victories over the Agarites:  their
@c    captivity.

@c    5:1. Now the sons of Ruben the firstborn of Israel, (for he was his
@c    firstborn:  but forasmuch as he defiled his father's bed, his first
@c    birthright was given to the sons of Joseph the son of Israel, and he
@c    was not accounted for the firstborn.

@c    5:2. But of the race of Juda, who was the strongest among his brethren,
@c    came the princes:  but the first birthright was accounted to Joseph.)

@c    Accounted to Joseph. . .Viz., as to the double portion, which belonged
@c    to the firstborn; but the princely dignity was given to Juda, and the
@c    priesthood to Levi.

@c    5:3. The sons then of Ruben the firstborn of Israel were Enoch, and
@c    Phallu, Esron, and Charmi.

@c    5:4. The sons of Joel:  Samaia his son, Gog his son, Semei his son,

@c    5:5. Micha his son, Reia his son, Baal his son,

@c    5:6. Beera his son, whom Thelgathphalnasar king of the Assyrians
@c    carried away captive, and he was prince in the tribe of Ruben.

@c    5:7. And his brethren, and all his kindred, when they were numbered by
@c    their families, had for princes Jehiel, and Zacharias.

@c    5:8. And Bala the son of Azaz, the son of Samma, the son of Joel, dwelt
@c    in Aroer as far as Nebo, and Beelmeon.

@c    5:9. And eastward he had his habitation as far as the entrance of the
@c    desert, and the river Euphrates.  For they possessed a great number of
@c    cattle in the land of Galaad.

@c    5:10. And in the days of Saul they fought against the Agarites, and
@c    slew them, and dwelt in their tents in their stead, in all the country,
@c    that looketh to the east of Galaad.

@c    5:11. And the children of Gad dwelt over against them in the land of
@c    Basan, as far as Selcha:

@c    5:12. Johel the chief, and Saphan the second:  and Janai, and Saphat in
@c    Basan.

@c    5:13. And their brethren according to the houses of their kindreds,
@c    were Michael and Mosollam, and Sebe, and Jorai, and Jacan, and Zie, and
@c    Heber, seven.

@c    5:14. These were the sons of Abihail, the son of Huri, the son of Jara,
@c    the son of Galaad, the son of Michael, the son of Jesisi, the son of
@c    Jeddo, the son of Buz.

@c    5:15. And their brethren the sons of Abdiel, the son of Guni, chief of
@c    the house in their families,

@c    5:16. And they dwelt in Galaad, and in Basan and in the towns thereof,
@c    and in all the suburbs of Saron, unto the borders.

@c    5:17. All these were numbered in the days of Joathan king of Juda, and
@c    in the days of Jeroboam king of Israel.

@c    5:18. The Sons of Ruben, and of Gad, and of the half tribe of Manasses,
@c    fighting men, bearing shields, and swords, and bending the bow, and
@c    trained up to battles, four and forty thousand seven hundred and
@c    threescore that went out to war.

@c    5:19. They fought against the Agarites:  but the Itureans, and Naphis,
@c    and Nodab,

@c    5:20. Gave them help.  And the Agarites were delivered into their hands,
@c    and all that were with them, because they called upon God in the
@c    battle:  and he heard them, because they had put their faith in him.

@c    5:21. And they took all that they possessed, of camels fifty thousand,
@c    and of sheep two hundred and fifty thousand, and of asses two thousand,
@c    and of men a hundred thousand souls.

@c    5:22. And many fell down slain:  for it was the battle of the Lord.  And
@c    they dwelt in their stead till the captivity.

@c    5:23. And the children of the half tribe of Manasses possessed the
@c    land, from the borders of Basan unto Baal, Hermon, and Sanir, and mount
@c    Hermon, for their number was great.

@c    5:24. And these were the heads of the house of their kindred, Epher,
@c    and Jesi, and Eliel, and Esriel, and Jeremia, and Odoia, and Jediel,
@c    most valiant and powerful men, and famous chiefs in their families.

@c    5:25. But they forsook the God of their fathers, and went astray after
@c    the gods of the people of the land, whom God destroyed before them.

@c    5:26. And the God of Israel stirred up the spirit of Phul king of the
@c    Assyrians.  and the spirit of Thelgathphalnasar king of Assur:  and he
@c    carried away Ruben, and Gad, and the half tribe of Manasses, and
@c    brought them to Lahela, and to Habor, and to Ara, and to the river of
@c    Gozan, unto this day.



@c    1 Paralipomenon Chapter 6


@c    The genealogies of Levi, and of Aaron:  the cities of the Levites.

@c    6:1. The sons of Levi were Gerson, Caath, and Merari.

@c    6:2. The Sons of Caath:  Amram, Isaar, Hebron, and Oziel.

@c    6:3. The children of Amram:  Aaron, Moses, and Mary.  The Sons of Aaron:
@c    Nadab and Abiu, Eleazar and Ithamar.

@c    6:4. Eleazar begot Phinees, and Phinees begot Abisue,

@c    6:5. And Abisue begot Bocci, and Bocci begot Ozi.

@c    6:6. Ozi begot Zaraias, and Zaraias begot Maraioth.

@c    6:7. And Maraioth begot Amarias, and Amarias begot Achitob.

@c    6:8. Achitob begot Sadoc, and Sadoc begot Achimaas.

@c    6:9. Achimaas begot Azarias, Azarias begot Johanan,

@c    6:10. Johanan begot Azarias.  This is he that executed the priestly
@c    office in the house which Solomon built in Jerusalem.

@c    6:11. And Azarias begot Amarias, and Amarias begot Achitob.

@c    6:12. And Achitob begot Sadoc, and Sadoc begot Sellum,

@c    6:13. Sellum begot Helcias, and Helcias begot Azarias,

@c    6:14. Azarias begot Saraias, and Saraias begot Josedec.

@c    6:15. Now Josedec went out, when the Lord carried away Juda, and
@c    Jerusalem, by the hands of Nabuchodonosor.

@c    6:16. So the sons of Levi were Gerson, Caath, and Merari.

@c    6:17. And these are the names of the sons of Gerson:  Lobni and Semei.

@c    6:18. The sons of Caath:  Amram, and Isaar, and Hebron, and Oziel.

@c    6:19. The sons of Merari:  Moholi and Musi.  And these are the kindreds
@c    of Levi according to their families.

@c    6:20. Of Gerson:  Lobni his son, Jahath his son, Zamma his son,

@c    6:21. Joah his son, Addo his son, Zara his son, Jethrai his son.

@c    6:22. The sons of Caath, Aminadab his son, Core his son, Asir his son,

@c    6:23. Elcana his son, Abiasaph his son, Asir his son,

@c    6:24. Thahath his son, Uriel his son, Ozias his son, Saul his son.

@c    6:25. The sons of Elcana:  Amasai, and Achimoth.

@c    6:26. And Elcana.  The sons of Elcana:  Sophai his son, Nahath his son,

@c    6:27. Eliab his son, Jeroham his son, Elcana his son.

@c    6:28. The sons of Samuel:  the firstborn Vasseni, and Abia.

@c    6:29. And the sons of Merari, Moholi:  Lobni his son, Semei his son, Oza
@c    his son,

@c    6:30. Sammaa his son, Haggia his son, Asaia his son.

@c    6:31. These are they, whom David set over the singing men of the house
@c    of the Lord, after that the ark was placed.

@c    6:32. And they ministered before the tabernacle of the testimony, with
@c    singing, until Solomon built the house of the Lord in Jerusalem, and
@c    they stood according to their order in the ministry.

@c    6:33. And these are they that stood with their sons, of the sons of
@c    Caath, Hemam a singer, the son of Joel, the son of Sammuel,

@c    6:34. The son of Elcana, the son of Jeroham, the son of Eliel, the son
@c    of Thohu,

@c    6:35. The son of Suph, the son of Elcana, the son of Mahath, the son of
@c    Amasai,

@c    6:36. The son of Elcana, the son of Johel, the son of Azarias, the son
@c    of Sophonias,

@c    6:37. The son of Thahath, the son of Asir, the son of Abiasaph, the son
@c    of Core,

@c    6:38. The son of Isaar, the son of Caath, the son of Levi, the son of
@c    Israel.

@c    6:39. And his brother Asaph, who stood on his right hand, Asaph the son
@c    of Barachias, the son of Samaa.

@c    6:40. The son of Michael, the son of Basaia, the, son of Melchia.

@c    6:41. The son of Athanai, the son of Zara, the son of Adaia.

@c    6:42. The son of Ethan, the son of Zamma, the son of Semei.

@c    6:43. The son of Jeth, the son of Gerson, the son of Levi.

@c    6:44. And the sons of Merari their brethren, on the left hand, Ethan
@c    the son of Cusi, the son of Abdi, the son of Meloch,

@c    6:45. The son of Hasabia, the son of Amasai, the son of Helcias,

@c    6:46. The son of Amasai, the son of Boni, the son of Somer,

@c    6:47. The son of Moholi, the son of Musi, the son of Merari, the son of
@c    Levi.

@c    6:48. Their brethren also the Levites, who were appointed for all the
@c    ministry of the tabernacle of the house of the Lord.

@c    6:49. But Aaron and his sons offered burnt offerings upon the altar of
@c    holocausts, and upon the altar of incense, for every work of the holy
@c    of holies:  and to pray for Israel according to all that Moses the
@c    servant of God had commanded.

@c    6:50. And these are the sons of Aaron:  Eleazar his son, Phinees his
@c    son, Abisue his son,

@c    6:51. Bocci his son, Ozi his son, Zarahia his son,

@c    6:52. Meraioth his son, Amarias his son, Achitob his son,

@c    6:53. Sadoc his son, Achimaas his son.

@c    6:54. And these are their dwelling places by the towns and confines, to
@c    wit, of the sons of Aaron, of the families of the Caathites:  for they
@c    fell to them by lot.

@c    6:55. And they gave them Hebron in the land of Juda, and the suburbs
@c    thereof round about:

@c    6:56. But the fields of the city, and the villages to Caleb son of
@c    Jephone.

@c    6:57. And to the sons of Aaron they gave the cities for refuge Hebron,
@c    and Lobna, and the suburbs thereof,

@c    6:58. And Jether and Esthemo, with their suburbs, and Helon, and Dabir
@c    with their suburbs:

@c    6:59. Asan also, and Bethsames, with their suburbs.

@c    6:60. And out of the tribe of Benjamin:  Gabee and its suburbs, Almath
@c    with its suburbs, Anathoth also with its suburbs:  all their cities
@c    throughout their families were thirteen.

@c    6:61. And to the sons of Caath that remained of their kindred they gave
@c    out of the half tribe of Manasses ten cities in possession.

@c    6:62. And to the sons of Gerson by their families out of the tribe of
@c    Issachar, and out of the tribe of Aser, and out of the tribe of
@c    Nephtali, and out of the tribe Manasses in Basan, thirteen cities.

@c    6:63. And to the sons of Merari by their families out of the tribe of
@c    Ruben, and out of the tribe of Gad, and out of the tribe of Zabulon,
@c    they gave by lot twelve cities.

@c    6:64. And the children of Israel gave to the Levites the cities, and
@c    their suburbs.

@c    6:65. And they gave them by lot, out of the tribe of the sons of Juda,
@c    and out of the tribe of the sons of Simeon, and out of the tribe of the
@c    sons of Benjamin, these cities which they called by their names.

@c    6:66. And to them that were of the kindred of the sons of Caath, and
@c    the cities in their borders were of the tribe of Ephraim.

@c    6:67. And they gave the cities of refuge Sichem with its suburbs in
@c    mount Ephraim, and Gazer with its suburbs,

@c    6:68. Jecmaan also with its suburbs, and Beth-horon in like manner,

@c    6:69. Helon also with its suburbs, and Gethremmon in like manner,

@c    6:70. And out of the half tribe of Manasses, Aner and its suburbs,
@c    Baalam and its suburbs, to wit, to them that were left of the family of
@c    the sons of Caath.

@c    6:71. And to the sons of Gersom, out the kindred of the half tribe of
@c    Manasses, Gaulon, in Basan, and its suburbs, and Astharoth with its
@c    suburbs.

@c    6:72. Out of the tribe of Issachar, Cedes and its suburbs, and Dabereth
@c    with its suburbs;

@c    6:73. Ramoth also and its suburbs, and Anem with its suburbs.

@c    6:74. And out of the tribe of Aser:  Masal with its suburbs, and Abdon
@c    in like manner;

@c    6:75. Hucac also and its suburbs, and Rohol with its suburbs.

@c    6:76. And out of the tribe of Nephtali, Cedes in Galilee and its
@c    suburbs, Hamon with its suburbs, and Cariathaim, and its suburbs.

@c    6:77. And to the sons of Merari that remained:  out of the tribe of
@c    Zabulon, Remmono and its suburbs, and Thabor with its suburbs.

@c    6:78. Beyond the Jordan also over against Jericho, on the east side of
@c    the Jordan and out of the tribe of Ruben, Bosor in the wilderness with
@c    its suburbs, and Jassa with its suburbs;

@c    6:79. Cademoth also and its suburbs, and Mephaath with its suburbs;

@c    6:80. Moreover also out of the tribe of Gad, Ramoth in Galaad and its
@c    suburbs, and Manaim with its suburbs;

@c    6:81. Hesebon also with its suburbs, and Jazer with its suburbs.



@c    1 Paralipomenon Chapter 7


@c    Genealogies of Issachar, Benjamin, Nephtali, Manasses, Ephraim, and
@c    Aser.

@c    7:1. Now the sons of Issachar were Thola, and Phua, Jasub and Simeron,
@c    four.

@c    7:2. The sons of Thola:  Ozi and Raphaia, and Jeriel, and Jemai, and
@c    Jebsem, and Samuel, chiefs of the houses of their kindreds.  Of the
@c    posterity of Thola were numbered in the days of David, two and twenty
@c    thousand six hundred most valiant men.

@c    7:3. The sons of Ozi:  Izrahia, of whom were born Michael, and Obadia,
@c    and Joel, and Jesia, five all great men.

@c    7:4. And there were with them by their families and peoples, six and
@c    thirty thousand most valiant men ready for war:  for they had many wives
@c    and children.

@c    7:5. Their brethren also throughout all the house of Issachar, were
@c    numbered fourscore and seven thousand most valiant men for war.

@c    7:6. The sons of Benjamin were Bela, and Bechor, and Jadihel, three.

@c    7:7. The sons of Bela:  Esbon, and Ozi, and Ozial, and Jerimoth and
@c    Urai, five chiefs of their families, and most valiant warriors, and
@c    their number was twenty-two thousand and thirty-four.

@c    7:8. And the sons of Bechor were Zamira, and Joas, and Eliezer, and
@c    Elioenai, and Amai, and Jerimoth, and Abia, and Anathoth, and Almath:
@c    all these were the sons of Bechor.

@c    7:9. And they were numbered by the families, heads of their kindreds,
@c    most valiant men for war, twenty thousand and two hundred.

@c    7:10. And the son of Jadihel:  Balan.  And the sons of Balan:  Jehus and
@c    Benjamin, and Aod, and Chanana, and Zethan and Tharsis, and Ahisahar.

@c    7:11. All these were sons of Jadihel, heads of their kindreds, most
@c    valiant men, seventeen thousand and two hundred fifty to go out to war.

@c    7:12. Sepham also and Hapham the sons of Hir:  and Hasim the sons of
@c    Aher.

@c    7:13. And the sons of Nephtali were Jasiel, and Guni, and Jezer, and
@c    Sellum, sons of Bala.

@c    7:14. And the son of Manasses, Ezriel:  and his concubine the Syrian
@c    bore Machir the father of Galaad.

@c    7:15. And Machir took wives for his sons Happhim, and Saphan:  and he
@c    had a sister named Maacha:  the name of the second was Salphaad, and
@c    Salphaad had daughters.

@c    7:16. And Maacha the wife of Machir bore a son, and she called his name
@c    Phares:  and the name of his brother was Sares:  and his sons were Ulam
@c    and Recen.

@c    7:17. And the son of Ulam, Baden.  These are the sons of Galaad, the son
@c    of Machir, the son of Manasses.

@c    7:18. And his sister named Queen bore Goodlyman, and Abiezer, and
@c    Mohola.

@c    7:19. And the sons of Semida were Ahiu, and Sechem, and Leci and Aniam.

@c    7:20. And the sons of Ephraim were Suthala, Bared his son, Thahath his
@c    son, Elada his son, Thahath his son, and his son Zabad,

@c    7:21. And his son Suthala, and his son Ezer, and Elad:  and the men of
@c    Geth born in the land slew them, because they came down to invade their
@c    possessions.

@c    7:22. And Ephraim their father mourned many days, and his brethren came
@c    to comfort him.

@c    7:23. And he went in to his wife:  and she conceived and bore a son, and
@c    he called his name Beria, because he was born when it went evil with
@c    his house:

@c    Beria. . .This name signifies in evil, or in affliction.

@c    7:24. And his daughter was Sara, who built Bethoron, the nether and the
@c    upper, and Ozensara.

@c    7:25. And Rapha was his son, and Reseph, and Thale, of whom was born
@c    Thaan,

@c    7:26. Who begot Laadan:  and his son was Ammiud, who begot Elisama,

@c    7:27. Of whom was born Nun, who had Josue for his son.

@c    7:28. And their possessions and habitations were Bethel with her
@c    daughters, and eastward Noran, and westward Gazer and her daughters,
@c    Sichem also with her daughters, as far as Asa with her daughters.

@c    7:29. And by the borders of the sons of Manasses Bethsan and her
@c    daughters, Thanach and her daughters, Mageddo and her daughters:  Dor
@c    and her daughters:  in these dwelt the children of Joseph, the son of
@c    Israel.

@c    7:30. The children of Aser were Jemna, and Jesua, and Jessui, and
@c    Baria, and Sara their sister.

@c    7:31. And the sons of Baria:  Haber, and Melchiel:  he is the father of
@c    Barsaith.

@c    7:32. And Heber begot Jephlat, and Somer, and Hotham, and Suaa their
@c    sister.

@c    7:33. The sons of Jephlat:  Phosech, and Chamaal, and Asoth:  these are
@c    the sons of Jephlat.

@c    7:34. And the sons of Somer:  Ahi, and Roaga and Haba, and Aram.

@c    7:35. And the sons of Helem his brother:  Supha, and Jemna, and Selles,
@c    and Amal.

@c    7:36. The sons of Supha:  Sue, Hernapher, and Sual, and Beri, and Jamra.

@c    7:37. Bosor and Hod, and Samma, and Salusa, and Jethran, and Bera.

@c    7:38. The sons of Jether:  Jephone, and Phaspha, and Ara.

@c    7:39. And the sons of Olla:  Aree, and Haniel, and Resia.

@c    7:40. All these were sons of Aser, heads of their families, choice and
@c    most valiant captains of captains:  and the number of them that were of
@c    the age that was fit for war, was six and twenty thousand.



@c    1 Paralipomenon Chapter 8


@c    The posterity of Benjamin is further declared down to Saul.  His issue.

@c    8:1. Now Benjamin begot Bale his firstborn, Asbel the second, Ahara the
@c    third,

@c    8:2. Nohaa the fourth, and Rapha the fifth.

@c    8:3. And the sons of Bale were Addar, and Gera, and Abiud,

@c    8:4. And Abisue, and Naaman, and Ahoe,

@c    8:5. And Gera, and Sephuphan, and Huram.

@c    8:6. These are the sons of Abed, heads of families that dwelt in Gabaa,
@c    who were removed into Manahath.

@c    8:7. And Naaman, and Achia, and Gera he removed them, and begot Oza,
@c    and Ahiud.

@c    8:8. And Saharim begot in the land of Moab, after he sent away Husim
@c    and Bara his wives.

@c    8:9. And he begot of Hodes his wife Jobab, and Sebia, and Mosa, and
@c    Molchom,

@c    8:10. And Jehus and Sechia, and Marma.  These were his sons heads of
@c    their families.

@c    8:11. And Mehusim begot Abitob, and Elphaal.

@c    8:12. And the sons of Elphaal were Heber, and Misaam, and Samad:  who
@c    built Ono, and Lod, and its daughters.

@c    8:13. And Baria, and Sama were heads of their kindreds that dwelt in
@c    Aialon:  these drove away the inhabitants of Geth.

@c    8:14. And Ahio, and Sesac, and Jerimoth,

@c    8:15. And Zabadia, and Arod, and Heder,

@c    8:16. And Michael, and Jespha, and Joha, the sons of Baria.

@c    8:17. And Zabadia, and Mosollam, Hezeci, and Heber,

@c    8:18. And Jesamari, and Jezlia, and Jobab, sons of Elphaal,

@c    8:19. And Jacim, and Zechri, and Zabdi,

@c    8:20. And Elioenai, and Selethai, and Elial,

@c    8:21. And Adaia, and Baraia, and Samareth, the sons of Semei.

@c    8:22. And Jespham, and Heber, and Eliel,

@c    8:23. And Abdon, and Zechri, and Hanan,

@c    8:24. And Hanania, and Elam, and Anathothia.

@c    8:25. And Jephdaia, and Phanuel the sons of Sesac.

@c    8:26. And Samsari, and Sohoria and Otholia,

@c    8:27. And Jersia, and Elia, and Zechri, the sons of Jeroham.

@c    8:28. These were the chief fathers, and heads of their families who
@c    dwelt in Jerusalem.

@c    8:29. And at Gabaon dwelt Abigabaon, and the name of his wife was
@c    Maacha:

@c    8:30. And his firstborn son Abdon, and Sur, and Cis, and Baal, and
@c    Nadab,

@c    8:31. And Gedor, and Ahio, and Zacher, and Macelloth:

@c    8:32. And Macelloth begot Samaa:  and they dwelt over against their
@c    brethren in Jerusalem with their brethren.

@c    8:33. And Ner begot Cis and Cis begot Saul.  And Saul begot Jonathan and
@c    Melchisua, and Abinadab, and Esbaal.

@c    Esbaal. . .Alias Isboseth.

@c    8:34. And the son of Jonathan was Meribbaal:  and Meribbaal begot Micha.

@c    Meribbaal. . .Alias Miphiboseth.  2 Kings 4.4.

@c    8:35. And the sons of Micha were Phithon, and Melech, and Tharaa, and
@c    Ahaz.

@c    8:36. And Ahaz begot Joada:  and Joada begot Alamath, and Azmoth, and
@c    Zamri:  and Zamri begot Mosa,

@c    8:37. And Mosa begot Banaa, whose son was Rapha, of whom was born
@c    Elasa, who begot Asel.

@c    8:38. And Asel had six sons whose names were Ezricam, Bochru, Ismahel,
@c    Saris, Obdia, and Hanan.  All these were the sons of Asel.

@c    8:39. And the sons of Esec, his brother, were Ulam the firstborn, and
@c    Jehus the second, and Eliphalet the third.

@c    8:40. And the sons of Ulam were most valiant men, and archers of great
@c    strength:  and they had many sons and grandsons, even to a hundred and
@c    fifty.  All these were children of Benjamin.



@c    1 Paralipomenon Chapter 9


@c    The Israelites, priests, and Levites, who first dwelt in Jerusalem
@c    after the captivity.  A repetition of the genealogy of Saul.

@c    9:1. And all Israel was numbered:  and the sum of them was written in
@c    the book of the kings of Israel, and Juda:  and they were carried away
@c    to Babylon for their transgression.

@c    9:2. Now the first that dwelt in their possessions, and in their
@c    cities, were the Israelites, and the priests, and the Levites, and the
@c    Nathineans.

@c    Nathineans. . .These were the posterity of the Gabaonites, whose office
@c    was to bring wood, water, etc., for the service of the temple.

@c    9:3. And in Jerusalem dwelt of the children of Juda, and of the
@c    children of Benjamin, and of the children of Ephraim, and of Manasses.

@c    9:4. Othei the son of Ammiud, the son of Amri, the son of Omrai, the
@c    son of Bonni of the sons of Phares the son of Juda.

@c    9:5. And of Siloni:  Asaia the firstborn, and his sons.

@c    9:6. And of the sons of Zara:  Jehuel and their brethren, six hundred
@c    and ninety.

@c    9:7. And of the sons of Benjamin:  Salo the son of Mosollam, the son of
@c    Oduia, the son of Asana:

@c    9:8. And Jobania the son of Jeroham:  and Ela the son of Ozi, the son of
@c    Mochori and Mosallam the son of Saphatias, the son of Rahuel, the son
@c    of Jebania:

@c    9:9. And their brethren by their families, nine hundred and fifty-six.
@c    All these were heads of their families, by the houses of their fathers.

@c    9:10. And of the priests:  Jedaia, Joiarib, and Jachin:

@c    9:11. And Azarias the son of Helcias, the son of Mosollam, the son of
@c    Sadoc, the son of Maraioth, the son of Achitob, high priest of the
@c    house of God.

@c    9:12. And Adaias the son of Jeroham, the son of Phassur, the son of
@c    Melchias, and Maasai the son of Adiel, the son of Jezra, the son of
@c    Mosollam, the son of Mosollamith, the son of Emmer.

@c    9:13. And their brethren heads in their families a thousand seven
@c    hundred and threescore, very strong and able men for the work of the
@c    ministry in the house of God.

@c    9:14. And of the Levites:  Semeia the son of Hassub the son of Ezricam,
@c    the son of Hasebia of the sons of Merari.

@c    9:15. And Bacbacar the carpenter, and Galal, and Mathania the son of
@c    Micha, the son of Zechri the son of Asaph:

@c    9:16. And Obdia the son of Semeia, the son of Galal, the son of
@c    Idithum:  and Barachia the son of Asa, the son of Elcana, who dwelt in
@c    the suburbs of Netophati.

@c    9:17. And the porters were Sellum, and Accub, and Telmon, and Ahiman:
@c    and their brother Sellum was the prince,

@c    9:18. Until that time, in the king's gate eastward, the sons of Levi
@c    waited by their turns.

@c    9:19. But Sellum the son of Core, the son of Abiasaph, the son of Core,
@c    with his brethren and his father's house, the Corites were over the
@c    works of the service, keepers of the gates of the tabernacle:  and their
@c    families in turns were keepers of the entrance of the camp of the Lord.

@c    9:20. And Phinees the son of Eleazar, was their prince before the Lord,

@c    9:21. And Zacharias the son of Mosollamia, was porter of the gate of
@c    the tabernacle of the testimony:

@c    9:22. All these that were chosen to be porters at the gates, were two
@c    hundred and twelve:  the they were registered in their proper towns:
@c    whom David and Samuel the seer appointed in their trust.

@c    9:23. As well them as their sons, to keep the gates of the house of the
@c    Lord, and the tabernacle by their turns.

@c    9:24. In four quarters were the porters:  that is to say, toward the
@c    east, and west, and north, and south.

@c    9:25. And their brethren dwelt in village, and came upon their sabbath
@c    days from time to time.

@c    9:26. To these four Levites were committed the whole number of the
@c    porters, and they were over the chambers, and treasures, of the house
@c    of the Lord.

@c    9:27. And they abode in their watches round about the temple of the
@c    Lord:  that when it was time, they might open the gates in the morning.

@c    9:28. And some of their stock had the charge of the vessels for the
@c    ministry:  for the vessels were both brought in and carried out by
@c    number.

@c    9:29. Some of them also had the instruments of the sanctuary committed
@c    unto them, and the charge of the fine flour, and wine, and oil, and
@c    frankincense, and spices.

@c    9:30. And the sons of the priests made the ointments of the spices.

@c    9:31. And Mathathias a Levite, the firstborn of Sellum the Corite, was
@c    overseer of such things as were fried the fryingpan.

@c    9:32. And some of the sons of Caath their brethren, were over the
@c    loaves of proposition, to prepare always new for every sabbath.

@c    9:33. These are the chief of the singing men of the families of the
@c    Levites, who dwelt in the chambers, by the temple, that they might
@c    serve continually day and night in their ministry.

@c    9:34. The heads of the Levites, princes in their families, abode in
@c    Jerusalem.

@c    9:35. And in Gabaon dwelt Jehiel the father of Gabaon, and the name of
@c    his wife was Maacha:

@c    9:36. His firstborn son Abdon, and Sur, and Cis, and Baal, and Ner, and
@c    Nadab,

@c    9:37. Gedor also, and Ahio, and Zacharias, and Macelloth.

@c    9:38. And Macelloth begot Samaan:  these dwelt over against their
@c    brethren in Jerusalem, with their brethren.

@c    9:39. Now Ner begot Cis:  and Cis begot Saul:  and Saul begot Jonathan
@c    and Melchisua, and Abinadab, and Esbaal.

@c    9:40. And the son of Jonathan, was Meribbaal:  and Meribbaal begot
@c    Micha.

@c    9:41. And the sons of Micha, were Phithon, and Melech, and Tharaa, and
@c    Ahaz.

@c    9:42. And Ahaz begot Jara, and Jara begot Alamath, and Azmoth, and
@c    Zamri.  And Zamri begot Mosa.

@c    9:43. And Mosa begot Banaa:  whose son Raphaia begot Elasa:  of whom was
@c    born Asel.

@c    9:44. And Asel had six sons whose names are, Ezricam Bochru, Ismahel,
@c    Saria, Obdia, Hanan:  these are the sons of Asel.



@c    1 Paralipomenon Chapter 10


@c    Saul is slain for his sins:  he is buried by the men of Jabes.

@c    10:1. Now the Philistines fought against Israel, and the men of Israel
@c    fled from before the Philistines, and fell down wounded in mount
@c    Gelboe.

@c    10:2. And the Philistines drew near pursuing after Saul, and his sons,
@c    and they killed Jonathan, and Abinadab, and Melchisua the sons of Saul.

@c    10:3. And the battle grew hard against Saul and the archers reached
@c    him, and wounded him with arrows.

@c    10:4. And Saul said to his armourbearer:  Draw thy sword, and kill me:
@c    lest these uncircumcised come, and mock me.  But his armourbearer would
@c    not, for he was struck with fear:  so Saul took his sword, and fell upon
@c    it.

@c    10:5. And when his armourbearer saw it, to wit, that Saul was dead, he
@c    also fell upon his sword and died.

@c    10:6. So Saul died, and his three sons, and all his house fell
@c    together.

@c    10:7. And when the men of Israel, that dwelt in the plains, saw this,
@c    they fled:  and Saul and his sons being dead, they forsook their cities,
@c    and were scattered up and down:  and the Philistines came, and dwelt in
@c    them.

@c    10:8. And the next day the Philistines taking away the spoils of them
@c    that were slain, found Saul and his sons lying on mount Gelboe.

@c    10:9. And when they had stripped him, and out off his head, and taken
@c    away his armour, they sent it into their land, to be carried about, and
@c    shewn in the temples of the idols and to the people.

@c    10:10. And his armour they dedicated in the temple of their god, and
@c    his head they fastened up in the temple of Dagon.

@c    10:11. And when the men of Jabes Galaad had heard this, to wit, all
@c    that the Philistines had done to Saul,

@c    10:12. All the valiant men of them arose, and took the bodies of Saul
@c    and of his sons, and brought them to Jabes, and buried their bones
@c    under the oak that was in Jabes, and they fasted seven days.

@c    10:13. So Saul died for his iniquities, because he transgressed the
@c    commandment of the Lord, which he had commanded, and kept it not:  and
@c    moreover consulted also a witch,

@c    10:14. And trusted not in the Lord:  therefore he slew him, and
@c    transferred his kingdom to David the son of Isai.



@c    1 Paralipomenon Chapter 11


@c    David is made king.  He taketh the castle of Sion.  A catalogue of his
@c    valiant men.

@c    11:1. Then all Israel gathered themselves to David in Hebron, saying:
@c    We are thy bone, and thy flesh.

@c    11:2. Yesterday also, and the day before when Saul was king, thou wast
@c    he that leddest out and broughtest in Israel:  for the Lord thy God said
@c    to thee:  Thou shalt feed my people Israel, and thou shalt be ruler over
@c    them.

@c    11:3. So all the ancients of Israel came to the king to Hebron, and
@c    David made a covenant with them before the Lord:  and they anointed him
@c    king over Israel according to the word of the Lord which he spoke in
@c    the hand of Samuel.

@c    11:4. And David and all Israel went to Jerusalem, which is Jebus, where
@c    the Jebusites were the inhabitants of the land.

@c    11:5. And the inhabitants of Jebus said to David:  Thou shalt not come
@c    in here.  But David took the castle of Sion, which is the city of David.

@c    11:6. And he said:  Whosoever shall first strike the Jebusites, shall be
@c    the head and chief captain.  And Joab the son of Sarvia went up first,
@c    and was made the general.

@c    11:7. And David dwelt in the castle, and therefore it was called the
@c    city of David,

@c    11:8. And he built the city round about from Mello all round, and Joab
@c    built the rest of the city.

@c    11:9. And David went on growing and increasing, and the Lord of hosts
@c    was with him.

@c    11:10. These are the chief of the valiant man of David, who helped him
@c    to be made king over all Israel, according to the word of the Lord,
@c    which he spoke to Israel.

@c    11:11. And this is the number of the heroes of David:  Jesbaam the son
@c    of Hachamoni the chief among the thirty:  he lifted up his spear against
@c    three hundred wounded by him at one time.

@c    11:12. And after him was Eleazar his uncle's son the Ahohite, who was
@c    one of the three mighties.

@c    11:13. He was with David in Phesdomim, when the Philistines were
@c    gathered to that place to battle:  and the field of that country was
@c    full of barley, and the people fled from before the Philistines.

@c    11:14. But these men stood in the midst of the field, and defended it:
@c    and they slew the Philistines, and the Lord gave a great deliverance to
@c    his people.

@c    11:15. And three of the thirty captains went down to the rock, wherein
@c    David was, to the cave of Odollam, when the Philistines encamped in the
@c    valley of Raphaim.

@c    11:16. And David was in a hold, and the garrison of the Philistines in
@c    Bethlehem.

@c    11:17. And David longed, and said:  O that some man would give me water
@c    of the cistern of Bethlehem, which is in the gate.

@c    11:18. And these three broke through the midst of the camp of the
@c    Philistines, and drew water out of the cistern of Bethlehem, which was
@c    in the gate, and brought it to David to drink:  and he would not drink
@c    of it, but rather offered it to the Lord,

@c    11:19. Saying:  God forbid that I should do this in the sight of my God,
@c    and should drink the blood of these men:  for with the danger of their
@c    lives they have brought me the water.  And therefore he would not drink.
@c    These things did the three most valiant.

@c    11:20. And Abisai the brother of Joab, he was chief of three, and he
@c    lifted up his spear against three hundred whom he slew, and he was
@c    renowned among the three,

@c    11:21. And illustrious among the second three, and their captain:  but
@c    yet he attained not to the first three.

@c    11:22. Banaias the son of Joiada a most valiant man, of Cabseel, who
@c    had done many acts:  he slew the two ariels of Moab:  and he went down,
@c    and killed a lion in the midst of a pit in the time of snow.

@c    Two ariels. . .That is, two lions, or lion-like men; for Ariel in Hebrew
@c    signifies a lion.

@c    11:23. And he slew an Egyptian, whose stature was of five cubits, and
@c    who had a spear like a weaver's beam:  and he went down to him with a
@c    staff, and plucked away the spear, that he held in his hand, and slew
@c    him with his own spear.

@c    11:24. These things did Banaias the son of Joiada, who was renowned
@c    among the three valiant ones,

@c    11:25. And the first among the thirty, but yet to the three he attained
@c    not:  and David made him of his council.

@c    11:26. Moreover the most valiant men of the army, were Asahel brother
@c    of Joab, and Elchanan the son of his uncle of Bethlehem,

@c    11:27. Sammoth an Arorite, Helles a Phalonite,

@c    11:28. Ira the son of Acces a Thecuite, Abiezer an Anathothite,

@c    11:29. Sobbochai a Husathite, Ilai an Ahohite,

@c    11:30. Maharai a Netophathite, Heled the son of Baana a Netophathite,

@c    11:31. Ethai the son of Ribai of Gabaath of the sons of Benjamin, Banai
@c    a Pharathonite,

@c    11:32. Hurai of the torrent Gaas, Abiel an Arbathite, Azmoth a
@c    Bauramite, Eliaba a Salabonite,

@c    11:33. The sons of Assem a Gezonite, Jonathan the son of Sage an
@c    Ararite,

@c    11:34. Ahiam the son of Sachar an Ararite,

@c    11:35. Eliphal the son of Ur,

@c    11:36. Hepher a Mecherathite, Ahia a Phelonite,

@c    11:37. Hesro a Carmelite, Naarai the son of Azbai,

@c    11:38. Joel the brother of Nathan, Mibahar the son of Agarai.

@c    11:39. Selec an Ammonite, Naharai a Berothite, the armourbearer of Joab
@c    the son of Sarvia.

@c    11:40. Ira a Jethrite, Gareb a Jethrite,

@c    11:41. Urias a Hethite, Zabad the son of Oholi,

@c    11:42. Adina the son of Siza a Rubenite the prince of the Rubenites,
@c    and thirty with him:

@c    11:43. Hanan the son of Maacha, and Josaphat a Mathanite,

@c    11:44. Ozia an Astarothite, Samma, and Jehiel the sons of Hotham an
@c    Arorite,

@c    11:45. Jedihel the son of Zamri, and Joha his brother a Thosaite,

@c    11:46. Eliel a Mahumite, and Jeribai, and Josaia the sons of Elnaim,
@c    and Jethma a Moabite, Eliel, and Obed, and Jasiel of Masobia.



@c    1 Paralipomenon Chapter 12


@c    Who followed David when he fled from Saul.  And who came to Hebron to
@c    make him king.

@c    12:1. Now these are they that came to David to Siceleg, while he yet
@c    fled from Saul the son of Cis, and they were most valiant and excellent
@c    warriors,

@c    12:2. Bending the bow, and using either hand in hurling stones with
@c    slings, and shooting arrows:  of the brethren of Saul of Benjamin.

@c    12:3. The chief was Ahiezer, and Joas, the sons of Samoa of Gabaath,
@c    and Jaziel, and Phallet the sons of Azmoth, and Beracha, and Jehu an
@c    Anathothite.

@c    12:4. And Samaias of Gabaon, the stoutest amongst the thirty and over
@c    the thirty; Jeremias, and Jeheziel and Johanan, and Jozabad of
@c    Gaderoth;

@c    12:5. And Eluzai, and Jerimuth, and Baalia, and Samaria, and Saphatia
@c    the Haruphite;

@c    12:6. Elcana, and Jesia, and Azareel, and Joezer, and Jesbaam of
@c    Carehim:

@c    12:7. And Joela, and Zabadia the sons of Jeroham of Gedor.

@c    12:8. From Gaddi also there went over to David, when he lay hid in the
@c    wilderness most valiant men, and excellent warriors, holding shield and
@c    spear:  whose faces were like the faces of a lion, and they were swift
@c    like the roebucks on the mountains.

@c    12:9. Ezer the chief, Obdias the second, Eliab the third,

@c    12:10. Masmana the fourth, Jeremias the fifth,

@c    12:11. Ethi the sixth, Eliel the seventh,

@c    12:12. Johanan the eighth, Elzebad the ninth,

@c    12:13. Jerenias the tenth, Machbani the eleventh,

@c    12:14. These were of the sons of Gad, captains of the army:  the least
@c    of them was captain over a hundred soldiers, and the greatest over a
@c    thousand.

@c    12:15. These are they who passed over the Jordan in the first month,
@c    when it is used to flow over its banks:  and they put to flight all that
@c    dwelt in the valleys both toward the east and toward the west.

@c    12:16. And there came also of the men of Benjamin, and of Juda to the
@c    hold, in which David abode.

@c    12:17. And David went out to meet them, and said:  If you are come
@c    peaceably to me to help me, let my heart be joined to you:  but if you
@c    plot against me for my enemies whereas I have no iniquity in my hands,
@c    let the God of our fathers see, and judge.

@c    12:18. But the spirit came upon Amasai the chief among thirty, and he
@c    said:  We are thine, O David, and for thee, O son of Isai:  peace, peace
@c    be to thee, and peace to thy helpers.  For thy God helpeth thee.  So
@c    David received them, and made them captains of the band.

@c    12:19. And there were some of Manasses that went over to David, when he
@c    came with the Philistines against Saul to fight:  but he did not fight
@c    with them:  because the lords of the Philistines taking counsel sent him
@c    back, saying:  With the danger of our heads he will return to his master
@c    Saul.

@c    12:20. So when he went back to Siceleg, there fled to him of Manasses,
@c    Ednas and Jozabad, and Jedihel, and Michael, and Ednas, and Jozabad,
@c    and Eliu, and Salathi, captains of thousands in Manasses.

@c    12:21. These helped David against the rovers:  for they were all most
@c    valiant men, and were made commanders in the army.

@c    12:22. Moreover day by day there came some to David to help him till
@c    they became a great number, like the army of God.

@c    12:23. And this is the number of the chiefs of the army who came to
@c    David, when he was in Hebron, to transfer to him the kingdom of Saul,
@c    according to the word of the Lord.

@c    12:24. The sons of Juda bearing shield and spear, six thousand eight
@c    hundred well appointed to war.

@c    12:25. Of the sons of Simeon valiant men for war, seven thousand one
@c    hundred.

@c    12:26. Of the sons of Levi, four thousand six hundred.

@c    12:27. And Joiada prince of the race of Aaron, and with him three
@c    thousand seven hundred.

@c    12:28. Sadoc also a young man of excellent disposition, and the house
@c    of his father, twenty-two principal men.

@c    12:29. And of the sons of Benjamin the brethren of Saul, three
@c    thousand:  for hitherto a great part of them followed the house of Saul.

@c    12:30. And of the sons of Ephraim twenty thousand eight hundred, men of
@c    great valour renowned in their kindreds.

@c    12:31. And of the half tribe of Manasses, eighteen thousand, every one
@c    by their names, came to make David king.

@c    12:32. Also of the sons of Issachar men of understanding, that knew all
@c    times to order what Israel should do, two hundred principal men:  and
@c    all the rest of the tribe followed their counsel.

@c    12:33. And of Zabulon such as went forth to battle, and stood in array
@c    well appointed with armour for war, there came fifty thousand to his
@c    aid, with no double heart.

@c    12:34. And of Nephtali, a thousand leaders:  and with them seven and
@c    thirty thousand, furnished with shield and spear.

@c    12:35. Of Dan also twenty-eight thousand six hundred prepared for
@c    battle.

@c    12:36. And of Aser forty thousand going forth to fight, and challenging
@c    in battle.

@c    12:37. And on the other side of the Jordan of the sons of Ruben, and of
@c    Gad, and of the half of the tribe of Manasses a hundred and twenty
@c    thousand, furnished with arms for war.

@c    12:38. All these men of war well appointed to fight, came with a
@c    perfect heart to Hebron, to make David king over all Israel:  and all
@c    the rest also of Israel, were of one heart to make David king.

@c    12:39. And they were there with David three days eating and drinking:
@c    for their brethren had prepared for them.

@c    12:40. Moreover they that were near them even as far as Issachar, and
@c    Zabulon, and Nephtali, brought loaves on asses, and on camels, and on
@c    mules, and on oxen, to eat:  meal, figs, raisins, wine, oil, and oxen,
@c    and sheep in abundance, for there was joy in Israel.



@c    1 Paralipomenon Chapter 13


@c    The ark is brought from Cariathiarim.  Oza for touching it is struck
@c    dead.

@c    13:1. David consulted with the captains of thousands, and of hundreds,
@c    and with all the commanders.

@c    13:2. And he said to all the assembly of Israel:  If it please you; and
@c    if the words which I speak come from the Lord our God, let us send to
@c    the rest of our brethren into all the countries of Israel, and to the
@c    priests, and the Levites, that dwell in the suburbs of the cities, to
@c    gather themselves to us,

@c    13:3. And let us bring again the ark of our God to us:  for we sought it
@c    not in the days of Saul.

@c    13:4. And all the multitude answered that it should be so:  for the word
@c    pleased all the people.

@c    13:5. So David assembled all Israel from Sihor of Egypt, even to the
@c    entering into Emath, to bring the ark of God from Cariathiarim.

@c    13:6. And David went up with all the men of Israel to the hill of
@c    Cariathiarim which is in Juda, to bring thence the ark of the Lord God
@c    sitting upon the cherubims, where his name is called upon.

@c    13:7. And they carried the ark of God upon a new cart out of the house
@c    of Abinadab.  And Oza and his brother drove the cart.

@c    13:8. And David and all Israel played before God with all their might
@c    with hymns, and with harps, and with psalteries, and timbrels, and
@c    cymbals, and trumpets,

@c    13:9. And when they came to the floor of Chidon, Oza put forth his
@c    hand, to hold up the ark:  for the ox being wanton had made it lean a
@c    little on one side.

@c    13:10. And the Lord was angry with Oza, and struck him, because he had
@c    touched the ark; and he died there before the Lord.

@c    13:11. And David was troubled because the Lord had divided Oza:  and he
@c    called that place the Breach of Oza to this day.

@c    13:12. And he feared God at that time, saying:  How can I bring in the
@c    ark of God to me?

@c    13:13. And therefore he brought it not home to himself, that is, into
@c    the city of David, but carried it aside into the house of Obededom the
@c    Gethite.

@c    13:14. And the ark of God remained in the house of Obededom three
@c    months:  and the Lord blessed his house, and all that he had.



@c    1 Paralipomenon Chapter 14


@c    David's house, and children:  his victories over the Philistines.

@c    14:1. And Hiram king of Tyre sent messengers to David, and cedar trees,
@c    and masons, and carpenters, to build him a house.

@c    14:2. And David perceived that the Lord had confirmed him king over
@c    Israel, and that his kingdom was exalted over his people Israel.

@c    14:3. And David took other wives in Jerusalem:  and he begot sons, and
@c    daughters.

@c    14:4. Now these are the names of them that were born to him in
@c    Jerusalem:  Samua, and Sobad, Nathan, and Solomon,

@c    14:5. Jebahar, and Elisua, and Eliphalet,

@c    14:6. And Noga, and Napheg, and Japhia,

@c    14:7. Elisama, and Baaliada, and Eliphalet.

@c    14:8. And the Philistines hearing that David was anointed king over all
@c    Israel, went all up to seek him:  and David heard of it, and went out
@c    against them.

@c    14:9. And the Philistines came and spread themselves in the vale of
@c    Raphaim.

@c    14:10. And David consulted the Lord, saying:  Shall I go up against the
@c    Philistines, and wilt thou deliver them into my hand?  And the Lord said
@c    to him:  Go up, and I will deliver them into thy hand.

@c    14:11. And when they were come to Baalpharasim, David defeated them
@c    there, and he said:  God hath divided my enemies by my hand, as waters
@c    are divided:  and therefore the name of that place was called
@c    Baalpharasim.

@c    14:12. And they left there their gods, and David commanded that they
@c    should be burnt.

@c    14:13. Another time also the Philistines made an irruption, and spread
@c    themselves abroad in the valley.

@c    14:14. And David consulted God again, and God said to him:  Go not up
@c    after them, turn away from them, and come upon them over against the
@c    pear trees.

@c    14:15. And when thou shalt hear the sound of one going in the tops of
@c    the pear trees, then shalt thou go out to battle.  For God is gone out
@c    before thee to strike the army of the Philistines.

@c    14:16. And David did as God had commanded him, and defeated the army of
@c    the Philistines, slaying them from Gabaon to Gazera.

@c    14:17. And the name of David became famous in all countries, and the
@c    Lord made all nations fear aim.



@c    1 Paralipomenon Chapter 15


@c    The ark is brought into the city of David, with great solemnity.  Michol
@c    derideth David's devotion.

@c    15:1. He made also houses for himself in the city of David:  and built a
@c    place for the ark of God, and pitched a tabernacle for it.

@c    15:2. Then David said:  No one ought to carry the ark of God, but the
@c    Levites, whom the Lord hath chosen to carry it, and to minister unto
@c    himself for ever.

@c    15:3. And he gathered all Israel together into Jerusalem, that the ark
@c    of God might be brought into its place, which he had prepared for it.

@c    15:4. And the sons of Aaron also, and the Levites.

@c    15:5. Of the children of Caath, Uriel was the chief, and his brethren a
@c    hundred and twenty.

@c    15:6. Of the sons of Merari, Asaia the chief, and his brethren two
@c    hundred and twenty.

@c    15:7. Of the sons of Gersom, Joel the chief, and his brethren a hundred
@c    and thirty.

@c    15:8. Of the sons of Elisaphan, Semeias the chief:  and his brethren two
@c    hundred.

@c    15:9. Of the sons of Hebron, Eliel the chief:  and his brethren eighty.

@c    15:10. Of the sons of Oziel, Aminadab the chief:  and his brethren a
@c    hundred and twelve.

@c    15:11. And David called Sadoc, and Abiathar the priests, and the
@c    Levites, Uriel, Asaia, Joel, Semeia, Eliel, and Aminadab:

@c    15:12. And he said to them:  You that are the heads of the Levitical
@c    families, be sanctified with your brethren, and bring the ark of the
@c    Lord the God of Israel to the place, which is prepared for it:

@c    15:13. Lest as the Lord at first struck us, because you were not
@c    present, the same should now also come to pass, by our doing some thing
@c    against the law.

@c    15:14. So the priests and the Levites were sanctified, to carry the ark
@c    of the Lord the God of Israel.

@c    15:15. And the sons of Levi took the ark of God as Moses had commanded,
@c    according to the word of the Lord, upon their shoulders, with the
@c    staves.

@c    15:16. And David spoke to the chiefs of the Levites, to appoint some of
@c    their brethren to be singers with musical instruments, to wit, on
@c    psalteries, and harps, and cymbals, that the joyful noise might resound
@c    on high.

@c    15:17. And they appointed Levites, Hemam the son of Joel, and of his
@c    brethren Asaph the son of Barachias:  and of the sons of Merari, their
@c    brethren:  Ethan the son of Casaia.

@c    15:18. And with them their brethren:  in the second rank, Zacharias, and
@c    Ben, and Jaziel, and Semiramoth, and Jahiel, and Ani, and Eliab, and
@c    Banaias, and Maasias, and Mathathias, and Eliphalu, and Macenias, and
@c    Obededom, and Jehiel, the porters.

@c    15:19. Now the singers, Heman, Asaph, and Ethan, sounded with cymbals
@c    of brass.

@c    15:20. And Zacharias, and Oziel, and Semiramoth, and Jehiel, and Ani,
@c    and Eliab, and Maasias, and Banaias, sung mysteries upon psalteries.

@c    15:21. And Mathathias, and Eliphalu, and Macenias and Obededom, and
@c    Jehiel and Ozaziu, sung a song of victory for the octave upon harps.

@c    15:22. And Chonenias chief of the Levites, presided over the prophecy,
@c    to give out the tunes:  for he was very skilful.

@c    The prophecy, to give out the tunes. . .Singing praises to God is here
@c    called prophecy:  the more, because these singers were often inspired
@c    men.

@c    15:23. And Barachias, and Elcana, were doorkeepers of the ark.

@c    15:24. And Sebenias, and Josaphat, and Nathanael, and Amasai, and
@c    Zacharias, and Banaias, and Eliezer the priests, sounded with trumpets,
@c    before the ark of God:  and Obededom and Jehias were porters of the ark.

@c    15:25. So David and all the ancients of Israel, and the captains over
@c    thousands, went to bring the ark of the covenant of the Lord out of the
@c    house of Obededom with joy.

@c    15:26. And when God had helped the Levites who carried the ark of the
@c    covenant of the Lord, they offered in sacrifice seven oxen, and seven
@c    rams.

@c    15:27. And David was clothed with a robe of fine linen, and all the
@c    Levites that carried the ark, and the singing men, and Chonenias the
@c    ruler of the prophecy among the singers:  and David also had on him an
@c    ephod of linen.

@c    15:28. And all Israel brought the ark of the covenant of the Lord with
@c    joyful shouting, and sounding with the sound of the cornet, and with
@c    trumpets, and cymbals, and psalteries, and harps.

@c    15:29. And when the ark of the covenant of the Lord was come to the
@c    city of David, Michol the daughter of Saul looking out at a window, saw
@c    king David dancing and playing, and she despised him in her heart.



@c    1 Paralipomenon Chapter 16


@c    The ark is placed in the tabernacle.  Sacrifice is offered.  David
@c    blesseth the people, disposeth the offices of Levites, and maketh a
@c    psalm of praise to God.

@c    16:1. So they brought the ark of God, and set it in the midst of the
@c    tent, which David had pitched for it:  and they offered holocausts, and
@c    peace offerings before God.

@c    16:2. And when David had made an end of offering holocausts, and peace
@c    offerings, he blessed the people in the name of the Lord.

@c    16:3. And he divided to all and every one, both men and women, a loaf
@c    of bread, and a piece of roasted beef, and flour fried with oil.

@c    16:4. And he appointed Levites to minister before the ark of the Lord,
@c    and to remember his works, and to glorify, and praise the Lord God of
@c    Israel.

@c    16:5. Asaph the chief, and next after him Zacharias:  moreover Jahiel,
@c    and Semiramoth, and Jehiel, and Mathathias, and Eliab, and Banaias, and
@c    Obededom:  and Jehiel over the instruments of psaltery, and harps:  and
@c    Asaph sounded with cymbals:

@c    16:6. But Banaias, and Jaziel the priests, to sound the trumpet
@c    continually before the ark of the covenant of the Lord.

@c    16:7. In that day David made Asaph the chief to give praise to the Lord
@c    with his brethren.

@c    16:8. Praise ye the Lord, and call upon his name:  make known his doings
@c    among the nations.

@c    16:9. Sing to him, yea, sing praises to him:  and relate all his
@c    wondrous works.

@c    16:10. Praise ye his holy name:  let the heart of them rejoice, that
@c    seek the Lord.

@c    16:11. Seek ye the Lord, and his power:  seek ye his face evermore.

@c    16:12. Remember his wonderful works, which he hath done:  his signs, and
@c    the judgments of his mouth.

@c    16:13. O ye seed of Israel his servants, ye children of Jacob his
@c    chosen.

@c    16:14. He is the Lord our God:  his judgments are in all the earth.

@c    16:15. Remember for ever his covenant:  the word, which he commanded to
@c    a thousand generations.

@c    16:16. The covenant which he made with Abraham:  and his oath to Isaac.

@c    16:17. And he appointed the same to Jacob for a precept:  and to Israel
@c    for an everlasting covenant:

@c    16:18. Saying:  To thee will I give the land of Chanaan:  the lot of your
@c    inheritance.

@c    16:19. When they were but a small number:  very few and sojourners in
@c    it.

@c    16:20. And they passed from nation to nation:  and from a kingdom to
@c    another people.

@c    16:21. He suffered no man to do them wrong:  and reproved kings for
@c    their sake.

@c    16:22. Touch not my anointed:  and do no evil to my prophets.

@c    16:23. Sing ye to the Lord, all the earth:  shew forth from day to day
@c    his salvation.

@c    16:24. Declare his glory among the Gentiles:  his wonders among all
@c    people.

@c    16:25. For the Lord is great and exceedingly to be praised:  and he is
@c    to be feared above all gods.

@c    16:26. For all the gods of the nations are idols:  but the Lord made the
@c    heavens.

@c    16:27. Praise and magnificence are before him:  strength and joy in his
@c    place.

@c    16:28. Bring ye to the Lord, O ye families of the nations:  bring ye to
@c    the Lord glory and empire.

@c    16:29. Give to the Lord glory to his name, bring up sacrifice, and come
@c    ye in his sight:  and adore the Lord in holy becomingness.

@c    16:30. Let all the earth be moved at his presence:  for he hath founded
@c    the world immoveable.

@c    16:31. Let the heavens rejoice, and the earth be glad:  and let them say
@c    among the nations:  The Lord hath reigned.

@c    16:32. Let the sea roar, and the fulness thereof:  let the fields
@c    rejoice, and all things that are in them.

@c    16:33. Then shall the trees of the wood give praise before the Lord:
@c    because he is come to judge the earth.

@c    16:34. Give ye glory to the Lord, for he is good:  for his mercy
@c    endureth for ever.

@c    16:35. And say ye:  Save us, O God our savior:  and gather us together,
@c    and deliver us from the nations, that we may give glory to thy holy
@c    name, and may rejoice in singing thy praises.

@c    16:36. Blessed be the Lord the God of Israel from eternity to eternity:
@c    and let all the people say Amen, and a hymn to God.

@c    16:37. So he left there before the ark of the covenant of the Lord,
@c    Asaph and his brethren to minister in the presence of the ark
@c    continually day by day, and in their courses.

@c    16:38. And Obededom, with his brethren sixty-eight:  and Obededom the
@c    son of Idithun, and Hosa he appointed to be porters.

@c    16:39. And Sadoc the priest, and his brethren priests, before the
@c    tabernacle of the Lord in the high place, which was in Gabaon.

@c    16:40. That they should offer holocausts to the Lord upon the altar of
@c    holocausts continually, morning and evening, according to all that is
@c    written in the law of the Lord, which he commanded Israel.

@c    16:41. And after him Heman, and Idithun, and the rest that were chosen,
@c    every one by his name to give praise to the Lord:  because his mercy
@c    endureth for ever.

@c    16:42. And Heman and Idithun sounded the trumpet, and played on the
@c    cymbals, and all kinds of musical instruments to sing praises to God:
@c    and the sons of Idithun he made porters.

@c    16:43. And all the people returned to their houses:  and David to bless
@c    also his own house.



@c    1 Paralipomenon Chapter 17


@c    David's purpose to build a temple, is rewarded by most ample promises:
@c    David's thanksgiving.

@c    17:1. Now when David was dwelling in his house, he said to Nathan the
@c    prophet:  Behold I dwell in a house of cedar:  and the ark of the
@c    covenant of the Lord is under skins.

@c    17:2. And Nathan said to David:  Do all that is in thy heart:  for God is
@c    with thee.

@c    17:3. Now that night the word of God came to Nathan, saying:

@c    17:4. Go, and speak to David my servant:  Thus saith the Lord:  Thou
@c    shalt not build me a house to dwell in.

@c    17:5. For I have not remained in a house from the time that I brought
@c    up Israel, to this day:  but I have been always changing places in a
@c    tabernacle, and in a tent,

@c    17:6. Abiding with all Israel.  Did I ever speak to any one, of all the
@c    judges of Israel whom I charged to feed my people, saying:  Why have you
@c    not built me a house of cedar?

@c    17:7. Now therefore thus shalt thou say to my servant David:  Thus saith
@c    the Lord of hosts:  I took thee from the pastures, from following the
@c    flock, that thou shouldst be ruler of my people Israel.

@c    17:8. And I have been with thee whithersoever thou hast gone:  and have
@c    slain all thy enemies before thee, and have made thee a name like that
@c    of one of the great ones that are renowned in the earth.

@c    17:9. And I have given a place my people Israel:  they shall be planted,
@c    and shall dwell therein, and shall be moved no more, neither shall the
@c    children of iniquity waste them, as at the beginning,

@c    17:10. Since the days that I gave judges to my people Israel, and have
@c    humbled all thy enemies.  And I declare to thee, that the Lord will
@c    build thee a house.

@c    17:11. And when thou shalt have ended thy days to go to thy fathers, I
@c    will raise up thy seed after thee, which shall be of thy sons:  and I
@c    will establish his kingdom.

@c    17:12. He shall build me a house, and I will establish his throne for
@c    ever.

@c    17:13. I will be to him a father, and he shall be to me a son:  and I
@c    will not take my mercy away from him, as I took it from him that was
@c    before thee.

@c    17:14. But I will settle him in my house, and in my kingdom for ever:
@c    and his throne shall be most firm for ever.

@c    17:15. According to all these words, and according to all this vision,
@c    so did Nathan speak to David.

@c    17:16. And king David came and sat before the Lord, and said:  Who am I,
@c    O Lord God, and what is my house, that thou shouldst give such things
@c    to me?

@c    17:17. But even this hath seemed little in thy sight, and therefore
@c    thou hast also spoken concerning the house of thy servant for the time
@c    to come:  and hast made me remarkable above all men, O Lord God.

@c    17:18. What can David add more, seeing thou hast thus glorified thy
@c    servant, and known him?

@c    17:19. O Lord, for thy servant's sake, according to thy own heart, thou
@c    hast shewn all this magnificence, and wouldst have all the great things
@c    to be known.

@c    17:20. O Lord there is none like thee:  and here is no other God beside
@c    thee, of all whom we have heard of with our ears.

@c    17:21. For what other nation is there upon earth like thy people
@c    Israel, whom God went to deliver, and make a people for himself, and by
@c    his greatness and terrors cast out nations before their face whom he
@c    had delivered out of Egypt?

@c    17:22. And thou hast made thy people Israel to be thy own people for
@c    ever, and thou, O Lord, art become their God.

@c    17:23. Now therefore, O Lord, let the word which thou hast spoken to
@c    thy servant, and concerning his house, be established for ever, and do
@c    as thou hast said.

@c    17:24. And let thy name remain and be magnified for ever:  and let it be
@c    said:  The Lord of hosts is God of Israel, and the house of David his
@c    servant remaineth before him.

@c    17:25. For thou, O Lord my God, hast revealed to the ear of thy
@c    servant, that thou wilt build him a house:  and therefore thy servant
@c    hath found confidence to pray before thee.

@c    17:26. And now O Lord, thou art God:  and thou hast promised to thy
@c    servant such great benefits.

@c    17:27. And thou hast begun to bless the house of thy servant, that it
@c    may be always before thee:  for seeing thou blessest it, O Lord, it
@c    shall be blessed for ever.



@c    1 Paralipomenon Chapter 18


@c    David's victories.  His chief officers.

@c    18:1. And it came to pass after this, that David defeated the
@c    Philistines, and humbled them, and took away Geth, and her daughters
@c    out of the hands of the Philistines,

@c    18:2. And he defeated Moab, and the Moabites were made David's
@c    servants, and brought him gifts.

@c    18:3. At that time David defeated also Adarezer king of Soba of the
@c    land of Hemath, when he went to extend his dominions as far as the
@c    river Euphrates.

@c    18:4. And David took from him a thousand chariots, and seven thousand
@c    horsemen, and twenty thousand footmen, and he houghed all the chariot
@c    horses, only a hundred chariots, which he reserved for himself.

@c    18:5. And the Syrians of Damascus came also to help Adarezer king of
@c    Soba:  and David slew of them likewise two and twenty thousand men.

@c    18:6. And he put a garrison in Damascus, that Syria also should serve
@c    him, and bring gifts.  And the Lord assisted him in all things to which
@c    he went.

@c    18:7. And David took the golden quivers which the servants of Adarezer
@c    had, and he brought them to Jerusalem.

@c    18:8. Likewise out of Thebath and Chun, cities of Adarezer, he brought
@c    very much brass, of which Solomon made the brazen sea, and the pillars,
@c    and the vessels of brass.

@c    18:9. Now when Thou king of Hemath heard that David had defeated all
@c    the army of Adarezer king of Soba,

@c    18:10. He sent Adoram his son to king David to desire peace of him, and
@c    to congratulate him that he had defeated and overthrown Adarezer:  for
@c    Thou was an enemy to Adarezer.

@c    18:11. And all the vessels of gold, and silver and brass king David
@c    consecrated to the Lord, with the silver and gold which he had taken
@c    from all the nations, as well from Edom, and from Moab, and from the
@c    sons of Ammon, as from the Philistines, and from Amalec.

@c    18:12. And Abisai the son of Sarvia slew of the Edomites in the vale of
@c    the saltpits, eighteen thousand:

@c    18:13. And he put a garrison in Edom, that Edom should serve David:  and
@c    the Lord preserved David in all things to which he went.

@c    18:14. So David reigned over all Israel, and executed judgment and
@c    justice among all his people.

@c    18:15. And Joab the son of Sarvia was over the army, and Josaphat the
@c    son of Ahilud recorder.

@c    18:16. And Sadoc the son of Achitob, and Achimelech the son of
@c    Abiathar, were the priests:  and Susa, scribe.

@c    18:17. And Banaias the son of Joiada was over the bands of the Cerethi,
@c    and the Phelethi:  and the sons of David were chief about the king.



@c    1 Paralipomenon Chapter 19


@c    The Ammonites abuse David's ambassadors:  both they and their
@c    confederates are overthrown.

@c    19:1. Now it came to pass that Naas the king of the children of Ammon
@c    died, and his son reigned in his stead.

@c    19:2. And David said:  I will shew kindness to Hanon the son of Naas:
@c    for his father did a favour tome.  And David sent messengers to comfort
@c    him upon the death of his father.  But when they were come into the land
@c    of the children of Ammon, to comfort Hanon,

@c    19:3. The princes of the children of Ammon said to Hanon:  Thou thinkest
@c    perhaps that David to do honour to thy father hath sent comforters to
@c    thee:  and thou dost not take notice, that his servants are come to thee
@c    to consider, and search, and spy out thy land.

@c    19:4. Wherefore Hanon shaved the heads and beards of the servants of
@c    David, and cut away their garments from the buttocks to the feet, and
@c    sent them away.

@c    19:5. And when they were gone, they sent word to David, who sent to
@c    meet them (for they had suffered a great affront) and ordered them to
@c    stay at Jericho till their beards grew and then to return.

@c    19:6. And when the children of Ammon saw that they had done an injury
@c    to David, Hanon and the rest of the people sent a thousand talents of
@c    silver, to hire them chariots and horsemen out of Mesopotamia and out
@c    of Syria Maacha, and out of Soba.

@c    19:7. And they hired two and thirty thousand chariots, and the king of
@c    Maacha, with his people.  And they came and camped over against Medaba.
@c    And the children of Ammon gathered themselves together out of their
@c    cities, and came to battle.

@c    19:8. And when David heard of it, he sent Joab, and all the army of
@c    valiant men:

@c    19:9. And the children of Ammon came out and put their army in array
@c    before the gate of the city:  and the kings, that were come to their
@c    aid, stood apart in the field.

@c    19:10. Wherefore Joab understanding that the battle was set against him
@c    before and behind, chose out the bravest men of all Israel, and marched
@c    against the Syrians,

@c    19:11. And the rest of the people he delivered into the hand of Abisai
@c    his brother, and they went against the children of Ammon.

@c    19:12. And he said:  If the Syrians be too strong for me, then thou
@c    shalt help me:  but if the children of Ammon be too strong for thee, I
@c    will help thee.

@c    19:13. Be of good courage and let us behave ourselves manfully for our
@c    people, and for the cities of our God:  and the Lord will do that which
@c    is good in his sight.

@c    19:14. So Joab and the people that were with him, went against the
@c    Syrians to the battle:  and he put them to flight.

@c    19:15. And the children of Ammon seeing that the Syrians were fled,
@c    they likewise fled from Abisai his brother, and went into the city:  and
@c    Joab also returned to Jerusalem.

@c    19:16. But the Syrians seeing that they had fallen before Israel, sent
@c    messengers, and brought to them the Syrians that were beyond the river:
@c    and Sophach, general of the army of Adarezer, was their leader.

@c    19:17. And it was told David, and he gathered together all Israel, and
@c    passed the Jordan, and came upon them, and put his army in array
@c    against them, and they fought with him.

@c    19:18. But the Syrian fled before Israel:  and David slew of the Syrians
@c    seven thousand chariots, and forty thousand footmen, and Sophach the
@c    general of the army.

@c    Seven thousand chariots. . .That is, of men who fought in chariots.

@c    19:19. And when the servants of Adarezer saw themselves overcome by
@c    Israel, they went over to David, and served him:  and Syria would not
@c    help the children of Ammon any more.



@c    1 Paralipomenon Chapter 20


@c    Rabba is taken.  Other victories over the Philistines.

@c    20:1. And it came to pass after the course of a year, at the time that
@c    kings go out to battle, Joab gathered together an army and the strength
@c    of the troops, and wasted the land of the children of Ammon:  and went
@c    and besieged Rabba.  But David stayed at Jerusalem, when Joab smote
@c    Rabba, and destroyed it.

@c    20:2. And David took the crown of Melchom from his head, and found in
@c    it a talent weight of gold, and most precious stones, and he made
@c    himself a diadem of it:  he took also the spoils of the city which were
@c    very great.

@c    20:3. And the people that were therein he brought out:  and made
@c    harrows, and sleds, and chariots of iron to go over them, so that they
@c    were cut and bruised to pieces:  in this manner David dealt with all the
@c    cities of the children of Ammon:  and he returned with all his people to
@c    Jerusalem.

@c    20:4. After this there arose a war at Gazer against the Philistines:  in
@c    which Sabachai the Husathite slew Saphai of the race of Raphaim, and
@c    humbled them.

@c    20:5. Another battle also was fought against the Philistines, in which
@c    Adeodatus the son of Saltus a Bethlehemite slew the brother of Goliath
@c    the Gethite, the staff of whose spear was like a weaver's beam.

@c    20:6. There was another battle also in Geth, in which there was a man
@c    of great stature, whose fingers and toes were four and twenty, six on
@c    each hand and foot:  who also was born of the stock of Rapha.

@c    20:7. He reviled Israel:  but Jonathan the son of Samaa the brother of
@c    David slew him.  These were the sons of Rapha in Geth, who fell by the
@c    hand of David and his servants.



@c    1 Paralipomenon Chapter 21


@c    David's sin in numbering the people is punished by a pestilence:  which
@c    ceaseth upon his offering sacrifice in the thrashingfloor of Ornan.

@c    21:1. And Satan rose up against Israel:  and moved David to number
@c    Israel.

@c    21:2. And David said to Joab, and to the rulers of the people:  Go, and
@c    number Israel from Bersabee even to Dan, and bring me the number of
@c    them that I may know it.

@c    21:3. And Joab answered:  The Lord make his people a hundred times more
@c    than they are:  but, my lord the king, are they not all thy servants:
@c    why doth my lord seek this thing, which may be imputed as a sin to
@c    Israel?

@c    21:4. But the king's word rather prevailed:  and Joab departed, and went
@c    through all Israel:  and returned to Jerusalem.

@c    21:5. And he gave David the number of them, whom he had surveyed:  and
@c    all the number of Israel was found to be eleven hundred thousand men
@c    that drew the sword:  and of Juda four hundred and seventy thousand
@c    fighting men.

@c    The number, etc. . .The difference of the numbers here and 2 Kings 24.
@c    is to be accounted for, by supposing the greater number to be that
@c    which was really found, and the lesser to be that which Joab gave in.

@c    21:6. But Levi and Benjamin he did not number:  for Joab unwillingly
@c    executed the king's orders.

@c    21:7. And God was displeased with this thing that was commanded:  and he
@c    struck Israel.

@c    21:8. And David said to God:  I have sinned exceedingly in doing this:  I
@c    beseech thee take away the iniquity of thy servant, for I have done
@c    foolishly.

@c    21:9. And the Lord spoke to Gad the seer of David, saying:

@c    21:10. Go, and speak to David, and tell him:  Thus saith the Lord:  I
@c    give thee the choice of three things:  choose one which thou wilt, and I
@c    will do it to thee.

@c    21:11. And when Gad was come to David, he said to him:  Thus saith the
@c    Lord:  choose which thou wilt:

@c    21:12. Either three years famine:  or three months to flee from thy
@c    enemies, and not to be able to escape their sword:  or three days to
@c    have the sword of the Lord, and pestilence in the land, and the angel
@c    of the Lord destroying in all the coasts of Israel:  now therefore see
@c    what I shall answer him who sent me.

@c    Three years famine. . .Which joined with the three foregoing years of
@c    famine mentioned, 2 Kings 21. and the seventh year of the land's
@c    resting, would make up the seven years proposed by the prophet, 2 Kings
@c    24.13.

@c    21:13. And David said to Gad:  I am on every side in a great strait:  but
@c    it is better for me to fall into the hands of the Lord, for his mercies
@c    are many, than into the hands of men.

@c    21:14. So the Lord sent a pestilence upon Israel.  And there fell of
@c    Israel seventy thousand men.

@c    21:15. And he sent an angel to Jerusalem, to strike it:  and as he was
@c    striking it, the Lord beheld, and took pity for the greatness of the
@c    evil:  and said to the angel that destroyed:  It is enough, now stop thy
@c    hand.  And the angel of the Lord stood by the thrashingfloor of Ornan
@c    the Jebusite.

@c    Ornan. . .Otherwise Areuna.

@c    21:16. And David lifting up his eyes, saw the angel of the Lord
@c    standing between heaven and earth, with a drawn sword in his hand,
@c    turned against Jerusalem:  and both he and the ancients clothed in
@c    haircloth, fell down flat on the ground.

@c    21:17. And David said to God:  Am not I he that commanded the people to
@c    be numbered?  It is I that have sinned:  it is I that have done the evil:
@c    but as for this flock, what hath it deserved?  O Lord my God, let thy
@c    hand be turned, I beseech thee, upon me, and upon my father's house:
@c    and let not thy people be destroyed.

@c    21:18. And the angel of the Lord commanded Gad to tell David, to go up,
@c    and build an altar to the Lord God in the thrashingfloor of Ornan the
@c    Jebusite.

@c    21:19. And David went up, according to the word of Gad, which he spoke
@c    to him in the name of the Lord.

@c    21:20. Now when Ornan looked up, and saw the angel, he and his four
@c    sons hid themselves:  for at that time he was thrashing wheat in the
@c    floor.

@c    21:21. And as David was coming to Ornan, Ornan saw him, and went out of
@c    the thrashingfloor to meet him, and bowed down to him with his face to
@c    the ground.

@c    21:22. And David said to him:  Give me this place of thy thrashingfloor,
@c    that I may build therein an altar to the Lord:  but thou shalt take of
@c    me as much money as it is worth, that the plague may cease from the
@c    people.

@c    21:23. And Ornan said to David:  Take it, and let my lord the king do
@c    all that pleaseth him:  and moreover the oxen also I give for a
@c    holocaust, and the drays for wood, and the wheat for the sacrifice:  I
@c    will give it all willingly.

@c    21:24. And king David said to him:  It shall not be so, but I will give
@c    thee money as much as it is worth:  for I must not take it from thee,
@c    and so offer to the Lord holocausts free cost.

@c    21:25. So David gave to Ornan for the place, six hundred sicles of gold
@c    of just weight.

@c    Six hundred sicles, etc. . .This was the price of the whole place, on
@c    which the temple was afterwards built; but the price of the oxen was
@c    fifty sicles of silver.  2 Kings 24.24.

@c    21:26. And he built there an altar to the Lord:  and he offered
@c    holocausts, and peace offerings, and he called upon the Lord, and he
@c    heard him by sending fire from heaven upon the altar of the holocaust.

@c    21:27. And the Lord commanded the angel:  and he put up his sword again
@c    into the sheath.

@c    21:28. And David seeing that the Lord had heard him in the
@c    thrashingfloor of Ornan the Jebusite, forthwith offered victims there.

@c    21:29. But the tabernacle of the Lord, which Moses made in the desert,
@c    and the altar of holocausts, was at that time in the high place of
@c    Gabaon.

@c    21:30. And David could not go to the altar there to pray to God:  for he
@c    was seized with an exceeding great fear, seeing the sword of the angel
@c    of the Lord.



@c    1 Paralipomenon Chapter 22


@c    David having prepared all necessaries, chargeth Solomon to build the
@c    temple and the princes to assist him.

@c    22:1. Then David said:  This is the house of God, And this is the altar
@c    for the holocaust of Israel.

@c    22:2. And he commanded to gather together all the proselytes of the
@c    land of Israel, and out of them he appointed stonecutters to hew stones
@c    and polish them, to build the house of God.

@c    22:3. And David prepared in abundance iron for the nails of the gates,
@c    and for the closures and joinings:  and of brass an immense weight.

@c    22:4. And the cedar trees were without number, which the Sidonians, and
@c    Tyrians brought to David.

@c    22:5. And David said:  Solomon my son is very young and tender, and the
@c    house which I would have to be built to the Lord, must be such as to be
@c    renowned in all countries:  therefore I will prepare him necessaries.
@c    And therefore before his death he prepared all the charges.

@c    22:6. And he called for Solomon his son:  and commanded him to build a
@c    house to the Lord the God of Israel.

@c    22:7. And David said to Solomon:  My son, it was my desire to have built
@c    a house to the name of the Lord my God.

@c    22:8. But the word of the Lord came to me, saying:  Thou hast shed much
@c    blood, and fought many battles, so thou cannot not build house to my
@c    name, after shedding so much blood before me:

@c    22:9. The son, that shall be born to thee, shall be a most quiet man:
@c    for I will make him rest from all his enemies round about:  and
@c    therefore he shall be called Peaceable:  and I will give peace and
@c    quietness to Israel all his days.

@c    22:10. He shall build a house to my name, and he shall be a son to me,
@c    and I will be a father to him:  and I will establish the throne of his
@c    kingdom over Israel for ever.

@c    22:11. Now then, my son, the Lord be with thee, and do thou prosper,
@c    and build the house to the Lord thy God, as he hath spoken of thee.

@c    22:12. The Lord also give thee wisdom and understanding, that thou
@c    mayest be able to rule Israel, and to keep the law of the Lord thy God.

@c    22:13. For then thou shalt be able to prosper, if thou keep the
@c    commandments, and judgments, which the Lord commanded Moses to teach
@c    Israel:  take courage and act manfully, fear not, nor be dismayed.

@c    22:14. Behold I in my poverty have prepared the charges of the house of
@c    the Lord, of gold a hundred thousand talents, and of silver a million
@c    of talents:  but of brass, and of iron there is no weight, for the
@c    abundance surpasseth all account:  timber also and stones I have
@c    prepared for all the charges.

@c    22:15. Thou hast also workmen in abundance, hewers of stones, and
@c    masons, and carpenters, and of all trades the most skilful in their
@c    work,

@c    22:16. In gold, and in silver, and in brass, and in iron, whereof there
@c    is no number.  Arise then, and be doing, and the Lord will be with thee.

@c    22:17. David also charged all the princes of Israel, to help Solomon
@c    his son,

@c    22:18. Saying:  You see, that the Lord your God is with you, and hath
@c    given you rest round about, and hath delivered all your enemies into
@c    your hands, and the land is subdued before the Lord, and before his
@c    people.

@c    22:19. Give therefore your hearts and your souls, to seek the Lord your
@c    God and arise, and build a sanctuary to the Lord God, that the ark of
@c    the covenant of the Lord, and the vessels consecrated to the Lord, may
@c    be brought into the house, which is built to the name of the Lord.



@c    1 Paralipomenon Chapter 23


@c    David appointeth Solomon king.  The distribution of the Levites and
@c    their offices.

@c    23:1. David being old and full of days, made Solomon his son king over
@c    Israel.

@c    23:2. And he gathered together all the princes of Israel, and the
@c    priests and Levites.

@c    23:3. And the Levites were numbered from the age of thirty years, and
@c    upwards:  and there were found of them thirty-eight thousand men.

@c    23:4. Of these twenty-four thousand were chosen, and distributed unto
@c    the ministry of the house of the Lord:  and six thousand were the
@c    overseers and judges.

@c    23:5. Moreover four thousand were porters:  and as many singers singing
@c    to the Lord with the instruments, which he had made to sing with.

@c    23:6. And David distributed them into courses by the families of the
@c    sons of Levi, to wit, of Gerson, and of Caath, and of Merari.

@c    23:7. The sons of Gerson were Leedan and Semei.

@c    23:8. The sons of Leedan:  the chief Jahiel, and Zethan, and Joel,
@c    three.

@c    23:9. The sons of Semei:  Salomith, and Hosiel, and Aran, three:  these
@c    were the heads of the families of Leedan.

@c    23:10. And the sons of Semei were Leheth, and Ziza, and Jaus, and
@c    Baria:  these were the sons of Semei, four.

@c    23:11. And Leheth was the first, Ziza the second:  but Jaus and Baria
@c    had not many children, and therefore they were counted in one family,
@c    and in one house.

@c    23:12. The sons of Caath were Amram, and Isaar, Hebron, and Oziel,
@c    four.

@c    23:13. The sons of Amram, Aaron, and Moses.  And Aaron was separated to
@c    minister in the holy of holies, he and his sons for ever, and to burn
@c    incense before the Lord, according to his ceremonies, and to bless his
@c    name for ever.

@c    23:14. The sons also of Moses, the man of God, were numbered in the
@c    tribe of Levi.

@c    23:15. The sons of Moses were Gersom and Eliezer:

@c    23:16. The sons of Gersom:  Subuel the first.

@c    23:17. And the sons of Eliezer were:  Rohobia the first:  and Eliezer had
@c    no more sons.  But the sons of Rohobia were multiplied exceedingly.

@c    23:18. The sons of Isaar:  Salomith the first.

@c    23:19. The sons of Hebron:  Jeriau the first, Amarias the second,
@c    Jahaziel the third, Jecmaam the fourth.

@c    23:20. The sons of Oziel:  Micha the first, Jesia the second.

@c    23:21. The sons of Merari:  Moholi, and Musi.  The sons of Moholi:
@c    Eleazar and Cis.

@c    23:22. And Eleazar died, and had no sons but daughters:  and the sons of
@c    Cis their brethren took them.

@c    23:23. The sons of Musi:  Moholi, and Eder, and Jerimoth, three.

@c    23:24. These are the sons of Levi in their kindreds and families,
@c    princes by their courses, and the number of every head that did the
@c    works of the ministry of the house of the Lord from twenty years old
@c    and upward.

@c    23:25. For David said:  The Lord the God of Israel hath given rest to
@c    his people, and a habitation in Jerusalem for ever.

@c    23:26. And it shall not be the office of the Levites to carry any more
@c    the tabernacle, and all the vessels for the service thereof.

@c    23:27. So according to the last precepts of David, the sons of Levi are
@c    to be numbered from twenty years old and upward.

@c    23:28. And they are to be under the hand of the sons of Aaron for the
@c    service of the house of the Lord, in the porches, and in the chambers,
@c    and in the place of purification, and in the sanctuary, and in all the
@c    works of the ministry of the temple of the Lord.

@c    23:29. And the priests have the charge of the loaves of proposition,
@c    and of the sacrifice of fine flour, and of the unleavened cakes, and of
@c    the fryingpan, and of the roasting, and of every weight and measure.

@c    23:30. And the Levites are to stand in the morning to give thanks, and
@c    to sing praises to the Lord:  and in like manner in the evening,

@c    23:31. As well in the oblation of the holocausts of the Lord, as in the
@c    sabbaths and in the new moons, and the rest of the solemnities,
@c    according to the number and ceremonies prescribed for every thing,
@c    continually before the Lord.

@c    23:32. And let them keep the observances of the tabernacle of the
@c    covenant, and the ceremonies of the sanctuary, and the charge of the
@c    sons of Aaron their brethren, that they may minister in the house of
@c    the Lord.



@c    1 Paralipomenon Chapter 24


@c    The divisions of the priests into four and twenty courses, to serve in
@c    the temple:  the chiefs of the Levites.

@c    24:1. Now these were the divisions of the sons of Aaron:  The sons of
@c    Aaron:  Nadab, and Abiu, and Eleazar, and Ithamar.

@c    24:2. But Nadab and Abiu died before their father, and had no children:
@c    so Eleazar, and Ithamar did the office of the priesthood.

@c    24:3. And David distributed them, that is, Sadoc of the sons of
@c    Eleazar, and Ahimelech of the sons of Ithamar, according to their
@c    courses and ministry.

@c    24:4. And there were found many more of the sons of Eleazar among the
@c    principal men, than of the sons of Ithamar.  And he divided them so,
@c    that there were of the sons of Eleazar, sixteen chief men by their
@c    families:  and of the sons of Ithamar eight by their families and
@c    houses.

@c    24:5. And he divided both the families one with the other by lot:  for
@c    there were princes of the sanctuary, and princes of God, both of the
@c    sons of Eleazar, and of the sons of Ithamar.

@c    24:6. And Semeias the son of Nathanael the scribe a Levite, wrote them
@c    down before the king and the princes, and Sadoc the priest, and
@c    Ahimelech the son of Abiathar, and the princes also of the priestly and
@c    Levitical families:  one house, which was over the rest, of Eleazar:  and
@c    another house, which had the rest under it, of Ithamar.

@c    24:7. Now the first lot came forth to Joiarib, the second to Jedei,

@c    24:8. The third to Harim, the fourth to Seorim,

@c    24:9. The fifth to Melchia, the sixth to Maiman,

@c    24:10. The seventh to Accos, the eighth to Abia,

@c    24:11. The ninth to Jesua, the tenth to Sechenia,

@c    24:12. The eleventh to Eliasib, the twelfth to Jacim,

@c    24:13. The thirteenth to Hoppha, the fourteenth to Isbaab,

@c    24:14. The fifteenth to Belga, the sixteenth to Emmer,

@c    24:15. The seventeenth to Hezir, the eighteenth to Aphses,

@c    24:16. The nineteenth to Pheteia, the twentieth to Hezechiel,

@c    24:17. The one and twentieth to Jachin, the two and twentieth to Gamul,

@c    24:18. The three and twentieth to Dalaiau, the four and twentieth to
@c    Maaziau.

@c    24:19. These are their courses according to their ministries, to come
@c    into the house of the Lord, and according to their manner under the
@c    hand of Aaron their father:  as the Lord the God of Israel had
@c    commanded.

@c    24:20. Now of the rest of the sons of Levi, there was of the sons of
@c    Amram, Subael:  and of the sons of Subael, Jehedeia.

@c    24:21. Also of the sons of Rohobia the chief Jesias.

@c    24:22. And the son of Isaar Salemoth, and the son of Salemoth Jahath:

@c    24:23. And his son Jeriau the first, Amarias the second, Jahaziel the
@c    third, Jecmaan the fourth.

@c    24:24. The son of Oziel, Micha:  the son of Micha, Samir.

@c    24:25. The brother of Micha, Jesia:  and the son of Jesia, Zacharias.

@c    24:26. The sons of Merari:  Moholi and Musi:  the son of Oziau:  Benno.

@c    24:27. The son also of Merari Oziau, and Soam, and Zacchur, and Hebri.

@c    24:28. And the son of Moholi:  Eleazar, who had no sons.

@c    24:29. And the son of Cis, Jeramael.

@c    24:30. The sons of Musi:  Moholi, Eder, and Jerimoth.  These are the sons
@c    of Levi according to the houses of their families.

@c    24:31. And they also cast lots over against their brethren the sons of
@c    Aaron before David the king, and Sadoc, and Ahimelech, and the princes
@c    of the priestly and Levitical families, both the elder and the younger.
@c    The lot divided all equally.



@c    1 Paralipomenon Chapter 25


@c    The number and divisions of the musicians.

@c    25:1. Moreover David and the chief officers of the army separated for
@c    the ministry the sons of Asaph, and of Heman, and of Idithun:  to
@c    prophesy with harps, and with psalteries, and with cymbals according to
@c    their number serving in their appointed office.

@c    25:2. Of the sons of Asaph:  Zacchur, and Joseph, and Nathania, and
@c    Asarela, sons of Asaph:  under the hand of Asaph prophesying near the
@c    king.

@c    25:3. And of Idithun:  the sons of Idithun, Godolias, Sori, Jeseias, and
@c    Hasabias, and Mathathias, under the hand of their father Idithun, who
@c    prophesied with a harp to give thanks and to praise the Lord.

@c    25:4. Of Heman also:  the sons of Heman, Bocciau, Mathaniau, Oziel,
@c    Subuel, and Jerimoth, Hananias, Hanani, Eliatha, Geddelthi, and
@c    Romemthiezer, and Jesbacassa, Mellothi, Othir, Mahazioth:

@c    25:5. All these were the sons of Heman the seer of the king in the
@c    words of God, to lift up the horn:  and God gave to Heman fourteen sons
@c    and three daughters.

@c    25:6. All these under their father's hand were distributed to sing in
@c    the temple of the Lord, with cymbals, and psalteries and harps, for the
@c    service of the house of the Lord near the king:  to wit, Asaph, and
@c    Idithun, and Heman.

@c    25:7. And the number of them with their brethren, that taught the song
@c    of the Lord, all the teachers, were two hundred and eighty-eight.

@c    25:8. And they cast lots by their courses, the elder equally with the
@c    younger, the learned and the unlearned together.

@c    25:9. And the first lot came forth to Joseph, who was of Asaph.  The
@c    second to Godolias, to him and his sons, and his brethren twelve.

@c    25:10. The third to Zachur, to his sons and his brethren twelve.

@c    25:11. The fourth to Isari, to his sons and his brethren twelve.

@c    25:12. The fifth to Nathania, to his sons and his brethren twelve.

@c    25:13. The sixth to Bocciau, to his sons and his brethren twelve.

@c    25:14. The seventh to Isreela, to his sons and his brethren twelve.

@c    25:15. The eighth to Jesaia, to his sons and his brethren twelve.

@c    25:16. The ninth to Mathanaias, to his sons and his brethren twelve.

@c    25:17. The tenth to Semeias, to his sons and his brethren twelve.

@c    25:18. The eleventh to Azareel, to his sons and his brethren twelve.

@c    25:19. The twelfth to Hasabia, to his sons and his brethren twelve.

@c    25:20. The thirteenth to Subael, to his sons and his brethren twelve.

@c    25:21. The fourteenth to Mathathias, to his sons and his brethren
@c    twelve.

@c    25:22. The fifteenth to Jerimoth, to his sons and his brethren twelve.

@c    25:23. The sixteenth to Hananias, to his sons and his brethren twelve.

@c    25:24. The seventeenth to Jesbacassa, to his sons and his brethren
@c    twelve.

@c    25:25. The eighteenth to Hanani, to his sons and his brethren twelve.

@c    25:26. The nineteenth to Mellothi, to his sons and his brethren twelve.

@c    25:27. The twentieth to Eliatha, to his sons and his brethren twelve.

@c    25:28. The one and twentieth to Othir, to his sons and his brethren
@c    twelve.

@c    25:29. The two and twentieth to Geddelthi, to his sons and his brethren
@c    twelve.

@c    25:30. The three and twentieth to Mahazioth, to his sons and his
@c    brethren twelve.

@c    25:31. The four and twentieth to Romemthiezer, to his sons and his
@c    brethren twelve.



@c    1 Paralipomenon Chapter 26


@c    The divisions of the porters.  Offices of other Levites.

@c    26:1. And the divisions of the porters:  of the Corites Meselemia, the
@c    son of Core, of the sons of Asaph.

@c    26:2. The sons of Meselemia:  Zacharias the firstborn, Jadihel the
@c    second, Zabadias the third, Jathanael the fourth,

@c    26:3. Elam the fifth, Johanan the sixth, Elioenai the seventh.

@c    26:4. And the sons of Obededom, Semeias the firstborn, Jozabad the
@c    second, Joaha the third, Sachar the fourth, Nathanael the fifth,

@c    26:5. Ammiel the sixth, Issachar the seventh, Phollathi the eighth:  for
@c    the Lord had blessed him.

@c    26:6. And to Semei his son were born sons, heads of their families:  for
@c    they were men of great valour.

@c    26:7. The sons then of Semeias were Othni, and Raphael, and Obed,
@c    Elizabad, and his brethren most valiant men:  and Eliu, and Samachias.

@c    26:8. All these of the sons of Obededom:  they, and their sons, and
@c    their brethren most able men for service, sixty-two of Obededom.

@c    26:9. And the sons of Meselemia, and their brethren strong men, were
@c    eighteen.

@c    26:10. And of Hosa, that is, of the sons of Merari:  Semri the chief,
@c    (for he had not a firstborn, and therefore his father made him chief.)

@c    He had not a firstborn. . .That is, his firstborn was either dead or not
@c    fit to be chief; and therefore he made Semri the chief.

@c    26:11. Helcias the second, Tabelias the third, Zacharias the fourth:
@c    all these the sons, and the brethren of Hosa, were thirteen.

@c    26:12. Among these were the divisions of the porters, so that the
@c    chiefs of the wards, as well as their brethren, always ministered in
@c    the house of the Lord.

@c    26:13. And they cast lots equally, both little and great, by their
@c    families for every one of the gates.

@c    26:14. And the lot of the east fell to Selemias.  But to his son
@c    Zacharias, a very wise and learned man, the north gate fell by lot.

@c    26:15. And to Obededom and his sons that towards the south:  in which
@c    part of the house was the council of the ancients.

@c    26:16. To Sephim, and Hosa towards the west, by the gate which leadeth
@c    to the way of the ascent:  ward against ward.

@c    26:17. Now towards the east were six Levites:  and towards the north
@c    four a day:  and towards the south likewise four a day:  and where the
@c    council was, two and two.

@c    26:18. In the cells also of the porters toward the west four in the
@c    way:  and two at every cell.

@c    26:19. These are the divisions of the porters of the sons of Core, and
@c    of Merari.

@c    26:20. Now Achias was over the treasures of the house of God, and the
@c    holy vessels.

@c    Holy vessels. . .Or vessels of the holy places, or of things holy.  Vasa
@c    sanctorum.

@c    26:21. The sons of Ledan, the sons of Gersonni:  of Ledan were heads of
@c    the families, of Ledan, and Gersonni, Jehieli.

@c    26:22. The sons of Jehieli:  Zathan and Joel, his brethren over the
@c    treasures of the house of the Lord,

@c    26:23. With the Amramites, and Isaarites, and Hebronites, and
@c    Ozielites.

@c    26:24. And Subael the son of Gersom, the son of Moses, was chief over
@c    the treasures.

@c    26:25. His brethren also, Eliezer, whose son Rohobia, and his son
@c    Isaias, and his son Joram, and his son Zechri, and his son Selemith.

@c    26:26. Which Selemith and his brethren were over the treasures of the
@c    holy things, which king David, and the heads of families, and the
@c    captains over thousands and over hundreds, and the captains of the host
@c    had dedicated,

@c    26:27. Out of the wars, and the spoils won in battles, which they had
@c    consecrated to the building and furniture of the temple of the Lord.

@c    26:28. And all these things that Samuel the seer and Saul the son of
@c    Cis, and Abner the son of Ner, and Joab the son of Sarvia had
@c    sanctified:  and whosoever had sanctified those things, they were under
@c    the hand of Selemith and his brethren.

@c    26:29. But Chonenias and his sons were over the Isaarites, for the
@c    business abroad over Israel to teach them and judge them.

@c    26:30. And of the Hebronites Hasabias, and his brethren most able men,
@c    a thousand seven hundred had the charge over Israel beyond the Jordan
@c    westward, in all the works of the Lord, and for the service of the
@c    king.

@c    26:31. And the chief of the Hebronites was Jeria according to their
@c    families and kindreds.  In the fortieth year of the reign of David they
@c    were numbered, and there were found most valiant men in Jazer Galaad,

@c    26:32. And his brethren of stronger age, two thousand seven hundred
@c    chiefs of families.  And king David made them rulers over the Rubenites
@c    and the Gadites, and the half tribe of Manasses, for all the service of
@c    God, and the king.



@c    1 Paralipomenon Chapter 27


@c    The twelve captains for every month; the twelve princes of the tribes.
@c    David's several officers.

@c    27:1. Now the children of Israel according to their number, the heads
@c    of families, captains of thousands and of hundreds, and officers, that
@c    served the king according to their companies, who came in and went out
@c    every month in the year, under every chief were four and twenty
@c    thousand.

@c    27:2. Over the first company the first month Jesboam, the son of
@c    Zabdiel was chief, and under him were four and twenty thousand.

@c    27:3. Of the sons of Phares, the chief of all the captains in the host
@c    in the first month.

@c    27:4. The company of the second month was under Dudia, an Ahohite, and
@c    after him was another named Macelloth, who commanded a part of the army
@c    of four and twenty thousand.

@c    27:5. And the captain of the third company for the third month, was
@c    Banaias the son of Joiada the priest:  and in his division were four and
@c    twenty thousand.

@c    27:6. This is that Banaias the most valiant among the thirty, and above
@c    the thirty.  And Amizabad his son commanded his company.

@c    27:7. The fourth, for the fourth month, was Asahel the brother of Joab,
@c    and Zabadias his son after him:  and in his company were four and twenty
@c    thousand.

@c    27:8. The fifth captain for the fifth month, was Samaoth a Jezerite:
@c    and his company were four and twenty thousand.

@c    27:9. The sixth, for the sixth month, was Hira the son of Acces a
@c    Thecuite:  and in his company were four and twenty thousand.

@c    27:10. The seventh, for the seventh month, was Helles a Phallonite of
@c    the sons of Ephraim:  and in his company were four and twenty thousand.

@c    27:11. The eighth, for the eighth month, was Sobochai a Husathite of
@c    the race of Zarahi:  and in his company were four and twenty thousand.

@c    27:12. The ninth, for the ninth month, was Abiezer an Anathothite of
@c    the sons of Jemini, and in his company were four and twenty thousand.

@c    27:13. The tenth, for the tenth month, was Marai, who was a
@c    Netophathite of the race of Zarai:  and in his company were four and
@c    twenty thousand.

@c    27:14. The eleventh, for the eleventh month, was Banaias, a
@c    Pharathonite of the sons of Ephraim:  and in his company were four and
@c    twenty thousand.

@c    27:15. The twelfth, for the twelfth month, was Holdai a Netophathite,
@c    of the race of Gothoniel:  and in his company were four and twenty
@c    thousand.

@c    27:16. Now the chiefs over the tribes of Israel were these:  over the
@c    Rubenites, Eliezer the son of Zechri was ruler:  over the Simeonites,
@c    Saphatias the son of Maacha:

@c    27:17. Over the Levites, Hasabias the son of Camuel:  over the
@c    Aaronites, Sadoc:

@c    27:18. Over Juda, Eliu the brother of David over Issachar, Amri the son
@c    of Michael:

@c    27:19. Over the Zabulonites, Jesmaias the son of Adias:  over the
@c    Nephtalites, Jerimoth the son of Ozriel:

@c    27:20. Over the sons of Ephraim, Osee the son of Ozaziu:  over the half
@c    tribe of Manasses, Joel the son of Phadaia:

@c    27:21. And over the half tribe of Manasses in Galaad, Jaddo the son of
@c    Zacharias:  and over Benjamin, Jasiel the son of Abner.

@c    27:22. And over Dan, Ezrihel the son of Jeroham:  these were the princes
@c    of the children of Israel.

@c    27:23. But David would not number them from twenty years old and under:
@c    because the lord had said that he would multiply Israel like the stars
@c    of heaven.

@c    27:24. Joab the son of Sarvia began to number, but he finished not:
@c    because upon this there fell wrath upon Israel:  and therefore the
@c    number of them that were numbered, was not registered in the chronicles
@c    of king David.

@c    27:25. And over the king's treasures was Azmoth the son of Adiel:  and
@c    over those stores which were in the cities, and in the villages, and,
@c    in the castles, was Jonathan the son of Ozias.

@c    27:26. And over the tillage, and the husbandmen, who tilled the ground,
@c    was Ezri the son of Chelub:

@c    27:27. And over the dressers of the vine yards, was Semeias a
@c    Romathite:  and over the wine cellars, Zabdias an Aphonite.

@c    27:28. And over the oliveyards and the fig groves, which were in the
@c    plains, was Balanam a Gederite:  and over the oil cellars, Joas.

@c    27:29. And over the herds that fed in Saron, was Setrai a Saronite:  and
@c    over the oxen in the valleys, Saphat the son of Adli:

@c    27:30. And over the camels, Ubil an Ishmahelite and over the asses,
@c    Jadias a Meronathite:

@c    27:31. And over the sheep Jaziz an Agarene.  All these were the rulers
@c    of the substance of king David.

@c    27:32. And Jonathan David's uncle, a counsellor, a wise and learned
@c    man:  he and Jahiel the son of Hachamoni were with the king's sons.

@c    27:33. And Achitophel was the king's counsellor, and Chusai the
@c    Arachite, the king's friend.

@c    27:34. And after Achitophel was Joiada the son of Banaias, and
@c    Abiathar.  And the general of the king's army was Joab.



@c    1 Paralipomenon Chapter 28


@c    David's speech, in a solemn assembly:  his exhortation to Solomon.  He
@c    giveth him a pattern of the temple.

@c    28:1. And David assembled all the chief men of Israel, the princes of
@c    the tribes, and the captains of the companies, who waited on the king:
@c    and the captains over thousands, and over hundreds, and them who had
@c    the charge over the substance and possessions of the king, and his sons
@c    with the officers of the court, and the men of power, and all the
@c    bravest of the army at Jerusalem.

@c    28:2. And the king rising up, and standing said:  Hear me, my brethren
@c    and my people:  I had a thought to have built a house, in which the ark
@c    of the Lord, and the footstool of our God might rest:  and prepared all
@c    things for the building.

@c    28:3. And God said to me:  Thou shalt not build a house to my name:
@c    because thou art a man of war, and hast shed blood.

@c    28:4. But the Lord God of Israel chose me of all the house of my
@c    father, to be king over Israel for ever:  for of Juda he chose the
@c    princes:  and of the house of Juda, my father's house:  and among the
@c    sons of my father, it pleased him to choose me king over all Israel.

@c    28:5. And among my sons (for the Lord hath given me many sons) he hath
@c    chosen Solomon my son, to sit upon the throne of the kingdom of the
@c    Lord over Israel.

@c    28:6. And he said to me:  Solomon thy son shall build my house, and my
@c    courts:  for I have chosen him to be my son, and I will be a father to
@c    him.

@c    28:7. And I will establish his kingdom for ever, it he continue to keep
@c    my commandments, and my judgments, as at this day.

@c    28:8. Now then before all the assembly of Israel, in the hearing of our
@c    God, keep ye, and seek all the commandments of the Lord our God:  that
@c    you may possess the good land, and may leave it to your children after
@c    you for ever.

@c    28:9. And thou my son Solomon, know the God of thy father, and serve
@c    him with a perfect heart, and a willing mind:  for the Lord searcheth
@c    all hearts, and understandeth all the thoughts of minds.  If thou seek
@c    him, thou shalt find him:  but if thou forsake him, he will cast thee
@c    off for ever.

@c    28:10. Now therefore seeing the Lord hath chosen thee to build the
@c    house of the sanctuary, take courage, and do it.

@c    28:11. And David gave to Solomon his son a description of the porch,
@c    and of the temple, and of the treasures, and of the upper floor, and of
@c    the inner chambers, and of the house for the mercy seat,

@c    28:12. As also of all the courts, which he had in his thought, and of
@c    the chambers round about, for the treasures of the house of the Lord,
@c    and for the treasures of the consecrated things,

@c    28:13. And of the divisions of the priests and of the Levites, for all
@c    the works of the house of the Lord, and for all the vessels of the
@c    service of the temple of the Lord.

@c    28:14. Gold by weight for every vessel for the ministry.  And silver by
@c    weight according to the diversity of the vessels and uses.

@c    28:15. He gave also gold for the golden candlesticks, and their lamps,
@c    according to the dimensions of every candlestick, and the lamps
@c    thereof.  In like manner also he gave silver by weight for the silver
@c    candlesticks, and for their lamps according to the diversity of the
@c    dimensions of them.

@c    28:16. He gave also gold for the tables of proposition, according to
@c    the diversity of the tables:  in like manner also silver for other
@c    tables of silver.

@c    28:17. For fleshhooks also, and bowls, and censors of fine gold, and
@c    for little lions of gold, according to the measure he gave by weight,
@c    for every lion.  In like manner also for lions of silver he set aside a
@c    different weight of silver.

@c    28:18. And for the altar of incense, he gave the purest gold:  and to
@c    make the likeness of the chariot of the cherubims spreading their
@c    wings, and covering the ark of the covenant of the Lord.

@c    28:19. All these things, said he, came to me written by the hand of the
@c    Lord that I might understand all the works of the pattern.

@c    28:20. And David said to Solomon his son:  Act like a man, and take
@c    courage, and do:  fear not, and be not dismayed:  for the Lord my God
@c    will be with thee, and will not leave thee, nor forsake thee, till thou
@c    hast finished all the work for the service of the house of the Lord.

@c    28:21. Behold the courses of the priests and the Levites, for every
@c    ministry of the house of the Lord, stand by thee, and are ready, and
@c    both the princes, and the people know how to execute all thy
@c    commandments.



@c    1 Paralipomenon Chapter 29


@c    David by word and example encourageth the princes to contribute
@c    liberally to the building of the temple.  His thanksgiving, prayer, and
@c    sacrifices:  his death.

@c    29:1. And king David said to all the assembly:  Solomon my son, whom
@c    alone God hath chosen, is as yet young and tender:  and the work is
@c    great, for a house is prepared not for man, but for God.

@c    29:2. And I with all my ability have prepared the expenses for the
@c    house of my God.  Gold for vessels of gold, and silver for vessels of
@c    silver, brass for things of brass, iron for things of iron, wood for
@c    things of wood:  and onyx stones, and stones like alabaster, and of
@c    divers colours, and all manner of precious stones, and marble of Paros
@c    in great abundance.

@c    29:3. Now over and above the things which I have offered into the house
@c    of my God I give of my own proper goods, gold and silver for the temple
@c    of my God, beside what things I have prepared for the holy house.

@c    29:4. Three thousand talents of gold of the gold of Ophir:  and seven
@c    thousand talents of refined silver, to overlay the walls of the temple.

@c    29:5. And gold for wheresoever there is need of gold:  and silver for
@c    wheresoever there is need of silver, for the works to be made by the
@c    hands of the artificers:  now if any man is willing to offer, let him
@c    fill his hand to day, and offer what he pleaseth to the Lord.

@c    29:6. Then the heads of the families, and the princes of the tribes of
@c    Israel and the captains of thousands, and of hundreds, and the
@c    overseers of the king's possessions promised,

@c    29:7. And they gave for the works of the house of the Lord, of gold,
@c    five thousand talents, and ten thousand solids:  of silver ten thousand
@c    talents:  and of brass eighteen thousand talents:  and of iron a hundred
@c    thousand talents.

@c    29:8. And all they that had stones, gave them to the treasures of the
@c    house of the Lord, by the hand of Jahiel the Gersonite.

@c    29:9. And the people rejoiced, when they promised their offerings
@c    willingly:  because they offered them to the Lord with all their heart:
@c    and David the king rejoiced also with a great joy.

@c    29:10. And he blessed the Lord before all the multitude, and he said:
@c    Blessed art thou, O Lord the God of Israel, our father from eternity to
@c    eternity.

@c    29:11. Thine, O Lord, is magnificence, and power, and glory, and
@c    victory:  and to thee is praise:  for all that is in heaven, and in
@c    earth, is thine:  thine is the kingdom, O Lord, and thou art above all
@c    princes.

@c    29:12. Thine are riches, and thine is glory, thou hast dominion over
@c    all, in thy hand is power and might:  in thy hand greatness, and the
@c    empire of all things.

@c    29:13. Now therefore our God we give thanks to thee, and we praise thy
@c    glorious name.

@c    29:14. Who am I, and what is my people, that we should be able to
@c    promise thee all these things?  all things are thine:  and we have given
@c    thee what we received of thy hand.

@c    29:15. For we are sojourners before thee, and strangers, as were all
@c    our fathers.  I Our days upon earth are as a shadow, and there is no
@c    stay.

@c    29:16. O Lord our God, all this store that we have prepared to build
@c    thee a house for thy holy name, is from thy hand, and all things are
@c    thine.

@c    29:17. I know my God that thou provest hearts, and lovest simplicity,
@c    wherefore I also in the simplicity of my heart, have joyfully offered
@c    all these things:  and I have seen with great joy thy people, which are
@c    here present, offer thee their offerings.

@c    29:18. O Lord God of Abraham, and of Isaac, and of Israel our fathers,
@c    keep for ever this will of their heart, and let this mind remain always
@c    for the worship of thee.

@c    29:19. And give to Solomon my son a perfect heart, that he may keep thy
@c    commandments, thy testimonies, and thy ceremonies, and do all things:
@c    and build the house, for which I have provided the charges.

@c    29:20. And David commanded all the assembly:  Bless ye the Lord our God.
@c    And all the assembly blessed the Lord the God of their fathers:  and
@c    they bowed themselves and worshipped God, and then the king.

@c    29:21. And they sacrificed victims to the Lord:  and they offered
@c    holocausts the next day, a thousand bullocks, a thousand rams, a
@c    thousand lambs, with their libations, and with every thing prescribed
@c    most abundantly for all Israel.

@c    29:22. And they ate, and drank before the Lord that day with great joy.
@c    And they anointed the second time Solomon the son of David.  And they
@c    anointed him to the Lord to be prince, and Sadoc to be high priest.

@c    29:23. And Solomon sat on the throne of the Lord as king instead of
@c    David his father, and he pleased all:  and all Israel obeyed him.

@c    29:24. And all the princes, and men of power, and all the sons of king
@c    David gave their hand, and were subject to Solomon the king.

@c    29:25. And the Lord magnified Solomon over all Israel:  and gave him the
@c    glory of a reign, such as no king of Israel had before him.

@c    29:26. So David the son of Isai reigned over all Israel.

@c    29:27. And the days that he reigned over Israel, were forty years:  in
@c    Hebron he reigned seven years, and in Jerusalem three and thirty years.

@c    29:28. And he died in a good age, full of days, and riches, and glory.
@c    And Solomon his son reigned in his stead.

@c    29:29. Now the acts of king David first and last are written in the
@c    book of Samuel the seer, and in the book of Nathan the prophet, and in
@c    the book of Gad the seer:

@c    29:30. And of all his reign, and his valour, and of the times that
@c    passed under him, either in Israel, or in all the kingdoms of the
@c    countries.
