@c    THE SECOND BOOK OF SAMUEL, OTHERWISE CALLED THE SECOND BOOK OF KINGS



@c    This Book relates the transactions from the death of Saul until the end
@c    of David's reign, being a history for the space of about forty-six
@c    years.



@c    2 Kings Chapter 1


@c    David mourneth for the death of Saul and Jonathan:  he ordereth the man
@c    to be slain who pretended he had killed Saul.

@c    1:1. Now it came to pass, after Saul was dead, that David returned from
@c    the slaughter of the Amalecites, and abode two days in Siceleg.

@c    1:2. And on the third day, there appeared a man who came out of Saul's
@c    camp, with his garments rent, and dust strewed on his head:  and when he
@c    came to David, he fell upon his face, and adored.

@c    1:3. And David said to him:  From whence comest thou?  And he said to
@c    him:  I am fled out of the camp of Israel.

@c    1:4. And David said unto him:  What is the matter that is come to pass?
@c    tell me:  He said:  The people are fled from the battle, and many of the
@c    people are fallen and dead:  moreover Saul and Jonathan his son are
@c    slain.

@c    1:5. And David said to the young man that told him:  How knowest thou
@c    that Saul and Jonathan his son, are dead?

@c    1:6. And the young man that told him, said:  I came by chance upon mount
@c    Gelboe, and Saul leaned upon his spear:  and the chariots and horsemen
@c    drew nigh unto him,

@c    1:7. And looking behind him, and seeing me, he called me.  And I
@c    answered, Here am I.

@c    1:8. And he said to me:  Who art thou?  And I said to him:  I am an
@c    Amalecite.

@c    1:9. And he said to me:  Stand over me, and kill me:  for anguish is come
@c    upon me, and as yet my whole life is in me.

@c    1:10. So standing over him, I killed him:  for I knew that he could not
@c    live after the fall:  and I took the diadem that was on his head, and
@c    the bracelet that was on his arm, and have brought them hither to thee,
@c    my lord.

@c    I killed him. . .This story of the young Amalecite was not true, as may
@c    easily be proved by comparing it with the last chapter of the foregoing
@c    book.

@c    1:11. Then David took hold of his garments and rent them, and likewise
@c    all the men that were with him.

@c    1:12. And they mourned, and wept, and fasted until evening for Saul,
@c    and for Jonathan his son, and for the people of the Lord, and for the
@c    house of Israel, because they were fallen by the sword.

@c    1:13. And David said to the young man that told him:  Whence art thou?
@c    He answered:  I am the son of a stranger of Amalec.

@c    1:14. David said to him:  Why didst thou not fear to put out thy hand to
@c    kill the Lord's anointed?

@c    1:15. And David calling one of his servants, said:  Go near and fall
@c    upon him.  And he struck him so that he died.

@c    1:16. And David said to him:  Thy blood be upon thy own head:  for thy
@c    own mouth hath spoken against thee, saying:  I have slain the Lord's
@c    anointed.

@c    1:17. And David made this kind of lamentation over Saul, and over
@c    Jonathan his son.

@c    1:18. (Also he commanded that they should teach the children of Juda
@c    the use of the bow, as it is written in the book of the just.)  And he
@c    said:  Consider, O Israel, for them that are dead, wounded on thy high
@c    places.

@c    1:19. The illustrious of Israel are slain upon thy mountains:  how are
@c    the valiant fallen?

@c    1:20. Tell it not in Geth, publish it not in the streets of Ascalon:
@c    lest the daughters of the Philistines rejoice, lest the daughters of
@c    the uncircumcised triumph.

@c    1:21. Ye mountains of Gelboe, let neither dew, nor rain come upon you,
@c    neither be they fields of firstfruits:  for there was cast away the
@c    shield of the valiant, the shield of Saul as though he had not been
@c    anointed with oil.

@c    1:22. From the blood of the slain, from the fat of the valiant, the
@c    arrow of Jonathan never turned back, and the sword of Saul did not
@c    return empty.

@c    1:23. Saul and Jonathan, lovely, and comely in their life, even in
@c    death they were not divided:  they were swifter than eagles, stronger
@c    than lions.

@c    1:24. Ye daughters of Israel, weep over Saul, who clothed you with
@c    scarlet in delights, who gave ornaments of gold for your attire.

@c    1:25. How are the valiant fallen in battle?  Jonathan slain in the high
@c    places?

@c    1:26. I grieve for thee, my brother Jonathan:  exceeding beautiful, and
@c    amiable to me above the love of women.  As the mother loveth her only
@c    son, so did I love thee.

@c    1:27. How are the valiant fallen, and the weapons of war perished?



@c    2 Kings Chapter 2


@c    David is received and anointed king of Juda.  Isboseth the son of Saul
@c    reigneth over the rest of Israel.  A battle between Abner and Joab.

@c    2:1. And after these things David consulted the Lord, saying:  Shall I
@c    go up into one of the cities of Juda?  And the Lord said to him:  Go up.
@c    And David said:  Whither shall I go up?  And he answered him:  Into
@c    Hebron.

@c    2:2. So David went up, and his two wives Achinoam the Jezrahelitess,
@c    and Abigail the wife of Nabal of Carmel:

@c    2:3. And the men also that were with him, David brought up every man
@c    with his household:  and they abode in the towns of Hebron.

@c    2:4. And the men of Juda came, and anointed David there, to be king
@c    over the house of Juda.  And it was told David that the men of Jabes
@c    Galaad had buried Saul.

@c    2:5. David therefore sent messengers to the men of Jabes Galaad, and
@c    said to them:  Blessed be you to the Lord, who have shewn this mercy to
@c    your master Saul, and have buried him.

@c    2:6. And now the Lord surely will render you mercy and truth, and I
@c    also will requite you for this good turn, because you have done this
@c    thing.

@c    2:7. Let your hands be strengthened, and be ye men of valour:  for
@c    although your master Saul be dead, yet the house of Juda hath anointed
@c    me to be their king.

@c    2:8. But Abner the son of Ner, general of Saul's army, took Isboseth
@c    the son of Saul, and led him about through the camp,

@c    2:9. And made him king over Galaad, and over Gessuri, and over
@c    Jezrahel, and over Ephraim, and over Benjamin, and over all Israel.

@c    2:10. Isboseth the son of Saul was forty years old when he began to
@c    reign over Israel, and he reigned two years; and only the house of Juda
@c    followed David.

@c    He reigned two years. . .Viz., before he began visibly to decline:  but
@c    in all he reigned seven years and six months; for so long David reigned
@c    in Hebron.

@c    2:11. And the number of the days that David abode, reigning in Hebron
@c    over the house of Juda, was seven years and six months.

@c    2:12. And Abner the son of Ner, and the servants of Isboseth the son of
@c    Saul, went out from the camp to Gabaon.

@c    2:13. And Joab the son of Sarvia, and the servants of David went out,
@c    and met them by the pool of Gabaon.  And when they were come together,
@c    they sat down over against one another:  the one on the one side of the
@c    pool, and the other on the other side.

@c    2:14. And Abner said to Joab:  Let the young men rise, and play before
@c    us.  And Joab answered:  Let them rise.

@c    2:15. Then there arose and went over twelve in number of Benjamin, of
@c    the part of Isboseth the son of Saul, and twelve of the servants of
@c    David.

@c    2:16. And every one catching his fellow by the head, thrust his sword
@c    into the side of his adversary, and they fell down together:  and the
@c    name of the place was called:  The field of the valiant, in Gabaon.

@c    2:17. And there was a very fierce battle that day:  and Abner was put to
@c    flight, with the men of Israel, by the servants of David.

@c    2:18. And there were the three sons of Sarvia there, Joab, and Abisai,
@c    and Asael:  now Asael was a most swift runner, like one of the roes that
@c    abide in the woods.

@c    2:19. And Asael pursued after Abner, and turned not to the right hand
@c    nor to the left from following Abner.

@c    2:20. And Abner looked behind him, and said:  Art thou Asael?  And he
@c    answered:  I am.

@c    2:21. And Abner said to him:  Go to the right hand or to the left, and
@c    lay hold on one of the young men and take thee his spoils.  But Asael
@c    would not leave off following him close.

@c    2:22. And again Abner said to Asael:  Go off, and do not follow me, lest
@c    I be obliged to stab thee to the ground, and I shall not be able to
@c    hold up my face to Joab thy brother.

@c    2:23. But he refused to hearken to him, and would not turn aside:
@c    wherefore Abner struck him with his spear with a back stroke in the
@c    groin, and thrust him through, and he died upon the spot:  and all that
@c    came to the place where Asael fell down and died stood still.

@c    2:24. Now while Joab and Abisai pursued after Abner, the sun went down:
@c    and they came as far as the hill of the aqueduct, that lieth over
@c    against the valley by the way of the wilderness in Gabaon.

@c    2:25. And the children of Benjamin gathered themselves together to
@c    Abner:  and being joined in one body, they stood on the top of a hill.

@c    2:26. And Abner cried out to Joab, and said:  Shall thy sword rage unto
@c    utter destruction?  knowest thou not that it is dangerous to drive
@c    people to despair?  how long dost thou defer to bid the people cease
@c    from pursuing after their brethren?

@c    2:27. And Joab said:  As the Lord liveth, if thou hadst spoke sooner,
@c    even in the morning the people should have retired from pursuing after
@c    their brethren.

@c    2:28. Then Joab sounded the trumpet, and all the army stood still, and
@c    did not pursue after Israel any farther, nor fight any more.

@c    2:29. And Abner and his men walked all that night through the plains:
@c    and they passed the Jordan, and having gone through all Beth-horon,
@c    came to the camp.

@c    2:30. And Joab returning, after he had left Abner, assembled all the
@c    people:  and there were wanting of David's servants nineteen men, beside
@c    Asael.

@c    2:31. But the servants of David had killed of Benjamin, and of the men
@c    that were with Abner, three hundred and sixty, who all died.

@c    2:32. And they took Asael, and buried him in the sepulchre of his
@c    father in Bethlehem and Joab, and the men that were with him, marched
@c    all the night, and they came to Hebron at break of day.



@c    2 Kings Chapter 3


@c    David groweth daily stronger.  Abner cometh over to him:  he is
@c    treacherously slain by Joab.

@c    3:1. Now there was a long war between the house of Saul and the house
@c    of David:  David prospering and growing always stronger and stronger,
@c    but the house of Saul decaying daily.

@c    There was a long war between the house of Saul, etc. . .Rather a strife
@c    or emulation than a war with arms; it lasted five years and a half.

@c    3:2. And sons were born to David in Hebron:  and his firstborn was Ammon
@c    of Achinoam the Jezrahelitess:

@c    3:3. And his second Cheleab of Abigail the wife of Nabal of Carmel:  and
@c    the third Absalom the son of Maacha the daughter of Tholmai king of
@c    Gessur:

@c    3:4. And the fourth Adonias, the son of Haggith:  and the fifth
@c    Saphathia the son of Abital:

@c    3:5. And the sixth Jethraam of Egla the wife of David:  these were born
@c    to David In Hebron.

@c    3:6. Now while there was war between the house of Saul and the house of
@c    David, Abner the son of Ner ruled the house of Saul.

@c    3:7. And Saul had a concubine named Respha, the daughter of Aia.  And
@c    Isboseth said to Abner:

@c    3:8. Why didst thou go in to my father's concubine?  And he was
@c    exceedingly angry for the words of Isboseth, and said:  Am I a dog's
@c    head against Juda this day, who have shewn mercy to the house of Saul
@c    thy father, and to his brethren and friends, and have not delivered
@c    thee into the hands of David, and hast thou sought this day against me
@c    to charge me with a matter concerning a woman?

@c    3:9. So do God to Abner, and more also, unless as the Lord hath sworn
@c    to David, so I do to him,

@c    3:10. That the kingdom be translated from the house of Saul, and the
@c    throne of David be set up over Israel, and over Juda from Dan to
@c    Bersabee.

@c    3:11. And he could not answer him a word, because he feared him.

@c    3:12. Abner therefore sent messengers to David for himself, saying:
@c    Whose is the land?  and that they should say:  Make a league with me, and
@c    my hand shall be with thee:  and I will bring all Israel to thee.

@c    3:13. And he said:  Very well:  I will make a league with thee:  but one
@c    thing I require of thee, saying:  Thou shalt not see my face before thou
@c    bring Michol the daughter of Saul:  and so thou shalt come, and see me.

@c    3:14. And David sent messengers to Isboseth the son of Saul, saying:
@c    Restore my wife Michol, whom I espoused to me for a hundred foreskins
@c    of the Philistines.

@c    3:15. And Isboseth sent, and took her from her husband Phaltiel, the
@c    son of Lais.

@c    3:16. And her husband followed her, weeping as far as Bahurim:  and
@c    Abner said to him:  Go and return.  And he returned.

@c    3:17. Abner also spoke to the ancients of Israel, saying:  Both
@c    yesterday and the day before you sought for David that he might reign
@c    over you.

@c    3:18. Now then do it:  because the Lord hath spoken to David, saying:  By
@c    the hand of my servant David I will save my people Israel from the
@c    hands of the Philistines, and of all their enemies.

@c    3:19. And Abner spoke also to Benjamin.  And he went to speak to David
@c    in Hebron all that seemed good to Israel, and to all Benjamin.

@c    3:20. And he came to David in Hebron with twenty men:  and David made a
@c    feast for Abner, and his men that came with him.

@c    3:21. And Abner said to David:  I will rise, that I may gather all
@c    Israel unto thee my lord the king, and may enter into a league with
@c    thee, and that thou mayst reign over all as thy soul desireth.  Now when
@c    David had brought Abner on his way, and he was gone in peace,

@c    3:22. Immediately, David's servants and Joab came, after having slain
@c    the robbers, with an exceeding great booty.  And Abner was not with
@c    David in Hebron, for he had now sent him away, and he was gone in
@c    peace.

@c    3:23. And Joab and all the army that was with him, came afterwards:  and
@c    it was told Joab, that Abner the son of Ner came to the king, and he
@c    hath sent him away, and he is gone in peace.

@c    3:24. And Joab went in to the king, and said:  What hast thou done?
@c    Behold Abner came to thee:  Why didst thou send him away, and he is gone
@c    and departed?

@c    3:25. Knowest thou not Abner the son of Ner, that to this end he came
@c    to thee, that he might deceive thee, and to know thy going out, and thy
@c    coming in, and to know all thou dost?

@c    3:26. Then Joab going out from David, sent messengers after Abner, and
@c    brought him back from the cistern of Sira, David knowing nothing of it.

@c    3:27. And when Abner was returned to Hebron, Joab took him aside to the
@c    middle of the gate, to speak to him treacherously:  and he stabbed him
@c    there in the groin, and he died, in revenge of the blood of Asael his
@c    brother.

@c    3:28. And when David heard of it, after the thing was now done, he
@c    said:  I, and my kingdom are innocent before the Lord for ever of the
@c    blood of Abner the son of Ner:

@c    3:29. And may it come upon the head of Joab, and upon all his father's
@c    house:  and let there not fail from the house of Joab one that hath an
@c    issue of seed, or that is a leper, or that holdeth the distaff, or that
@c    falleth by the sword, or that wanteth bread.

@c    3:30. So Joab and Abisai his brother slew Abner, because he had killed
@c    their brother Asael at Gabaon in the battle.

@c    3:31. And David said to Joab, and to all the people that were with him:
@c    Rend your garments, and gird yourselves with sackcloths, and mourn
@c    before the funeral of Abner.  And king David himself followed the bier.

@c    3:32. And when they had buried Abner in Hebron, king David lifted up
@c    his voice, and wept at the grave of Abner:  and all the people also
@c    wept.

@c    3:33. And the king mourning and lamenting over Abner, said:  Not as
@c    cowards are wont to die, hath Abner died.

@c    3:34. Thy hands were not bound, nor thy feet laden with fetters:  but as
@c    men fall before the children of iniquity, so didst thou fall.  And all
@c    the people repeating it wept over him.

@c    3:35. And when all the people came to take meat with David, while it
@c    was yet broad day, David swore, saying:  So do God to me, and more also,
@c    if I taste bread or any thing else before sunset.

@c    3:36. And all the people heard, and they were pleased, and all that the
@c    king did seemed good in the sight of all the people.

@c    3:37. And all the people, and all Israel understood that day that it
@c    was not the king's doing, that Abner the son of Ner was slain.

@c    3:38. The king also said to his servants:  Do you not know that a prince
@c    and a great man is slain this day in Israel?

@c    3:39. But I as yet am tender, though anointed king.  And these men the
@c    sons of Sarvia are too hard for me:  the Lord reward him that doth evil
@c    according to his wickedness.



@c    2 Kings Chapter 4


@c    Isboseth is murdered by two of his servants.  David punisheth the
@c    murderers.

@c    4:1. And Isboseth the son of Saul heard that Abner was slain in Hebron:
@c    and his hands were weakened, and all Israel was troubled.

@c    4:2. Now the son of Saul had two men captains of his bands, the name of
@c    the one was Baana, and the name of the other Rechab, the sons of Remmon
@c    a Berothite of the children of Benjamin:  for Beroth also was reckoned
@c    in Benjamin.

@c    4:3. And the Berothites fled into Gethaim, and were sojourners there
@c    until that time.

@c    4:4. And Jonathan the son of Saul had a son that was lame of his feet:
@c    for he was five years old when the tidings came of Saul and Jonathan
@c    from Jezrahel.  And his nurse took him up and fled:  and as she made
@c    haste to flee, he fell and became lame:  and his name was Miphiboseth.

@c    4:5. And the sons of Remmon the Berothite, Rechab and Baana coming,
@c    went into the house of Isboseth in the heat of the day:  and he was
@c    sleeping upon his bed at noon.  And the doorkeeper of the house, who was
@c    cleansing wheat, was fallen asleep.

@c    4:6. And they entered into the house secretly taking ears of corn, and
@c    Rechab and Baana his brother stabbed him in the groin, and fled away.

@c    4:7. For when they came into the house, he was sleeping upon his bed in
@c    a parlour, and they struck him and killed him and taking away his head
@c    they went off by the way of the wilderness, walking all night.

@c    4:8. And they brought the head of Isboseth to David to Hebron:  and they
@c    said to the king:  Behold the head of Isboseth the son of Saul thy enemy
@c    who sought thy life:  and the Lord hath revenged my lord the king this
@c    day of Saul, and of his seed.

@c    4:9. But David answered Rechab, and Baana his brother, the sons of
@c    Remmon the Berothite, and said to them:  As the Lord liveth, who hath
@c    delivered my soul out of all distress,

@c    4:10. The man that told me, and said:  Saul is dead, who thought he
@c    brought good tidings, I apprehended, and slew him in Siceleg, who
@c    should have been rewarded for his news.

@c    4:11. How much more now when wicked men have slain an innocent man in
@c    his own house, upon his bed, shall I not require his blood at your
@c    hand, and take you away from the earth?

@c    4:12. And David commanded his servants and they slew them:  and cutting
@c    off their hands and feet, hanged them up over the pool in Hebron:  but
@c    the head of Isboseth they took and buried in the sepulchre of Abner in
@c    Hebron.



@c    2 Kings Chapter 5


@c    David is anointed king of all Israel.  He taketh Jerusalem, and dwelleth
@c    there.  He defeateth the Philistines.

@c    5:1. Then all the tribes of Israel came to David in Hebron, saying:
@c    Behold we are thy bone and thy flesh.

@c    5:2. Moreover yesterday also and the day before, when Saul was king
@c    over us, thou wast he that did lead out and bring in Israel:  and the
@c    Lord said to thee:  Thou shalt feed my people Israel, and thou shalt be
@c    prince over Israel.

@c    5:3. The ancients also of Israel came to the king of Hebron, and king
@c    David made a league with them in Hebron before the Lord:  and they
@c    anointed David to be king over Israel.

@c    5:4. David was thirty years old when he began to reign, and he reigned
@c    forty years.

@c    5:5. In Hebron he reigned over Juda seven years and six months:  and in
@c    Jerusalem he reigned three and thirty years over all Israel and Juda.

@c    5:6. And the king and all the men that were with him went to Jerusalem
@c    to the Jebusites the inhabitants of the land:  and they said to David:
@c    Thou shalt not come in hither unless thou take away the blind and the
@c    lame that say:  David shall not come in hither.

@c    5:7. But David took the castle of Sion, the same is the city of David.

@c    5:8. For David had offered that day a reward to whosoever should strike
@c    the Jebusites and get up to the gutters of the tops of the houses, and
@c    take away the blind and the lame that hated the soul of David:
@c    therefore it is said in the proverb:  The blind and the lame shall not
@c    come into the temple.

@c    5:9. And David dwelt in the castle, and called it, The city of David:
@c    and built round about from Mello and inwards.

@c    5:10. And he went on prospering and growing up, and the Lord God of
@c    hosts was with him.

@c    5:11. And Hiram the king of Tyre sent messengers to David, and cedar
@c    trees, and carpenters, and masons for walls:  and they built a house for
@c    David.

@c    5:12. And David knew that the Lord had confirmed him king over Israel,
@c    and that he had exalted his kingdom over his people Israel.

@c    5:13. And David took more concubines and wives of Jerusalem, after he
@c    was come from Hebron:  and there were born to David other sons also and
@c    daughters:

@c    David took more concubines and wives of Jerusalem. . .Not harlots, but
@c    wives of an inferior condition; for such, in scripture, are styled
@c    concubines.

@c    5:14. And these are the names of them, that were born to him in
@c    Jerusalem, Samua, and Sobab, and Nathan, and Solomon,

@c    5:15. And Jebahar, and Elisua, and Nepheg,

@c    5:16. And Japhia, and Elisama, and Elioda, and Eliphaleth.

@c    5:17. And the Philistines heard that they had anointed David to be king
@c    over Israel:  and they all came to seek David:  and when David heard of
@c    it, he went down to a strong hold.

@c    5:18. And the Philistines coming spread themselves in the valley of
@c    Raphaim.

@c    5:19. And David consulted the Lord, Saying:  Shall I go up to the
@c    Philistines?  and wilt thou deliver them into my hand?  And the Lord said
@c    to David:  Go up, for I will surely deliver the Philistines into thy
@c    hand.

@c    5:20. And David came to Baal Pharisim:  and defeated them there, and he
@c    said, The Lord hath divided my enemies before me, as waters are
@c    divided.  Therefore the name of the place was called Baal Pharisim.

@c    5:21. And they left there their idols:  which David and his men took
@c    away.

@c    5:22. And the Philistines came up again and spread themselves into the
@c    valley of Raphaim.

@c    5:23. And David consulted the Lord:  Shall I go up against the
@c    Philistines, and wilt thou deliver them into my hands?  He answered:  Go
@c    not up against them but fetch a compass behind them, and thou shalt
@c    come upon them over against the pear trees.

@c    5:24. And when thou shalt hear the sound of one going in the tops of
@c    the pear trees, then shalt thou join battle:  for then will the Lord go
@c    out before thy face to strike the army of the Philistines.

@c    5:25. And David did as the Lord had commanded him, and he smote the
@c    Philistines from Gabaa until thou come to Gezer.



@c    2 Kings Chapter 6


@c    David fetcheth the ark from Cariathiarim.  Oza is struck dead for
@c    touching it.  It is deposited in the house of Obededom:  and from thence
@c    carried to David's house.

@c    6:1. And David again gathered together all the chosen men of Israel,
@c    thirty thousand.

@c    6:2. And David arose and went, with all the people that were with him
@c    of the men of Juda to fetch the ark of God, upon which the name of the
@c    Lord of Hosts is invoked, who sitteth over it upon the cherubims.

@c    6:3. And they laid the ark of God upon a new cart:  and took it out of
@c    the house of Abinadab, who was in Gabaa, and Oza and Ahio, the sons of
@c    Abinadab, drove the new cart.

@c    Gabaa. . .The hill of Cariathiarim, where the ark had been in the house
@c    of Abinadab, from the time of its being restored back by the
@c    Philistines.

@c    6:4. And when they had taken it out of the house of Abinadab, who was
@c    in Gabaa, Ahio having care of the ark of God went before the ark.

@c    6:5. But David and all Israel played before the Lord on all manner of
@c    instruments made of wood, on harps and lutes and timbrels and cornets
@c    and cymbals.

@c    6:6. And when they came to the floor of Nachon, Oza put forth his hand
@c    to the ark of God, and took hold of it:  because the oxen kicked and
@c    made it lean aside.

@c    6:7. And the indignation of the Lord was enkindled against Oza, and he
@c    struck him for his rashness:  and he died there before the ark of God.

@c    6:8. And David was grieved because the Lord had struck Oza, and the
@c    name of that place was called:  The striking of Oza, to this day.

@c    6:9. And David was afraid of the Lord that day, saying:  How shall the
@c    ark of the Lord come to me?

@c    6:10. And he would not have the ark of the Lord brought in to himself
@c    into the city of David:  but he caused it to be carried into the house
@c    of Obededom the Gethite.

@c    6:11. And the ark of the Lord abode in the house of Obededom the
@c    Gethite three months:  and the Lord blessed Obededom, and all his
@c    household.

@c    6:12. And it was told king David, that the Lord had blessed Obededom,
@c    and all that he had, because of the ark of God.  So David went, and
@c    brought away the ark of God out of the house of Obededom into the city
@c    of David with joy.  And there were with David seven choirs, and calves
@c    for victims.

@c    Choirs. . .Or companies of musicians.

@c    6:13. And when they that carried the ark of the Lord had gone six
@c    paces, he sacrificed and ox and a ram:

@c    6:14. And David danced with all his might before the Lord:  and David
@c    was girded with a linen ephod.

@c    6:15. And David and all the louse of Israel brought the ark of the
@c    covenant of the Lord with joyful shouting, and with sound of trumpet.

@c    6:16. And when the ark of the Lord was come into the city of David,
@c    Michol the daughter of Saul, looking out through a window, saw king
@c    David leaping and dancing before the Lord:  and she despised him in her
@c    heart.

@c    6:17. And they brought the ark of the Lord, and set it in its place in
@c    the midst of the tabernacle, which David had pitched for it:  and David
@c    offered holocausts, and peace offerings before the Lord.

@c    6:18. And when he had made an end of offering holocausts and peace
@c    offerings, he blessed the people in the name of the Lord of hosts.

@c    6:19. And he distributed to all the multitude of Israel, both men and
@c    women, to every one, a cake of bread, and a piece of roasted beef, and
@c    fine flour fried with oil:  and all the people departed every one to his
@c    own house.

@c    6:20. And David returned to bless his own house:  and Michol the
@c    daughter of Saul coming out to meet David, said:  How glorious was the
@c    king of Israel to day, uncovering himself before the handmaids of his
@c    servants, and was naked, as if one of the buffoons should be naked.

@c    6:21. And David said to Michol:  Before the Lord, who chose me rather
@c    than thy father, and than all his house, and commanded me to be ruler
@c    over the people of the Lord in Israel,

@c    6:22. I will both play and make myself meaner than I have done:  and I
@c    will be little in my own eyes:  and with the handmaids of whom thou
@c    speakest, I shall appear more glorious.

@c    6:23. Therefore Michol the daughter of Saul had no child to the day of
@c    her death.



@c    2 Kings Chapter 7


@c    David's purpose to build a temple is rewarded with the promise of great
@c    blessings in his seed:  his prayer and thanksgiving.

@c    7:1. And it came to pass when the king sat in his house, and the Lord
@c    had given him rest on every side from all his enemies,

@c    7:2. He said to Nathan the prophet:  Dost thou see that I dwell in a
@c    house of cedar, and the ark of God is lodged within skins?

@c    7:3. And Nathan said to the king:  Go, do all that is in they heart:
@c    because the Lord is with thee.

@c    7:4. But it came to pass that night, that the word of the Lord came to
@c    Nathan, saying:

@c    7:5. Go, and say to my servant David:  Thus saith the Lord:  Shalt thou
@c    build me a house to dwell in?

@c    7:6. Whereas I have not dwelt in a house from the day that I brought
@c    the children of Israel out of the land of Egypt even to this day:  but
@c    have walked in a tabernacle, and in a tent.

@c    7:7. In all the places that I have gone through with all the children
@c    of Israel, did ever I speak a word to any one of the tribes of Israel,
@c    whom I commanded to feed my people Israel, saying:  Why have you not
@c    built me a house of cedar?

@c    7:8. And now thus shalt thou speak to my servant David:  Thus saith the
@c    Lord of hosts:  I took thee out of the pastures from following the sheep
@c    to be ruler over my people Israel:

@c    7:9. And I have been with thee wheresoever thou hast walked, and have
@c    slain all thy enemies from before thy face:  and I have made thee a
@c    great man, like unto the name of the great ones that are on the earth.

@c    7:10. And I will appoint a place for my people Israel, and I will plant
@c    them, and they shall dwell therein, and shall be disturbed no more:
@c    neither shall the children of iniquity afflict them any more as they
@c    did before,

@c    7:11. From the day that I appointed judges over my people Israel:  and I
@c    will give thee rest from all thy enemies.  And the Lord foretelleth to
@c    thee, that the Lord will make thee a house.

@c    7:12. And when thy days shall be fulfilled, and thou shalt sleep with
@c    thy fathers, I will raise up thy seed after thee, which shall proceed
@c    out of the bowels, and I will establish his kingdom.

@c    I will establish his kingdom. . .This prophecy partly relateth to
@c    Solomon:  but much more to Christ, who is called the son of David in
@c    scripture, and who is the builder of the true temple, which is the
@c    church, his everlasting kingdom, which shall never fail.

@c    7:13. He shall build a house to my name, and I will establish the
@c    throne of his kingdom fore ever.

@c    7:14. I will be to him a father, and he shall be to me a son:  and if he
@c    commit any iniquity, I will correct him with the rod of men, and with
@c    the stripes of the children of men.

@c    7:15. But my mercy I will not take away from him, as I took it from
@c    Saul, whom I removed from before my face.

@c    7:16. And thy house shall be faithful, and thy kingdom for ever before
@c    thy face, and thy throne shall be firm for ever.

@c    7:17. According to all these words and according to all this vision so
@c    did Nathan speak to David.

@c    7:18. And David went in, and sat before the Lord, and said:  Who am I, O
@c    Lord God, and what is my house, that thou hast brought me thus far?

@c    7:19. Bur yet this hath seemed little in thy sight, O Lord God, unless
@c    thou didst also speak of the house of thy servant for a long time to
@c    come:  for this is the law of Adam, O Lord God:

@c    7:20. And what can David say more unto thee?  for thou knowest thy
@c    servant, O Lord God:

@c    7:21. For thy word's sake, and according to thy own heart thou has done
@c    all these great things, so that thou wouldst make it known to thy
@c    servant.

@c    7:22. Therefore thou art magnified, O Lord God, because there is none
@c    like to thee, neither is there any God besides thee, in all the things
@c    that we have heard with our ears.

@c    7:23. And what nation is there upon earth, as thy people Israel, whom
@c    God went to redeem for a people to himself, and to make him a name, and
@c    to do for them great and terrible things, upon the earth, before the
@c    face of thy people, whom thou redeemedst to thyself out of Egypt, from
@c    the nations and their gods.

@c    7:24. For thou hast confirmed to thyself thy people Israel to be an
@c    everlasting people:  and thou, O Lord God, art become their God.

@c    7:25. And now, O Lord God, raise up for ever the word that thou hast
@c    spoken, concerning thy servant and concerning his house:  and do as thou
@c    hast spoken,

@c    7:26. That thy name may be magnified for ever, and it may be said:  The
@c    Lord of hosts is God over Israel.  And the house of thy servant David
@c    shall be established before the Lord.

@c    7:27. Because thou, O Lord of hosts, God of Israel, hast revealed to
@c    the ear of thy servant, saying:  I will build thee a house:  therefore
@c    hath thy servant found in his heart to pray this prayer to thee.

@c    7:28. And now, O Lord God, thou art God, and thy words shall be true:
@c    for thou hast spoken to thy servant these good things.

@c    7:29. And now begin, and bless the house of thy servant, that it may
@c    endure for ever before thee:  because thou, O Lord God, hast spoken it,
@c    and with thy blessing let the house of thy servant be blessed for ever.



@c    2 Kings Chapter 8


@c    David's victories, and his chief officers.

@c    8:1. And it came to pass after this that David defeated the
@c    Philistines, and brought them down, and David took the bridle of
@c    tribute out of the hand of the Philistines,

@c    8:2. And he defeated Moab, and measured them with a line, casting them
@c    down to the earth:  and he measured with two lines, one to put to death,
@c    and one to save alive:  and Moab was made to serve David under tribute.

@c    8:3. David defeated also Adarezer the son of Rohob king of Soba, when
@c    he went to extend his dominion over the river Euphrates.

@c    8:4. And David took from him a thousand and seven hundred horsemen, and
@c    twenty thousand footmen, and houghed all the chariot horses:  and only
@c    reserved of them for one hundred chariots.

@c    8:5. And the Syrians of Damascus came to succour Adarezer the king of
@c    Soba:  and David slew of the Syrians two and twenty thousand men.

@c    8:6. And David put garrisons in Syria of Damascus:  and Syria served
@c    David under tribute, and the Lord preserved David in all his
@c    enterprises, whithersoever he went.

@c    8:7. And David took the arms of gold, which the servants of Adarezer
@c    wore and brought them to Jerusalem.

@c    8:8. And out of Bete, and out of Beroth, cities of Adarezer, king David
@c    took and exceeding great quantity of brass.

@c    8:9. And Thou the king of Emath heard that David had defeated all the
@c    forces of Adarezer.

@c    8:10. And Thou sent Joram his son to king David, to salute him, and to
@c    congratulate with him, and to return him thanks:  because he had fought
@c    against Adarezer, and had defeated him.  For Thou was an enemy to
@c    Adarezer, and in his hand were vessels of gold, and vessels of silver,
@c    and vessels of brass:

@c    8:11. And king David dedicated them to the Lord, together with the
@c    silver and gold that he had dedicated of all the nations, which he had
@c    subdued:

@c    8:12. Of Syria, and of Moab, and of the children Ammon, and of the
@c    Philistines, and of Amalec, and of the spoils of Adarezer the son of
@c    Rohob king of Soba.

@c    8:13. David also made himself a name, when he returned after taking
@c    Syria in the valley of the saltpits, killing eighteen thousand:

@c    8:14. And he put guards in Edom, and placed there a garrison:  and all
@c    Edom was made to serve David:  and the Lord preserved David in all
@c    enterprises he went about.

@c    8:15. And David reigned over all Israel:  and David did judgment and
@c    justice to all his people.

@c    8:16. And Joab the son Sarvia was over the army:  and Josaphat the son
@c    of Ahilud was recorder:

@c    Recorder. . .Or chancellor.

@c    8:17. And Sadoc the son of Achitob, and Achimelech the son of Abiathar,
@c    were the priests:  and Saraias was the scribe:

@c    Scribe. . .Or secretary.

@c    8:18. And Banaias the son of Joiada was over the Cerethi and Phelethi:
@c    and the sons of David were the princes.

@c    The Cerethi and Phelethi. . .The king's guards.--Ibid.
@c    Princes. . .Literally priests.  (Cohen) So called, by a title of honour,
@c    and not from exercising the priestly functions.



@c    2 Kings Chapter 9


@c    David's kindness to Miphiboseth for the sake of his father Jonathan.

@c    9:1. And David said:  Is there any one, think you, left of the house of
@c    Saul, that I may shew kindness to him for Jonathan's sake?

@c    9:2. Now there was of the house of Saul, a servant named Siba:  and when
@c    the king had called him to him, he said to him:  Art thou Siba?  And he
@c    answered:  I am Siba thy servant.

@c    9:3. And the king said:  Is there any one left of the house of Saul,
@c    that I may shew the mercy of God unto Him?  And Siba said to the king:
@c    There is a son of Jonathan left, who is lame of his feet.

@c    9:4. Where is he?  said he.  And Siba said to the king:  Behold he is in
@c    the house of Machir the son of Ammiel in Lodabar.

@c    9:5. Then King David sent, and brought him out of the house of Machir
@c    the son of Ammiel of Lodabar.

@c    9:6. And when Miphiboseth the son of Jonathan the son of Saul was come
@c    to David, he fell on his face and worshipped.  And David said:
@c    Miphiboseth?  And he answered:  Behold thy servant.

@c    9:7. And David said to him:  Fear not, for I will surely shew thee mercy
@c    for Jonathan thy father's sake, and I will restore the lands of Saul
@c    the father, and thou shalt eat bread at my table always.

@c    9:8. He bowed down to him, and said:  Who am I thy servant, that thou
@c    shouldst look upon such a dead dog as I am?

@c    9:9. Then the King called Siba the servant of Saul, and said to him:
@c    All that belonged to Saul, and all his house, I have given to thy
@c    master's son.

@c    9:10. Thou therefore and the sons and thy servants shall till the land
@c    for him:  and thou shalt bring in food for thy master's son, that he may
@c    be maintained:  and Miphiboseth the son of thy master shall always eat
@c    bread at my table.  And Siba had fifteen sons and twenty servants.

@c    9:11. And Siba said to the king:  As thou my lord the hast commanded thy
@c    servant, so will thy servant do:  and Miphiboseth shall eat at my table,
@c    as one of the sons of the King.

@c    9:12. And Miphiboseth had a young son whose name was Micha:  and all
@c    that kindred of the house of Siba served Miphiboseth.

@c    9:13. But Miphiboseth dwelt in Jerusalem:  because he ate always of the
@c    king's table:  and he was lame of both feet.



@c    2 Kings Chapter 10


@c    The Ammonites shamefully abuse the ambassadors of David:  they hire the
@c    Syrians to the their assistance:  but are overthrown with their allies.

@c    10:1. And it came to pass after this, that the king of the children of
@c    Ammon died, and Hanon his son reigned in his stead.

@c    10:2. And David said:  I will shew kindness to Hanon the son of Daas, as
@c    his father shewed kindness to me.  So David sent his servants to comfort
@c    him for the death of his father.  But when the servants of David were
@c    come into the land of the children of Ammon,

@c    10:3. The princes of the children of Ammon said to Hanon their lord:
@c    Thinkest thou that for the honour of thy father, David hath sent
@c    comforters to thee, and hath not David rather sent his servants to thee
@c    to search, and spy into the city, and overthrow it?

@c    10:4. Wherefore Hanon took the servants of David, and shaved off the
@c    one half of their beards, and cut away half of their garments even to
@c    the buttocks, and sent them away.

@c    10:5. When this was told David, he sent to meet them:  for the men were
@c    sadly put to confusion, and David commanded them, saying:  Stay at
@c    Jericho, till your beards be grown, and then return.

@c    10:6. And the children of Ammon seeing that they had done an injury to
@c    David, sent and hired the Syrians of Rohob, and the Syrians of Soba,
@c    twenty thousand footmen, and of the king of Maacha a thousand men, and
@c    of Istob twelve thousand men.

@c    10:7. And when David heard this, he sent Joab and the whole army of
@c    warriors.

@c    10:8. And the children of Ammon came out, and set their men in array at
@c    the entering in of the gate:  but the Syrians of Soba, and of Rohob, and
@c    of Istob, and of Maacha were by themselves in the field.

@c    10:9. Then Joab seeing that the battle was prepared against him, both
@c    before and behind, chose of all the choice men of Israel, and put them
@c    in array against the Syrians:

@c    10:10. And the rest of the people he delivered to Abisai his brother,
@c    who set them in array against the children of Ammon.

@c    10:11. And Joab said:  If the Syrians are too strong for me, then thou
@c    shalt help me, but if the children of Ammon are too strong for thee,
@c    then I will help thee.

@c    10:12. Be of good courage, and let us fight for our people, and for the
@c    city of our God:  and the Lord will do what is good in his sight.

@c    10:13. And Joab and the people that were with him, began to fight
@c    against the Syrians:  and they immediately fled before him.

@c    10:14. And the children of Ammon seeing that the Syrians were fled,
@c    they fled also before Abisai, and entered into the city:  and Joab
@c    returned from the children of Ammon, and came to Jerusalem.

@c    10:15. Then the Syrians seeing that they had fallen before Israel,
@c    gathered themselves together.

@c    10:16. And Adarezer sent and fetched the Syrians, that were beyond the
@c    river, and brought over their army:  and Sobach, the captain of the host
@c    of Adarezer, was their general.

@c    10:17. And when this was told David, he gathered all Israel together,
@c    and passed over the Jordan, and came to Helam:  and the Syrians set
@c    themselves in array against David, and fought against him.

@c    10:18. And the Syrians fled before Israel, and David slew of the
@c    Syrians the men of seven hundred chariots, and forty thousand horsemen:
@c    and smote Sobach the captain of the army, who presently died.

@c    10:19. And all the kings that were auxiliaries of Adarezer, seeing
@c    themselves overcome by Israel, were afraid and fled away, eight and
@c    fifty thousand men before Israel.  And they made peace with Israel:  and
@c    served them, and all the Syrians were afraid to help the children of
@c    Ammon any more.



@c    2 Kings Chapter 11


@c    David falleth into the crime of adultery with Bethsabee:  and not
@c    finding other means to conceal it, causeth her husband Urias to be
@c    slain.  Then marrieth her, who beareth him a son.

@c    11:1. And it came to pass at the return of the year, at the time when
@c    kings go forth to war, that David sent Joab and his servants with him,
@c    and all Israel, and they spoiled the children of Ammon, and besieged
@c    Rabba:  but David remained in Jerusalem.

@c    11:2. In the mean time it happened that David arose from his bed after
@c    noon, and walked upon the roof of the king's house:  And he saw from the
@c    roof of his house a woman washing herself, over against him:  and the
@c    woman was very beautiful.

@c    11:3. And the king sent, and inquired who the woman was.  And it was
@c    told him, that she was Bethsabee the daughter of Eliam, the wife of
@c    Urias the Hethite.

@c    11:4. And David sent messengers, and took her, and she came in to him,
@c    and he slept with her:  and presently she was purified from her
@c    uncleanness:

@c    11:5. And she returned to her house having conceived.  And she sent and
@c    told David, and said:  I have conceived.

@c    11:6. And David sent to Joab, saying:  Send me Urias the Hethite.  And
@c    Joab sent Urias to David.

@c    11:7. And Urias came to David.  And David asked how Joab did, and the
@c    people, and how the war was carried on.

@c    11:8. And David said to Urias:  Go into thy house, and wash thy feet.
@c    And Urias went out from the king's house, and there went out after him
@c    a mess of meat from the king.

@c    11:9. But Urias slept before the gate of the king's house, with the
@c    other servants of his lord, and went not down to his own house.

@c    11:10. And it was told David by some that said:  Urias went not to his
@c    house.  And David said to Urias:  Didst thou not come from thy journey?
@c    why didst thou not go down to thy house?

@c    11:11. And Urias said to David:  The ark of God and Israel and Juda
@c    dwell in tents, and my lord Joab and the servants of my lord abide upon
@c    the face of the earth:  and shall I go into my house, to eat and to
@c    drink, and to sleep with my wife?  By thy welfare and by the welfare of
@c    thy soul I will not do this thing.

@c    11:12. Then David said to Urias:  Tarry here to day, and to morrow I
@c    will send thee away.  Urias tarried in Jerusalem that day and the next.

@c    11:13. And David called him to eat and to drink before him, and he made
@c    him drunk:  and he went out in the evening, and slept on his couch with
@c    the servants of his lord, and went not down into his house.

@c    11:14. And when the morning was come, David wrote a letter to Joab:  and
@c    sent it by the hand of Urias,

@c    11:15. Writing in the letter:  Set ye Urias in the front of the battle,
@c    where the fight is strongest:  and leave ye him, that he may be wounded
@c    and die.

@c    11:16. Wherefore as Joab was besieging the city, he put Urias in the
@c    place where he knew the bravest men were.

@c    11:17. And the men coming out of the city, fought against Joab, and
@c    there fell some of the people of the servants of David, and Urias the
@c    Hethite was killed also.

@c    11:18. Then Joab sent, and told David all things concerning the battle.

@c    11:19. And he charged the messenger, saying:  When thou hast told all
@c    the words of the battle to the king,

@c    11:20. If thou see him to be angry, and he shall say:  Why did you
@c    approach so near to the wall to fight?  knew you not that many darts are
@c    thrown from above off the wall?

@c    11:21. Who killed Abimelech the son of Jerobaal?  did not a woman cast a
@c    piece of a millstone upon him from the wall and slew him in Thebes?  Why
@c    did you go near the wall?  Thou shalt say:  Thy servant Urias the Hethite
@c    is also slain.

@c    11:22. So the messenger departed, and came and told David all that Joab
@c    had commanded him.

@c    11:23. And the messenger said to David:  The men prevailed against us,
@c    and they came out to us into the field:  and we vigorously charged and
@c    pursued them even to the gate of the city.

@c    11:24. And the archers shot their arrows at thy servants from off the
@c    wall above:  and some of the king's servants are slain, and thy servant
@c    Urias the Hethite is also dead.

@c    11:25. And David said to the messenger:  Thus shalt thou say to Joab:
@c    Let not this thing discourage thee:  for various is the event of war:
@c    and sometimes one, sometimes another is consumed by the sword:
@c    encourage thy warriors against the city, and exhort them that thou
@c    mayest overthrow it.

@c    11:26. And the wife of Urias heard that Urias her husband was dead, and
@c    she mourned for him.

@c    11:27. And the mourning being over, David sent and brought her into his
@c    house, and she became his wife, and she bore him a son:  and this thing
@c    which David had done, was displeasing to the Lord.



@c    2 Kings Chapter 12


@c    Nathan's parable.  David confesseth his sin, and is forgiven:  yet so as
@c    to be sentenced to most severe temporal punishments.  The death of the
@c    child.  The birth of Solomon.  The taking of Rabbath.

@c    12:1. And the Lord sent Nathan to David:  and when he was come to him,
@c    he said to him:  There were two men in one city, the one rich, and the
@c    other poor.

@c    12:2. The rich man had exceeding many sheep and oxen.

@c    12:3. But the poor man had nothing at all but one little ewe lamb,
@c    which he had bought and nourished up, and which had grown up in his
@c    house together with his children, eating of his bread, and drinking of
@c    his cup, and sleeping in his bosom:  and it was unto him as a daughter.

@c    12:4. And when a certain stranger was come to the rich man, he spared
@c    to take of his own sheep and oxen, to make a feast for that stranger,
@c    who was come to him, but took the poor man's ewe, and dressed it for
@c    the man that was come to him.

@c    12:5. And David's anger being exceedingly kindled against that man, he
@c    said to Nathan:  As the Lord liveth, the man that hath done this is a
@c    child of death.

@c    12:6. He shall restore the ewe fourfold, because he did this thing, and
@c    had no pity.

@c    12:7. And Nathan said to David:  Thou art the man.  Thus saith the Lord
@c    the God of Israel:  I anointed thee king over Israel, and I delivered
@c    thee from the hand of Saul,

@c    12:8. And gave thee thy master's house and thy master's wives into thy
@c    bosom, and gave thee the house of Israel and Juda:  and if these things
@c    be little, I shall add far greater things unto thee.

@c    12:9. Why therefore hast thou despised the word of the Lord, to do evil
@c    in my sight?  Thou hast killed Urias the Hethite with the sword, and
@c    hast taken his wife to be thy wife, and hast slain him with the sword
@c    of the children of Ammon.

@c    12:10. Therefore the sword shall never depart from thy house, because
@c    thou hast despised me, and hast taken the wife of Urias the Hethite to
@c    be thy wife.

@c    12:11. Thus saith the Lord:  Behold, I will raise up evil against thee
@c    out of thy own house, and I will take thy wives before thy eyes and
@c    give them to thy neighbour, and he shall lie with thy wives in the
@c    sight of this sun.

@c    I will raise, etc. . .All these evils, inasmuch as they were
@c    punishments, came upon David by a just judgment of God, for his sin,
@c    and therefore God says, I will raise, etc.; but inasmuch as they were
@c    sins, on the part of Absalom and his associates, God was not the author
@c    of them, but only permitted them.

@c    12:12. For thou didst it secretly:  but I will do this thing in the
@c    sight of all Israel, and in the sight of the sun.

@c    12:13. And David said to Nathan:  I have sinned against the Lord.  And
@c    Nathan said to David:  The Lord also hath taken away thy sin:  thou shalt
@c    not die.

@c    12:14. Nevertheless, because thou hast given occasion to the enemies of
@c    the Lord to blaspheme, for this thing, the child that is born to thee,
@c    shall surely die.

@c    12:15. And Nathan returned to his house.  The Lord also struck the child
@c    which the wife of Urias had borne to David, and his life was despaired
@c    of.

@c    12:16. And David besought the Lord for the child:  and David kept a
@c    fast, and going in by himself lay upon the ground.

@c    12:17. And the ancients of his house came, to make him rise from the
@c    ground:  but he would not, neither did he eat meat with them.

@c    12:18. And it came to pass on the seventh day that the child died:  and
@c    the servants of David feared to tell him, that the child was dead.  For
@c    they said:  Behold when the child was yet alive, we spoke to him, and he
@c    would not hearken to our voice:  how much more will he afflict himself
@c    if we tell him that the child is dead?

@c    12:19. But when David saw his servants whispering, he understood that
@c    the child was dead:  and he said to his servants:  Is the child dead?
@c    They answered him He is dead.

@c    12:20. Then David arose from the ground, and washed and anointed
@c    himself:  and when he had changed his apparel, he went into the house of
@c    the Lord:  and worshipped, and then he came into his own house, and he
@c    called for bread, and ate.

@c    12:21. And his servants said to him:  What thing is this that thou hast
@c    done?  thou didst fast and weep for the child, while it was alive, but
@c    when the child was dead, thou didst rise up, and eat bread.

@c    12:22. And he said:  While the child was yet alive, I fasted and wept
@c    for him:  for I said:  Who knoweth whether the Lord may not give him to
@c    me, and the child may live?

@c    12:23. But now that he is dead, why should I fast?  Shall I be able to
@c    bring him back any more?  I shall go to him rather:  but he shall not
@c    return to me.

@c    12:24. And David comforted Bethsabee his wife, and went in unto her,
@c    and slept with her:  and she bore a son, and he called his name Solomon,
@c    and the Lord loved him.

@c    12:25. And he sent by the hand of Nathan the prophet, and called his
@c    name, Amiable to the Lord, because the Lord loved him.

@c    Amiable to the Lord. . .Or, beloved of the Lord.  In Hebrew, Jedidiah.

@c    12:26. And Joab fought against Rabbath of the children of Ammon, and
@c    laid close siege to the royal city.

@c    12:27. And Joab sent messengers to David, saying:  I have fought against
@c    Rabbath, and the city of waters is about to be taken.

@c    The city of waters. . .Rabbath the royal city of the Ammonites, was
@c    called the city of waters, from being encompassed with waters.

@c    12:28. Now therefore gather thou the rest of the people together, and
@c    besiege the city and take it:  lest when the city shall be wasted by me,
@c    the victory be ascribed to my name.

@c    12:29. Then David gathered all the people together, and went out
@c    against Rabbath:  and after fighting, he took it.

@c    12:30. And he took the crown of their king from his head, the weight of
@c    which was a talent of gold, set with most precious stones, and it was
@c    put upon David's head, and the spoils of the city which were very great
@c    he carried away.

@c    12:31. And bringing forth the people thereof he sawed them, and drove
@c    over them chariots armed with iron:  and divided them with knives, and
@c    made them pass through brickkilns:  so did he to all the cities of the
@c    children of Ammon:  and David returned, with all the army to Jerusalem.



@c    2 Kings Chapter 13


@c    Ammon ravisheth Thamar.  For which Absalom killeth him, and flieth to
@c    Gessur.

@c    13:1. And it came to pass after this that Ammon the son of David loved
@c    the sister of Absalom the son of David, who was very beautiful, and her
@c    name was Thamar.

@c    13:2. And he was exceedingly fond of her, so that he fell sick for the
@c    love of her:  for as she was a virgin, he thought it hard to do any
@c    thing dishonestly with her.

@c    13:3. Now Ammon had a friend, named Jonadab the son of Semmaa the
@c    brother of David, a very wise man:

@c    A very wise man. . .That is, a crafty and subtle man:  for the counsel he
@c    gave on this occasion shews that his wisdom was but carnal and worldly.

@c    13:4. And he said to him:  Why dost thou grow so lean from day to day, O
@c    son of the king?  why dost thou not tell me the reason of it?  And Ammon
@c    said to him:  I am in love with Thamar the sister of my brother Absalom.

@c    13:5. And Jonadab said to him:  Lie down upon thy bed, and feign thyself
@c    sick:  and when thy father shall come to visit thee, say to him:  Let my
@c    sister Thamar, I pray thee, come to me, to give me to eat, and to make
@c    me a mess, that I may eat it at her hand.

@c    13:6. So Ammon lay down, and made as if he were sick:  and when the king
@c    came to visit him, Ammon said to the king:  I pray thee let my sister
@c    Thamar come, and make in my sight two little messes, that I may eat at
@c    her hand.

@c    13:7. Then David sent home to Thamar, saying:  Come to the house of thy
@c    brother Ammon, and make him a mess.

@c    13:8. And Thamar came to the house of Ammon her brother:  but he was
@c    laid down:  and she took meal and tempered it:  and dissolving it in his
@c    sight she made little messes.

@c    13:9. And taking what she had boiled, she poured it out, and set it
@c    before him, but he would not eat:  and Ammon said:  Put out all persons
@c    from me.  And when they had put all persons out,

@c    13:10. Ammon said to Thamar:  Bring the mess into the chamber, that I
@c    may eat at thy hand.  And Thamar took the little messes which she had
@c    made, and brought them in to her brother Ammon in the chamber.

@c    13:11. And when she had presented him the meat, he took hold of her,
@c    and said:  Come lie with me, my sister.

@c    13:12. She answered him:  Do not so, my brother, do not force me:  for no
@c    such thing must be done in Israel.  Do not thou this folly.

@c    13:13. For I shall not be able to bear my shame, and thou shalt be as
@c    one of the fools in Israel:  but rather speak to the king, and he will
@c    not deny me to thee.

@c    13:14. But he would not hearken to her prayers, but being stronger
@c    overpowered her and lay with her.

@c    13:15. Then Ammon hated her with an exceeding great hatred:  so that the
@c    hatred wherewith he hated her was greater than the love with which he
@c    had loved her before.  And Ammon said to her:  Arise, and get thee gone.

@c    13:16. She answered him:  The evil which now thou dost against me, in
@c    driving me away, is greater than that which thou didst before.  And he
@c    would not hearken to her:

@c    13:17. But calling the servants that ministered to him, he said:  Thrust
@c    this woman out from me:  and shut the door after her.

@c    13:18. And she was clothed with a long robe:  for the king's daughters
@c    that were virgins, used such kind of garments.  Then his servant thrust
@c    her out:  and shut the door after her.

@c    13:19. And she put ashes on her head, and rent her long robe and laid
@c    her hands upon her head, and went on crying.

@c    13:20. And Absalom her brother said to her:  Hath thy brother Ammon lain
@c    with thee?  but now, sister, hold thy peace, he is thy brother:  and
@c    afflict not thy heart for this thing.  So Thamar remained pining away in
@c    the house of Absalom her brother.

@c    13:21. And when king David heard of these things he was exceedingly
@c    grieved:  and he would not afflict the spirit of his son Ammon, for he
@c    loved him, because he was his firstborn.

@c    13:22. But Absalom spoke not to Ammon neither good nor evil:  for
@c    Absalom hated Ammon because he had ravished his sister Thamar.

@c    13:23. And it came to pass after two years, that the sheep of Absalom
@c    were shorn in Baalhasor, which is near Ephraim:  and Absalom invited all
@c    the king's sons:

@c    13:24. And he came to the king, and said to him:  Behold thy servant's
@c    sheep are shorn.  Let the king, I pray, with his servants come to his
@c    servant.

@c    13:25. And the king said to Absalom:  Nay, my son, do not ask that we
@c    should all come, and be chargeable to thee.  And when he pressed him,
@c    and he would not go, he blessed him.

@c    13:26. And Absalom said:  If thou wilt not come, at least let my brother
@c    Ammon, I beseech thee, come with us.  And the king said to him:  It is
@c    not necessary that he should go with thee.

@c    13:27. But Absalom pressed him, so that he let Ammon and all the king's
@c    sons go with him.  And Absalom made a feast as it were the feast of a
@c    king.

@c    13:28. And Absalom had commanded his servants, saying:  Take notice when
@c    Ammon shall be drunk with wine, and when I shall say to you:  Strike
@c    him, and kill him, fear not:  for it is I that command you:  take
@c    courage, and be valiant men.

@c    13:29. And the servants of Absalom did to Ammon as Absalom had
@c    commanded them.  And all the king's sons arose and got up every man upon
@c    his mule, and fled.

@c    13:30. And while they were yet in the way, a rumour came to David,
@c    saying:  Absalom hath slain all the king's sons, and there is not one
@c    them left.

@c    13:31. Then the king rose up, and rent his garments:  and fell upon the
@c    ground, and all his servants, that stood about him, rent their
@c    garments.

@c    13:32. But Jonadab the son of Semmaa David's brother answering, said:
@c    Let not my lord the king think that all the king's sons are slain:
@c    Ammon only is dead, for he was appointed by the mouth of Absalom from
@c    the day that he ravished his sister Thamar.

@c    13:33. Now therefore let not my lord the king take this thing into his
@c    heart, saying:  All the king's sons are slain:  for Ammon only is dead.

@c    13:34. But Absalom fled away:  and the young man that kept the watch,
@c    lifted up his eyes and looked, and behold there came much people by a
@c    by-way on the side of the mountain.

@c    13:35. And Jonadab said to the king:  Behold the king's sons are come:
@c    as thy servant said, so it is.

@c    13:36. And when he made an end of speaking, the king's sons also
@c    appeared:  and coming in they lifted up their voice, and wept:  and the
@c    king also and all his servants wept very much.

@c    13:37. But Absalom fled, and went to Tholomai the son of Ammiud the
@c    king of Gessur.  And David mourned for his son every day.

@c    13:38. And Absalom after he was fled, and come into Gessur, was there
@c    three years.  And king David ceased to pursue after Absalom, because he
@c    was comforted concerning the death of Ammon.



@c    2 Kings Chapter 14


@c    Joab procureth Absalom's return, and his admittance to the king's
@c    presence.

@c    14:1. And Joab the son of Sarvia, understanding that the king's heart
@c    was turned to Absalom,

@c    14:2. Sent to Thecua, and fetched from thence a wise woman:  and said to
@c    her:  Feign thyself to be a mourner, and put on mourning apparel, and be
@c    not anointed with oil, that thou mayest be as a woman that had a long
@c    time been mourning for one dead.

@c    14:3. And thou shalt go in to the king, and shalt speak to him in this
@c    manner.  And Joab put the words in her mouth.

@c    14:4. And when the woman of Thecua was come in to the king, she fell
@c    before him upon the ground, and worshipped, and said:  Save me, O king.

@c    14:5. And the king said to her:  What is the matter with thee?  She
@c    answered:  Alas, I am a widow woman:  for my husband is dead.

@c    14:6. And thy handmaid had two sons:  and they quarrelled with each
@c    other in the field, and there was none to part them:  and the one struck
@c    the other, and slew him.

@c    14:7. And behold the whole kindred rising against thy handmaid, saith:
@c    Deliver him that hath slain his brother, that we may kill him for the
@c    life of his brother, whom he slew, and that we may destroy the heir:
@c    and they seek to quench my spark which is left, and will leave my
@c    husband no name, nor remainder upon the earth.

@c    14:8. And the king said to the woman:  Go to thy house, and I will give
@c    charge concerning thee.

@c    14:9. And the woman of Thecua said to the king:  Upon me, my lord be the
@c    iniquity, and upon the house of my father:  but may the king and his
@c    throne be guiltless.

@c    14:10. And the king said:  If any one shall say ought against thee,
@c    bring him to me, and he shall not touch thee any more.

@c    14:11. And she said:  Let the king remember the Lord his God, that the
@c    next of kin be not multiplied to take revenge, and that they may not
@c    kill my son.  And he said:  As the Lord liveth, there shall not one hair
@c    of thy son fall to the earth.

@c    14:12. The woman said:  Let thy hand maid speak one word to my lord the
@c    king.  And he said:  Speak.

@c    14:13. And the woman said:  Why hast thou thought such a thing against
@c    the people of God, and why hath the king spoken this word, to sin, and
@c    not bring home again his own exile?

@c    14:14. We all die, and like waters that return no more, we fall down
@c    into the earth:  neither will God have a soul to perish, but recalleth,
@c    meaning that he that is cast off should not altogether perish.

@c    14:15. Now therefore I am come, to speak this word to my lord the king
@c    before the people.  And thy handmaid said:  I will speak to the king, it
@c    maybe the king will perform the request of his handmaid.

@c    14:16. And the king hath hearkened to me to deliver his handmaid out of
@c    the hand of all that would destroy me and my son together out of the
@c    inheritance of God.

@c    14:17. Then let thy handmaid say, that the word of the Lord the king be
@c    made as a sacrifice.  For even as an angel of God, so is my lord the
@c    king, that he is neither moved with blessing nor cursing:  wherefore the
@c    Lord thy God is also with thee.

@c    14:18. And the king answering, said to the woman:  Hide not from me the
@c    thing that I ask thee.  And the woman said to him:  Speak, my lord the
@c    king.

@c    14:19. And the king said:  Is not the hand of Joab with thee in all
@c    this?  The woman answered, and said:  By the health of thy soul, my lord,
@c    O king, it is neither on the left hand, nor on the right, in all these
@c    things which my lord the king hath spoken:  for thy servant Joab, he
@c    commanded me, and he put all these words into the mouth of thy
@c    handmaid.

@c    14:20. That I should come about with this form of speech, thy servant
@c    Joab commanded this:  but thou, my lord, O king, art wise, according to
@c    the wisdom of an angel of God, to understand all things upon earth.

@c    14:21. And the king said to Joab:  Behold I am appeased and have granted
@c    thy request:  Go therefore and fetch back the boy Absalom.

@c    14:22. And Joab falling down to the ground upon his face, adored, and
@c    blessed the king:  and Joab said:  This day thy servant hath understood,
@c    that I have found grace in thy sight, my lord, O king:  for thou hast
@c    fulfilled the request of thy servant.

@c    Blessed. . .That is, and gave thanks to the king.

@c    14:23. Then Joab arose and went to Gessur, and brought Absalom to
@c    Jerusalem.

@c    14:24. But the king said:  Let him return into his house, and let him
@c    not see my face.  So Absalom returned into his house, and saw not the
@c    king's face.

@c    14:25. But in all Israel there was not a man so comely, and so
@c    exceedingly beautiful as Absalom:  from the sole of the foot to the
@c    crown of his head there was no blemish in him.

@c    14:26. And when he polled his hair (now he was polled once a year,
@c    because his hair was burdensome to him) he weighed the hair of his head
@c    at two hundred sicles, according to the common weight.

@c    14:27. And there were born to Absalom three sons:  and one daughter,
@c    whose name was Thamar, and she was very beautiful.

@c    14:28. And Absalom dwelt two years in Jerusalem, and saw not the king's
@c    face.

@c    14:29. He sent therefore to Joab, to send him to the king:  but he would
@c    not come to him.  And when he had sent the second time, and he would not
@c    come to him,

@c    14:30. He said to his servants:  You know the field of Joab near my
@c    field, that hath a crop of barley:  go now and set it on fire.  So the
@c    servants of Absalom set the corn on fire.  And Joab's servants coming
@c    with their garments rent, said:  The servants of Absalom have set part
@c    of the field on fire.

@c    14:31. Then Joab arose, and came to Absalom to his house, and said:  Why
@c    have thy servants set my corn on fire?

@c    14:32. And Absalom answered Joab:  I sent to thee beseeching thee to
@c    come to me, that I might send thee to the king, to say to him:
@c    Wherefore am I come from Gessur?  it had been better for me to be there:
@c    I beseech thee therefore that I may see the face of the king:  and if he
@c    be mindful of my iniquity, let him kill me.

@c    14:33. So Joab going in to the king, told him all:  and Absalom was
@c    called for, and, he went in to the king:  and prostrated himself on the
@c    ground before him:  and the king kissed Absalom.



@c    2 Kings Chapter 15


@c    Absalom's policy and conspiracy.  David is obliged to flee.

@c    15:1. Now after these things Absalom made himself chariots, and
@c    horsemen, and fifty men to run before him.

@c    15:2. And Absalom rising up early stood by the entrance of the gate,
@c    and when any man had business to come to the king's judgment, Absalom
@c    called him to him, and said:  Of what city art thou?  He answered, and
@c    said:  Thy servant is of such tribe of Israel.

@c    15:3. And Absalom answered him:  Thy words seem to me good and just.  But
@c    there is no man appointed by the king to hear thee.  And Absalom said:

@c    15:4. O that they would make me judge over the land, that all that have
@c    business might come to me, that I might do them justice.

@c    15:5. Moreover when any man came to him to salute him, he put forth his
@c    hand, and took him, and kissed him.

@c    15:6. And this he did to all Israel that came for judgment, to be heard
@c    by the king, and he enticed the hearts of the men of Israel.

@c    15:7. And after forty years, Absalom said to king David:  Let me go, and
@c    pay my vows which I have vowed to the Lord in Hebron.

@c    15:8. For thy servant made a vow, when he was in Gessur of Syria,
@c    saying:  If the Lord shall bring me again into Jerusalem, I will offer
@c    sacrifice to the Lord.

@c    15:9. And king David said to him:  Go in peace.  And he arose, and went
@c    to Hebron.

@c    15:10. And Absalom sent spies into all the tribes of Israel, saying:  As
@c    soon as you shall hear the sound of the trumpet, say ye:  Absalom
@c    reigneth in Hebron.

@c    15:11. Now there went with Absalom two hundred men out of Jerusalem
@c    that were called, going with simplicity of heart, and knowing nothing
@c    of the design.

@c    15:12. Absalom also sent for Achitophel the Gilonite, David's
@c    counsellor, from his city Gilo.  And while he was offering sacrifices,
@c    there was a strong conspiracy, and the people running together
@c    increased with Absalom.

@c    15:13. And there came a messenger to David, saying:  All Israel with
@c    their whole heart followeth Absalom.

@c    15:14. And David said to his servants, that were with him in Jerusalem:
@c    Arise and let us flee:  for we shall not escape else from the face of
@c    Absalom:  make haste to go out, lest he come and overtake us, and bring
@c    ruin upon us, and smite the city with the edge of the sword.

@c    15:15. And the king's servants said to him:  Whatsoever our lord the
@c    king shall command, we thy servants will willingly execute.

@c    15:16. And the king went forth, and all his household on foot:  and the
@c    king left ten women his concubines to keep the house:

@c    Concubines. . .That is, wives of an inferior degree.

@c    15:17. And the king going forth and all Israel on foot, stood afar off
@c    from the house:

@c    15:18. And all his servants walked by him, and the bands of the
@c    Cerethi, and the Phelethi, and all the Gethites, valiant warriors, six
@c    hundred men who had followed him from Geth on foot, went before the
@c    king.

@c    15:19. And the king said to Ethai the Gethite:  Why comest thou with us:
@c    return and dwell with the king, for thou art a stranger, and art come
@c    out of thy own place.

@c    15:20. Yesterday thou camest, and to day shalt thou be forced to go
@c    forth with us?  but I shall go whither I am going:  return thou, and take
@c    back thy brethren with thee, and the Lord will shew thee mercy, and
@c    truth, because thou hast shewn grace and fidelity.

@c    15:21. And Ethai answered the king, saying:  As the Lord liveth, and as
@c    my lord the king liveth:  in what place soever thou shalt be, my lord, O
@c    king, either in death, or in life, there will thy servant be.

@c    15:22. And David said to Ethai:  Come, and pass over.  And Ethai the
@c    Gethite passed, and all the men that were with him, and the rest of the
@c    people.

@c    15:23. And they all wept with a loud voice, and all the people passed
@c    over:  the king also himself went over the brook Cedron, and all the
@c    people marched towards the way that looketh to the desert.

@c    15:24. And Sadoc the priest also came, and all the Levites with him
@c    carrying the ark of the covenant of God, and they set down the ark of
@c    God:  and Abiathar went up, till all the people that was come out of the
@c    city had done passing.

@c    15:25. And the king said to Sadoc:  Carry back the ark of God into the
@c    city:  if I shall find grace in the sight of the Lord, he will bring me
@c    again, and he will shew me it, and his tabernacle.

@c    15:26. But if he shall say to me:  Thou pleasest me not:  I am ready, let
@c    him do that which is good before him.

@c    15:27. And the king said to Sadoc the priest:  O seer, return into the
@c    city in peace:  and let Achimaas thy son, and Jonathan the son of
@c    Abiathar, your two sons, be with you.

@c    15:28. Behold I will lie hid in the plains of the wilderness, till
@c    there come word from you to certify me.

@c    15:29. So Sadoc and Abiathar carried back the ark of God into
@c    Jerusalem:  and they tarried there.

@c    15:30. But David went up by the ascent of mount Olivet, going up and
@c    weeping, walking barefoot, and with his head covered, and all the
@c    people that were with them, went up with their heads covered weeping.

@c    Weeping, etc. . .David on this occasion wept for his sins, which he knew
@c    were the cause of all his sufferings.

@c    15:31. And it was told David that Achitophel also was in the conspiracy
@c    with Absalom, and David said:  Infatuate, O Lord, I beseech thee, the
@c    counsel of Achitophel.

@c    15:32. And when David was come to the top of the mountain, where he was
@c    about to adore the Lord, behold Chusai the Arachite, came to meet him
@c    with his garment rent and his head covered with earth.

@c    15:33. And David said to him:  If thou come with me, thou wilt be a
@c    burden to me:

@c    15:34. But if thou return into the city, and wilt say to Absalom:  I am
@c    thy servant, O king:  as I have been thy father's servant, so I will be
@c    thy servant:  thou shalt defeat the counsel of Achitophel.

@c    15:35. And thou hast with thee Sadoc, and soever thou shalt hear out of
@c    the king's house, thou shalt tell it to Sadoc and Abiathar the priests.

@c    15:36. And there are with them their two sons Achimaas; the son of
@c    Sadoc, and Jonathan the son of Abiathar:  and you shall send by them to
@c    me every thing that you shall hear.

@c    15:37. Then Chusai the friend of David went into the city, and Absalom
@c    came into Jerusalem.



@c    2 Kings Chapter 16


@c    Siba bringeth provisions to David.  Semei curseth him.  Absalom defileth
@c    his father's wives.

@c    16:1. And when David was a little past the top of the hill, behold Siba
@c    the servant of Miphiboseth came to meet him with two asses, laden with
@c    two hundred loaves of bread, and a hundred bunches of raisins, a
@c    hundred cakes of figs, and a vessel of wine.

@c    16:2. And the king said to Siba:  What mean these things?  And Siba
@c    answered:  The asses are for the king's household to sit on:  and the
@c    loaves and the figs for thy servants to eat, and the wine to drink if
@c    any man be faint in the desert.

@c    16:3. And the king said:  Where is thy master's son?  And Siba answered
@c    the king:  He remained in Jerusalem, saying:  To day, will the house of
@c    Israel restore me the kingdom of my father.

@c    16:4. And the king said to Siba:  I give thee all that belonged to
@c    Miphiboseth.  And Siba said:  I beseech thee let me find grace before
@c    thee, my lord, O king.

@c    16:5. And king David came as far as Bahurim:  and behold there came out
@c    from thence a man of the kindred of the house of Saul named Semei, the
@c    son of Gera, and coming out he cursed as he went on,

@c    16:6. And he threw stones at David, and at all the servants of king
@c    David:  and all the people, and all the warriors walked on the right,
@c    and on the left side of the king.

@c    16:7. And thus said Semei when he cursed the king:  Come out, come out,
@c    thou man of blood, and thou man of Belial.

@c    16:8. The Lord hath repaid thee for all the blood of the house of Saul:
@c    because thou hast usurped the kingdom in his stead, and the Lord hath
@c    given the kingdom into the hand of Absalom thy son:  and behold thy
@c    evils press upon thee, because thou art a man of blood.

@c    16:9. And Abisai the son of Sarvia said to the king:  Why should this
@c    dead dog curse my lord the king?  I will go, and cut off his head.

@c    16:10. And the king said:  What have I to do with you, ye sons of
@c    Sarvia?  Let him alone and let him curse:  for the Lord hath bid him
@c    curse David:  and who is he that shall dare say, why hath he done so?

@c    Hath bid him curse. . .Not that the Lord was the author of Semei's sin,
@c    which proceeded purely from his own malice, and the abuse of his free
@c    will.  But that knowing, and suffering his malicious disposition to
@c    break out on this occasion, he made use of him as his instrument to
@c    punish David for his sins.

@c    16:11. And the king said to Abisai, and to all his servants:  Behold my
@c    son, who came forth from my bowels, seeketh my life:  how much more now
@c    a son of Jemini?  let him alone that he may curse as the Lord hath
@c    bidden him.

@c    16:12. Perhaps the Lord may look upon my affliction, and the Lord may
@c    render me good for the cursing of this day.

@c    16:13. And David and his men with him went by the way.  And Semei by the
@c    hill's side went over against him, cursing, and casting stones at him,
@c    and scattering earth.

@c    16:14. And the king and all the people with him came weary, and
@c    refreshed themselves there.

@c    16:15. But Absalom and all his people came into Jerusalem, and
@c    Achitophel was with him.

@c    16:16. And when Chusai the Arachite, David's friend, was come to
@c    Absalom, he said to him:  God save thee, O king, God save thee, O king.

@c    16:17. And Absalom said to him, Is this thy kindness to thy friend?  Why
@c    wentest thou not with thy friend?

@c    16:18. And Chusai answered Absalom:  Nay:  for I will be his, whom the
@c    Lord hath chosen, and all this people, and all Israel, and with him
@c    will I abide.

@c    16:19. Besides this, whom shall I serve?  is it not the king's son?  as I
@c    have served thy father, so will I serve thee also.

@c    16:20. And Absalom said to Achitophel:  Consult what we are to do.

@c    16:21. And Achitophel said to Absalom:  Go in to the concubines of thy
@c    father, whom he hath left to keep the house:  that when all Israel shall
@c    hear that thou hast disgraced thy father, their hands may be
@c    strengthened with thee.

@c    Their hands may be strengthened, etc. . .The people might apprehend lest
@c    Absalom should be reconciled to his father, and therefore they followed
@c    him with some fear of being left in the lurch, till they saw such a
@c    crime committed as seemed to make a reconciliation impossible.

@c    16:22. So they spread a tent for Absalom on the top of the house, and
@c    he went in to his father's concubines before all Israel.

@c    16:23. Now the counsel of Achitophel, which he gave in those days, was
@c    as if a man should consult God:  so was all the counsel of Achitophel,
@c    both when he was with David, and when he was with Absalom.



@c    2 Kings Chapter 17


@c    Achitophel's counsel is defeated by Chusai:  who sendeth intelligence to
@c    David.  Achitophel hangeth himself.

@c    17:1. And Achitophel said to Absalom:  I will choose me twelve thousand
@c    men, and I will arise and pursue after David this night.

@c    17:2. And coming upon him (for he is now weary, and weak handed) I will
@c    defeat him:  and when all the people is put to flight that is with him,
@c    I will kill the king who will be left alone.

@c    17:3. And I will bring back all the people, as if they were but one
@c    man:  for thou seekest but one man:  and all the people shall be in
@c    peace.

@c    17:4. And his saying pleased Absalom, and all the ancients of Israel.

@c    17:5. But Absalom said:  Call Chusai the Arachite, and let us hear what
@c    he also saith.

@c    17:6. And when Chusai was come to Absalom, Absalom said to him:
@c    Achitophel hath spoken after this manner:  shall we do it or not?  what
@c    counsel dost thou give?

@c    17:7. And Chusai said to Absalom:  The counsel that Achitophel hath
@c    given this time is not good.

@c    17:8. And again Chusai said:  Thou knowest thy father, and the men that
@c    are with him, that they are very valiant, and bitter in their mind, as
@c    a bear raging in the wood when her whelps are taken away:  and thy
@c    father is a warrior, and will not lodge with the people.

@c    17:9. Perhaps he now lieth hid in pits, or in some other place where he
@c    liest:  and when any one shall fall at the first, every one that heareth
@c    it shall say:  There is a slaughter among the people that followed
@c    Absalom.

@c    17:10. And the most valiant man whose heart is as the heart of a lion,
@c    shall melt for fear:  for all the people of Israel know thy father to be
@c    a valiant man, and that all who are with him are valiant.

@c    17:11. But this seemeth to me to be good counsel:  Let all Israel be
@c    gathered to thee, from Dan to Bersabee, as the sand of the sea which
@c    cannot be numbered:  and thou shalt be in the midst of them.

@c    17:12. And we shall come upon him in what place soever he shall be
@c    found:  and we shall cover him, as the dew falleth upon the ground, and
@c    we shall not leave of the men that are with him, not so much as one.

@c    17:13. And if he shall enter into any city, all Israel shall cast ropes
@c    round about that city, and we will draw it into the river, so that
@c    there shall not be found so much as one small stone thereof.

@c    17:14. And Absalom, and all the men of Israel said:  The counsel of
@c    Chusai the Arachite is better than the counsel of Achitophel:  and by
@c    the will of the Lord the profitable counsel of Achitophel was defeated,
@c    that the Lord might bring evil upon Absalom.

@c    17:15. And Chusai said to Sadoc and Abiathar the priests:  Thus and thus
@c    did Achitophel counsel Absalom, and the ancients of Israel:  and thus
@c    and thus did I counsel them.

@c    17:16. Now therefore send quickly, and tell David, saying:  Tarry not
@c    this night in the plains of the wilderness, but without delay pass
@c    over:  lest the king be swallowed up, and all the people that is with
@c    him.

@c    17:17. And Jonathan and Achimaas stayed by the fountain Rogel:  and
@c    there went a maid and told them:  and they went forward, to carry the
@c    message to king David, for they might not be seen, nor enter into the
@c    city.

@c    17:18. But a certain boy saw them, and told Absalom:  but they making
@c    haste went into the house of a certain man in Bahurim, who had a well
@c    in his court, and they went down into it.

@c    17:19. And a woman took, and spread a covering over the mouth of the
@c    well, as it were to dry sodden barley and so the thing was not known.

@c    17:20. And when Absalom's servants were come into the house, they said
@c    to the woman:  Where is Achimaas and Jonathan?  and the woman answered
@c    them:  They passed on in haste, after they had tasted a little water.
@c    But they that sought them, when they found them not, returned into
@c    Jerusalem.

@c    17:21. And when they were gone, they came up out of the well, and going
@c    on told king David, and said:  Arise, and pass quickly over the river:
@c    for this manner of counsel has Achitophel given against you.

@c    17:22. So David arose, and all the people that were with him, and they
@c    passed over the Jordan, until it grew light, and not one of them was
@c    left that was not gone ever the river.

@c    17:23. But Achitophel seeing that his counsel was not followed, saddled
@c    his ass, and arose and went home to his house and to his city, and
@c    putting his house in order, hanged himself, and was buried in the
@c    sepulchre of his father.

@c    17:24. But David came to the camp, and Absalom passed over the Jordan,
@c    he and all the men of Israel with him.

@c    To the camp. . .The city of Mahanaim, the name of which, in Hebrew,
@c    signifies The camp.  It was a city of note at that time, as appears from
@c    its having been chosen by Isboseth for the place of his residence.

@c    17:25. Now Absalom appointed Amasa in Joab's stead over the army:  and
@c    Amasa was the son of a man who was called Jethra, of Jezrael, who went
@c    in to Abigail the daughter of Naas, the sister of Sarvia who was the
@c    mother of Joab.

@c    17:26. And Israel camped with Absalom in the land of Galaad.

@c    17:27. And when David was come to the camp, Sobi the son of Naas of
@c    Rabbath of the children of Ammon, and Machir the son of Ammihel of
@c    Lodabar and Berzellai the Galaadite of Rogelim,

@c    17:28. Brought him beds, and tapestry, and earthen vessels, and wheat,
@c    and barley, and meal, and parched corn, and beans, and lentils, and
@c    fried pulse,

@c    17:29. And honey, and butter, and sheep, and fat calves, and they gave
@c    to David and the people that were with him, to eat:  for they suspected
@c    that the people were faint with hunger and thirst in the wilderness.



@c    2 Kings Chapter 18


@c    Absalom is defeated, and slain by Joab.  David mourneth for him.

@c    18:1. And David, having reviewed his people, appointed over them
@c    captains of thousands and of hundreds,

@c    18:2. And sent forth a third part of the people under the hand of Joab,
@c    and a third part under the hand of Abisai the son of Sarvia Joab's
@c    brother, and a third part under the hand of Ethai, who was of Geth:  and
@c    the king said to the people:  I also will go forth with you.

@c    18:3. And the people answered:  Thou shalt not go forth:  for if we flee
@c    away, they will not much mind us:  or if half of us should fall, they
@c    will not greatly care:  for thou alone art accounted for ten thousand:
@c    it is better therefore that thou shouldst be in the city to succour us.

@c    18:4. And the king said to them:  What seemeth good to you, that will I
@c    do.  And the king stood by the gate:  and all the people went forth by
@c    their troops, by hundreds and by thousands.

@c    18:5. And the king commanded Joab, and Abisai, and Ethai, saying:  Save
@c    me the boy Absalom.  And all the people heard the king giving charge to
@c    all the princes concerning Absalom.

@c    18:6. So the people went out into the field against Israel, and the
@c    battle was fought in the forest of Ephraim.

@c    18:7. And the people of Israel were defeated there by David's army, and
@c    a great slaughter was made that day of twenty thousand men.

@c    18:8. And the battle there was scattered over the face of all the
@c    country, and there were many more of the people whom the forest
@c    consumed, than whom the sword devoured that day.

@c    Consumed. . .Viz., by pits and precipices.

@c    18:9. And it happened that Absalom met the servants of David, riding on
@c    a mule:  and as the mule went under a thick and large oak, his head
@c    stuck in the oak:  and while he hung between the heaven and the earth,
@c    the mule on which he rode passed on.

@c    18:10. And one saw this and told Joab, saying:  I saw Absalom hanging
@c    upon an oak.

@c    18:11. And Joab said to the man that told him:  If thou sawest him, why
@c    didst thou not stab him to the ground, and I would have given thee ten
@c    sicles of silver, and a belt?

@c    18:12. And he said to Joab:  If thou wouldst have paid down in my hands
@c    a thousand pieces of silver, I would not lay my hands upon the king's
@c    son for in our hearing the king charged thee, and Abisai, and Ethai,
@c    saying:  Save me the boy Absalom.

@c    18:13. Yea and if I should have acted boldly against my own life, this
@c    could not have been hid from the king, and wouldst thou have stood by
@c    me?

@c    18:14. And Joab said:  Not as thou wilt, but I will set upon him in thy
@c    sight.  So he took three lances in his hand, and thrust them into the
@c    heart of Absalom:  and whilst he yet panted for life, sticking on the
@c    oak,

@c    18:15. Ten young men, armourbearers of Joab, ran up, and striking him
@c    slew him.

@c    18:16. And Joab sounded the trumpet, and kept back the people from
@c    pursuing after Israel in their flight, being willing to spare the
@c    multitude.

@c    18:17. And they took Absalom, and cast him into a great pit in the
@c    forest, and they laid an exceeding great heap of stones upon him:  but
@c    all Israel fled to their own dwellings.

@c    18:18. Now Absalom had reared up for himself, in his lifetime, a
@c    pillar, which is in the king's valley:  for he said:  I have no son, and
@c    this shall be the monument of my name.  And he called the pillar by his
@c    own name, and it is called the hand of Absalom, to this day.

@c    No son. . .The sons mentioned above, chap. 14.27, were dead when this
@c    pillar was erected:  unless we suppose he raised this pillar before they
@c    were born.

@c    18:19. And Achimaas the son of Sadoc said:  I will run and tell the
@c    king, that the Lord hath done judgment for him from the hand of his
@c    enemies.

@c    18:20. And Joab said to him:  Thou shalt not be the messenger this day,
@c    but shalt bear tidings another day:  this day I will not have thee bear
@c    tidings, because the king's son is dead.

@c    18:21. And Joab said to Chusai:  Go, and tell the king what thou hast
@c    seen.  Chusai bowed down to Joab, and ran.

@c    18:22. Then Achimaas the son of Sadoc said to Joab again:  Why might not
@c    I also run after Chusai?  And Joab said to him:  Why wilt thou run, my
@c    son?  thou wilt not be the bearer of good tidings.

@c    18:23. He answered:  But what if I run?  And he said to him:  Run.  Then
@c    Achimaas running by a nearer way passed Chusai.

@c    18:24. And David sat between the two gates:  and the watchman that was
@c    on the top of the gate upon the wall, lifting up his eyes, saw a man
@c    running alone.

@c    18:25. And crying out he told the king:  and the king said:  If he be
@c    alone, there are good tidings in his mouth.  And as he was coming apace,
@c    and drawing nearer,

@c    18:26. The watchman saw another man running, and crying aloud from
@c    above, he said:  I see another man running alone.  And the king said:  He
@c    also is a good messenger.

@c    18:27. And the watchman said:  The running of the foremost seemeth to me
@c    like the running of Achimaas the son of Sadoc.  And the king said:  He is
@c    a good man:  and cometh with good news.

@c    18:28. And Achimaas crying out, said to the king:  God save thee, O
@c    king.  And falling down before the king with his face to the ground, he
@c    said:  Blessed be the Lord thy God, who hath shut up the men that have
@c    lifted up their hands against the lord my king.

@c    18:29. And the king said:  Is the young man Absalom safe?  And Achimaas
@c    said:  I saw a great tumult, O king, when thy servant Joab sent me thy
@c    servant:  I know nothing else.

@c    18:30. And the king said to him:  Pass, and stand here.

@c    18:31. And when he had passed, and stood still, Chusai appeared and
@c    coming up he said:  I bring good tidings, my lord, the king, for the
@c    Lord hath judged for thee this day from the hand of all that have risen
@c    up against thee.

@c    18:32. And the king said to Chusai:  Is the young man Absalom safe?  And
@c    Chusai answering him, said:  Let the enemies of my lord, the king, and
@c    all that rise against him unto evil, be as the young man is.

@c    18:33. The king therefore being much moved, went up to the high chamber
@c    over the gate, and wept.  And as he went he spoke in this manner:  My son
@c    Absalom, Absalom my son:  would to God that I might die for thee,
@c    Absalom my son, my son Absalom.

@c    Would to God. . .David lamented the death of Absalom, because of the
@c    wretched state in which he died:  and therefore would have been glad to
@c    have saved his life, even by dying for him.  In which he was a figure of
@c    Christ weeping, praying and dying for his rebellious children, and even
@c    for them that crucified him.



@c    2 Kings Chapter 19


@c    David, at the remonstrances of Joab, ceaseth his mourning.  He is
@c    invited back and met by Semei and Miphiboseth:  a strife between the men
@c    of Juda and the men of Israel.

@c    19:1. And it was told Joab, that the king wept and mourned for his son:

@c    19:2. And the victory that day was turned into mourning unto all the
@c    people:  for the people heard say that day:  The king grieveth for his
@c    son.

@c    19:3. And the people shunned the going into the city that day as a
@c    people would do that hath turned their backs, and fled away from the
@c    battle.

@c    19:4. And the king covered his head, and cried with a loud voice:  O my
@c    son Absalom, O Absalom my son, O my son.

@c    19:5. Then Joab going into the house to the king, said:  Thou hast
@c    shamed this day the faces of all thy servants, that have saved thy
@c    life, and the lives of thy sons, and of thy daughters, and the lives of
@c    thy wives, and the lives of thy concubines.

@c    19:6. Thou lovest them that hate thee, and thou hatest them that love
@c    thee:  and thou hast shewn this day that thou carest not for thy nobles,
@c    nor for thy servants:  and I now plainly perceive that if Absalom had
@c    lived, and all we had been slain, then it would have pleased thee.

@c    19:7. Now therefore arise, and go out, and speak to the satisfaction of
@c    thy servants:  for I swear to thee by the Lord, that if thou wilt not go
@c    forth, there will not tarry with thee so much as one this night:  and
@c    that will be worse to thee, than all the evils that have befallen thee
@c    from thy youth until now.

@c    19:8. Then the king arose and sat in the gate:  and it was told to all
@c    the people that the king sat in the gate:  and all the people came
@c    before the king, but Israel fled to their own dwellings.

@c    19:9. And all the people were at strife in all the tribes of Israel,
@c    saying:  The king delivered us out of the hand of our enemies, and he
@c    saved us out of the hand of the Philistines:  and now he is fled out of
@c    the land for Absalom.

@c    19:10. But Absalom, whom we anointed over us, is dead in the battle:
@c    how long are you silent, and bring not back the king?

@c    19:11. And king David sent to Sadoc, and Abiathar the priests, saying:
@c    Speak to the ancients of Juda, saying:  Why are you the last to bring
@c    the king back to his house?  (For the talk of all Israel was come to the
@c    king in his house.)

@c    19:12. You are my brethren, you are my bone, and my flesh, why are you
@c    the last to bring back the king?

@c    19:13. And say ye to Amasa:  Art not thou my bone, and my flesh?  So do
@c    God to me and add more, if thou be not the chief captain of the army
@c    before me always in the place of Joab.

@c    19:14. And he inclined the heart of all the men of Juda, as it were of
@c    one man:  and they sent to the king, saying:  Return thou, and all thy
@c    servants.

@c    19:15. And the king returned and came as far as the Jordan, and all
@c    Juda came as far as Galgal to meet the king, and to bring him over the
@c    Jordan.

@c    19:16. And Semei the son of Gera the son of Jemini of Bahurim, made
@c    haste and went down with the men of Juda to meet king David,

@c    19:17. With a thousand men of Benjamin, and Siba the servant of the
@c    house of Saul:  and his fifteen sons, and twenty servants were with him:
@c    and going over the Jordan,

@c    19:18.They passed the fords before the king, that they might help over
@c    the king's household, and do according to his commandment.  And Semei
@c    the son of Gera falling down before the king, when he was come over the
@c    Jordan,

@c    19:19. Said to him:  Impute not to me, my lord, the iniquity, nor
@c    remember the injuries of thy servant on the day that thou, my lord, the
@c    king, wentest out of Jerusalem, nor lay it up in thy heart, O king.

@c    19:20. For I thy servant acknowledge my sin:  and therefore I am come
@c    this day the first of all the house of Joseph, and am come down to meet
@c    my lord the king.

@c    19:21. But Abisai the son of Sarvia answering, said:  Shall Semei for
@c    these words not be put to death, because he cursed the Lord's anointed?

@c    19:22. And David said:  What have I to do with you, ye sons of Sarvia?
@c    why are you a satan this day to me?  shall there any man be killed this
@c    day in Israel?  do not I know that this day I am made king over Israel?

@c    19:23. And the king said to Semei:  Thou shalt not die.  And he swore
@c    unto him.

@c    19:24. And Miphiboseth the son of Saul came down to meet the king, and
@c    he had neither washed his feet, nor trimmed his beard:  nor washed his
@c    garments from the day that the king went out, until the day of his
@c    return in peace.

@c    19:25. And when he met the king at Jerusalem, the king said to him:  Why
@c    camest thou not with me, Miphiboseth?

@c    19:26. And he answering, said:  My lord, O king, my servant despised me:
@c    for I thy servant spoke to him to saddle me an ass, that I might get on
@c    and go with the king:  for I thy servant am lame.

@c    19:27. Moreover he hath also accused me thy servant to thee, my lord
@c    the king:  but thou my lord the king art as an angel of God, do what
@c    pleaseth thee.

@c    19:28. For all of my father's house were no better than worthy of death
@c    before my lord the king; and thou hast set me thy servant among the
@c    guests of thy table:  what just complaint therefore have I?  or what
@c    right to cry any more to the king?

@c    19:29. Then the king said to him:  Why speakest thou any more?  what I
@c    have said is determined:  thou and Siba divide the possessions.

@c    19:30. And Miphiboseth answered the king:  Yea, let him take all,
@c    forasmuch as my lord the king is returned peaceably into his house.

@c    19:31. Berzellai also the Galaadite coming down from Rogelim, brought
@c    the king over the Jordan, being ready also to wait on him beyond the
@c    river.

@c    19:32. Now Berzellai the Galaadite was of a great age, that is to say,
@c    fourscore years old, and he provided the king with sustenance when he
@c    abode in the camp:  for he was a man exceeding rich.

@c    19:33. And the king said to Berzellai:  Come with me that thou mayest
@c    rest secure with me in Jerusalem.

@c    19:34. And Berzellai said to the king:  How many are the days of the
@c    years of my life, that I should go up with the king to Jerusalem?

@c    19:35. I am this day fourscore years old, are my senses quick to
@c    discern sweet and bitter?  or can meat or drink delight thy servant?  or
@c    can I hear any more the voice of singing men and singing women?  why
@c    should thy servant be a burden to my lord, the king?

@c    19:36. I thy servant will go on a little way from the Jordan with thee:
@c    I need not this recompense.

@c    19:37. But I beseech thee let thy servant return, and die in my own
@c    city, and be buried by the sepulchre of my father, and of my mother.
@c    But there is thy servant Chamaam, let him go with thee, my lord, the
@c    king, and do to him whatsoever seemeth good to thee.

@c    19:38. Then the king said to him:  Let Chamaam go over with me, and I
@c    will do for him whatsoever shall please thee, and all that thou shalt
@c    ask of me, thou shalt obtain.

@c    19:39. And when all the people and the king had passed over the Jordan,
@c    the king kissed Berzellai, and blessed him:  and he returned to his own
@c    place.

@c    19:40. So the king went on to Galgal, and Chamaam with him.  Now all the
@c    people of Juda had brought the king over, and only half of the people
@c    of Israel were there.

@c    19:41. Therefore all the men of Israel running together to the king,
@c    said to him:  Why have our brethren the men of Juda stolen thee away,
@c    and have brought the king and his household over the Jordan, and all
@c    the men of David with him?

@c    19:42. And all the men of Juda answered the men of Israel:  Because the
@c    king is nearer to me:  why art thou angry for this matter?  have we eaten
@c    any thing of the king's, or have any gifts been given us?

@c    19:43. And the men of Israel answered the men of Juda, and said:  I have
@c    ten parts in the king more than thou, and David belongeth to me more
@c    than to thee:  why hast thou done me a wrong, and why was it not told me
@c    first, that I might bring back my king?  And the men of Juda answered
@c    more harshly than the men of Israel.



@c    2 Kings Chapter 20


@c    Seba's rebellion.  Amasa is slain by Joab.  Abela is besieged, but upon
@c    the citizens casting over the wall the head of Seba, Joab departeth
@c    with all his army.

@c    20:1. And there happened to be there a man of Belial, whose name was
@c    Seba, the son of Bochri, a man of Jemini:  and he sounded the trumpet,
@c    and said:  We have no part in David, nor inheritance in the son of Isai:
@c    return to thy dwellings, O Israel.

@c    20:2. And all Israel departed from David, and followed Seba the son of
@c    Bochri:  but the men of Juda stuck to their king from the Jordan unto
@c    Jerusalem.

@c    20:3. And when the king was come into his house at Jerusalem, he took
@c    the ten women his concubines, whom he had left to keep the house, and
@c    put them inward, allowing them provisions:  and he went not in unto
@c    them, but they were shut up unto the day of their death living in
@c    widowhood.

@c    20:4. And the king said to Amasa:  Assemble to me all the men of Juda
@c    against the third day, and be thou here present.

@c    20:5. So Amasa went to assemble the men of Juda, but he tarried beyond
@c    the set time which the king had appointed him.

@c    20:6. And David said to Abisai:  Now will Seba the son of Bochri do us
@c    more harm than did Absalom:  take thou therefore the servants of thy
@c    lord, and pursue after him, lest he find fenced cities, and escape us.

@c    20:7. So Joab's men went out with him, and the Cerethi and the
@c    Phelethi:  and all the valiant men went out of Jerusalem to pursue after
@c    Seba the son of Bochri.

@c    20:8. And when they were at the great stone which is in Gabaon, Amasa
@c    coming met them.  And Joab had on a close coat of equal length with his
@c    habit, and over it was girded with a sword hanging down to his flank,
@c    in a scabbard, made in such manner as to come out with the least motion
@c    and strike.

@c    20:9. And Joab said to Amasa:  God save thee, my brother.  And he took
@c    Amasa by the chin with his right hand to kiss him.

@c    20:10. But Amasa did not take notice of the sword, which Joab had, and
@c    he struck him in the side, and shed out his bowels to the ground, and
@c    gave him not a second wound, and he died.  And Joab, and Abisai his
@c    brother pursued after Seba the son of Bochri.

@c    20:11. In the mean time some men of Joab's company stopping at the dead
@c    body of Amasa, said:  Behold he that would have been in Joab's stead the
@c    companion of David.

@c    20:12. And Amasa imbrued with blood, lay in the midst of the way.  A
@c    certain man saw this that all the people stood still to look upon him,
@c    so he removed Amasa out of the highway into the field, and covered him
@c    with a garment, that they who passed might, not stop on his account.

@c    20:13. And when he was removed out of the way, all the people went on
@c    following Joab to pursue after Seba the son of Bochri.

@c    20:14. Now he had passed through all the tribes of Israel unto Abela
@c    and Bethmaacha:  and all the chosen men were gathered together unto him.

@c    Abela and Bethmaacha. . .Cities of the tribe of Nephtali.

@c    20:15. And they came, and besieged him in Abela, and in Bethmaacha, and
@c    they cast up works round the city, and the city was besieged:  and all
@c    the people that were with Joab, laboured to throw down the walls.

@c    20:16. And a wise woman cried out from the city:  Hear, hear, and say to
@c    Joab:  Come near hither, and I will speak with thee.

@c    20:17. And when he was come near to her, she said to him:  Art thou
@c    Joab?  And he answered:  I am.  And she spoke thus to him:  Hear the
@c    words of thy handmaid.  He answered:  I do hear.

@c    20:18. And she again said:  A saying was used in the old proverb:  They
@c    that inquire, let them inquire in Abela:  and so they made an end.

@c    20:19. Am not I she that answer truth in Israel, and thou seekest to
@c    destroy the city, and to overthrow a mother in Israel?  Why wilt thou
@c    throw down the inheritance of the Lord?

@c    20:20. And Joab answering said:  God forbid, God forbid that I should, I
@c    do not throw down, nor destroy.

@c    20:21. The matter is not so, but a man of mount Ephraim, Seba the son
@c    of Bochri by name, hath lifted up his hand against king David:  deliver
@c    him only, and we will depart from the city.  And the woman said to Joab:
@c    Behold his head shall be thrown to thee from the wall.

@c    20:22. So she went to all the people, and spoke to them wisely:  and
@c    they cut off the head of Seba the son of Bochri, and cast it out to
@c    Joab.  And he sounded the trumpet, and they departed from the city,
@c    every one to their home:  and Joab returned to Jerusalem to the king.

@c    20:23. So Joab was over all the army of Israel:  and Banaias the son of
@c    Joiada was over the Cerethites and Phelethites,

@c    20:24. But Aduram over the tributes:  and Josaphat the son of Ahilud was
@c    recorder.

@c    20:25. And Siva was scribe:  and Sadoc and Abiathar, priests.

@c    20:26. And Ira the Jairite was the priest of David.



@c    2 Kings Chapter 21


@c    A famine of three years, for the sin of Saul against the Gabaonites, at
@c    whose desire seven of Saul's race are crucified.  War again with the
@c    Philistines.

@c    21:1. And there was a famine in the days of David for three years
@c    successively:  and David consulted the oracle of the Lord.  And the Lord
@c    said:  It is for Saul, and his bloody house, because he slow the
@c    Gabaonites.

@c    21:2. Then the king, calling for the Gabaonites, said to them:  (Now the
@c    Gabaonites were not of the children of Israel, but the remains of the
@c    Amorrhites:  and the children of Israel had sworn to them, and Saul
@c    sought to slay them out of zeal, as it were for the children of Israel
@c    and Juda:)

@c    21:3. David therefore said to the Gabaonites:  What shall I do for you?
@c    and what shall be the atonement or you, that you may bless the
@c    inheritance of the Lord?

@c    21:4. And the Gabaonites said to him:  We have no contest about silver
@c    and gold, but against Saul and against his house:  neither do we desire
@c    that any man be slain of Israel.  And the king said to them:  What will
@c    you then that I should do for you?

@c    21:5. And they said to the king:  The man that crushed us and oppressed
@c    us unjustly, we must destroy in such manner that there be not so much
@c    as one left of his stock in all the coasts of Israel.

@c    21:6. Let seven men of his children be delivered unto us, that we may
@c    crucify them to the Lord in Gabaa of Saul, once the chosen of the Lord.
@c    And the king said:  I will give them.

@c    21:7. And the king spared Miphiboseth the son of Jonathan the son of
@c    Saul, because of the oath of the Lord, that had been between David and
@c    Jonathan the son of Saul.

@c    21:8. So the king took the two sons of Respha the daughter of Aia, whom
@c    she bore to Saul, Armoni, and Miphiboseth:  and the five sons of Michol
@c    the daughter of Saul, whom she bore to Hadriel the son of Berzellai,
@c    that was of Molathi:

@c    Of Michol. . .They were the sons of Merob, who was married to Hadriel:
@c    but they are here called the sons of Michol, because she adopted them,
@c    and brought them up as her own.

@c    21:9. And gave them into the hands of the Gabaonites:  and they
@c    crucified them on a hill before the Lord:  and these seven died together
@c    in the first days of the harvest, when the barley began to be reaped.

@c    21:10. And Respha the daughter of Aia took haircloth, and spread it
@c    under her upon the rock from the beginning of the harvest, till water
@c    dropped upon them out of heaven:  and suffered neither the birds to tear
@c    them by day, nor the beasts by night.

@c    21:11. And it was told David, what Respha the daughter of Aia, the
@c    concubine of Saul, had done.

@c    21:12. And David went, and took the bones of Saul, and the bones of
@c    Jonathan his son from the men of Jabes Galaad, who had stolen them from
@c    the street of Bethsan, where the Philistines had hanged them when they
@c    had slain Saul in Gelboe.

@c    21:13. And he brought from thence the bones of Saul, and the bones of
@c    Jonathan his son, and they gathered up the bones of them that were
@c    crucified,

@c    21:14. And they buried them with the bones of Saul, and of Jonathan his
@c    son in the land of Benjamin, in the side, in the sepulchre of Cis his
@c    father:  and they did all that the king had commanded, and God shewed
@c    mercy again to the land after these things.

@c    21:15. And the Philistines made war again against Israel, and David
@c    went down, and his servants with him, and fought against the
@c    Philistines.  And David growing faint,

@c    21:16. Jesbibenob, who was of the race of Arapha, the iron of whose
@c    spear weighed three hundred ounces, being girded with a new sword,
@c    attempted to kill David.

@c    21:17. And Abisai the son of Sarvia rescued him, and striking the
@c    Philistine killed him.  Then David's men swore unto him saying:  Thou
@c    shalt go no more out with us to battle, lest thou put out the lamp of
@c    Israel.

@c    21:18. There was also a second battle in Gob against the Philistines:
@c    then Sobochai of Husathi slew Saph of the race of Arapha of the family
@c    of the giants.

@c    21:19. And there was a third battle in Gob against the Philistines, in
@c    which Adeodatus the son of the Forrest an embroiderer of Bethlehem slew
@c    Goliath the Gethite, the shaft of whose spear was like a weaver's beam.

@c    Adeodatus the son of the Forrest. . .So it is rendered in the Latin
@c    Vulgate, by giving the interpretation of the Hebrew names, which are
@c    Elhanan the son of Jaare.

@c    21:20. A fourth battle was in Geth:  where there was a man of great
@c    stature, that had six fingers on each hand, and six toes on each foot,
@c    four and twenty in all, and he was of the race of Arapha.

@c    21:21. And he reproached Israel:  and Jonathan the son of Samae the
@c    brother of David slew him.

@c    21:22. These four were born of Arapha in Geth, and they fell by the
@c    hand of David, and of his servants.



@c    2 Kings Chapter 22


@c    King David's psalm of thanksgiving for his deliverance from all his
@c    enemies.

@c    22:1. And David spoke to the Lord the words of this canticle, in the
@c    day that the Lord delivered him out of the hand of all his enemies, and
@c    out of the hand of Saul,

@c    22:2. And he said:  The Lord is my rock, and my strength, and my
@c    saviour.

@c    22:3. God is my strong one, in him will I trust:  my shield, and the
@c    horn of my salvation:  he lifteth me up, and is my refuge:  my saviour,
@c    thou wilt deliver me from iniquity.

@c    22:4. I will call on the Lord who is worthy to be praised:  and I shall
@c    be saved from my enemies.

@c    22:5. For the pangs of death have surrounded me:  the floods of Belial
@c    have made me afraid.

@c    22:6. The cords of hell compassed me:  the snares of death prevented me.

@c    22:7. In my distress I will call upon the Lord, and I will cry to my
@c    God:  and he will hear my voice out of his temple, and my cry shall come
@c    to his ears.

@c    22:8. The earth shook and trembled, the foundations of the mountains
@c    were moved, and shaken, because he was angry with them.

@c    22:9. A smoke went up from his nostrils, and a devouring fire out of
@c    his mouth:  coals were kindled by it.

@c    22:10. He bowed the heavens, and came down:  and darkness was under his
@c    feet.

@c    22:11. And he rode upon the cherubims, and flew:  and slid upon the
@c    wings of the wind.

@c    22:12. He made darkness a covering round about him:  dropping waters out
@c    of the clouds of the heavens.

@c    22:13. By the brightness before him, the coals of fire were kindled.

@c    22:14. The Lord shall thunder from heaven:  and the most high shall give
@c    forth his voice.

@c    22:15. He shot arrows and scattered them:  lightning, and consumed them.

@c    22:16. And the overflowings of the sea appeared, and the foundations of
@c    the world were laid open at the rebuke of the Lord, at the blast of the
@c    spirit of his wrath.

@c    22:17. He sent from on high, and took me, and drew me out of many
@c    waters.

@c    22:18. He delivered me from my most mighty enemy, and from them that
@c    hated me:  for they were too strong for me.

@c    22:19. He prevented me in the day of my affliction, and the Lord became
@c    my stay.

@c    22:20. And he brought me forth into a large place, he delivered me,
@c    because I pleased him.

@c    22:21. The Lord will reward me according to my justice:  and according
@c    to the cleanness of my hands he will render to me.

@c    22:22. Because I have kept the ways of the Lord, and have not wickedly
@c    departed from my God.

@c    22:23. For all his judgments are in my sight:  and his precepts I have
@c    not removed from me.

@c    22:24. And I shall be perfect with him:  and shall keep myself from my
@c    iniquity.

@c    22:25. And the Lord will recompense me according to my justice:  and
@c    according to the cleanness of my hands in the sight of his eyes.

@c    22:26. With the holy one thou wilt be holy:  and with the valiant
@c    perfect.

@c    22:27. With the elect thou wilt be elect:  and with the perverse thou
@c    wilt be perverted.

@c    22:28. And the poor people thou wilt save:  and with thy eyes thou shalt
@c    humble the haughty.

@c    22:29. For thou art my lamp O Lord:  and thou, O Lord, wilt enlighten my
@c    darkness.

@c    22:30. For in thee I will run girded:  in my God I will leap over the
@c    wall.

@c    22:31. God, his way is immaculate, the word of the Lord is tried by
@c    fire:  he is the shield of all that trust in him.

@c    22:32. Who is God but the Lord:  and who is strong but our God?

@c    22:33. God who hath girded me with strength, and made my way perfect.

@c    22:34. Making my feet like the feet of harts, and setting me upon my
@c    high places.

@c    22:35. He teacheth my hands to war:  and maketh my arms like a bow of
@c    brass.

@c    22:36. Thou hast given me the shield of my salvation:  and thy mildness
@c    hath multiplied me.

@c    22:37. Thou shalt enlarge my steps under me:  and my ankles shall not
@c    fail.

@c    22:38. I will pursue after my enemies, and crush them:  and will not
@c    return again till I consume them.

@c    22:39. I will consume them and break them in pieces, so that they shall
@c    not rise:  they shall fall under my feet.

@c    22:40. Thou hast girded me with strength to battle:  thou hast made them
@c    that resisted me to bow under me.

@c    22:41. My enemies thou hast made to turn their back to me:  them that
@c    hated me, and I shall destroy them.

@c    22:42. They shall cry, and there shall be none to save:  to the Lord,
@c    and he shall not hear them.

@c    22:43. I shall beat them as small as the dust of the earth:  I shall
@c    crush them and spread them abroad like the mire of the streets.

@c    22:44. Thou wilt save me from the contradictions of my people:  thou
@c    wilt keep me to be the head of the Gentiles:  the people which I know
@c    not, shall serve me,

@c    22:45. The sons of the stranger will resist me, at the hearing of the
@c    ear they will obey me.

@c    22:46. The strangers are melted away, and shall be straitened in their
@c    distresses.

@c    22:47. The Lord liveth, and my God is blessed:  and the strong God of my
@c    salvation shall be exalted:

@c    22:48. God who giveth me revenge, and bringest down people under me,

@c    22:49. Who bringest me forth from my enemies, and liftest me up from
@c    them that resist me:  from the wicked man thou shalt deliver me.

@c    22:50. Therefore will I give thanks to thee, O Lord, among the
@c    Gentiles, and will sing to thy name.

@c    22:51. Giving great salvation to his king, and shewing mercy to David
@c    his anointed, and to his seed for ever.



@c    2 Kings Chapter 23


@c    The last words of David.  A catalogue of his valiant men.

@c    23:1. Now these are David's last words.  David the son of Isai said:  The
@c    man to whom it was appointed concerning the Christ of the God of Jacob,
@c    the excellent psalmist of Israel said:

@c    23:2. The spirit of the Lord hath spoken by me and his word by my
@c    tongue.

@c    23:3. The God of Israel said to me, the strong one of Israel spoke, the
@c    ruler of men, the just ruler in the fear of God.

@c    23:4. As the light of the morning, when the sun riseth, shineth in the
@c    morning without clouds, and as the grass springeth out of the earth by
@c    rain.

@c    As the light, etc. . .So shall be the kingdom of Christ.

@c    23:5. Neither is my house so great with God, that he should make with
@c    me an eternal covenant, firm in all things and assured.  For he is all
@c    my salvation, and all my will:  neither is there ought thereof that
@c    springeth not up.

@c    Neither is my house, etc. . .As if he should say:  This everlasting
@c    covenant was not due to my house:  but purely owing to his bounty; who
@c    is all my salvation, and my will:  that is, who hath always saved me,
@c    and granted me what I beseeched of him; so that I and my house, through
@c    his blessing, have sprung up, and succeeded in all things.

@c    23:6. But transgressors shall all of them be plucked up as thorns:
@c    which are not taken away with hands.

@c    23:7. And if a man will touch them, he must be armed with iron and with
@c    the staff of a lance:  but they shall be set on fire and burnt to
@c    nothing.

@c    23:8. These are the names of the valiant men of David:  Jesbaham sitting
@c    in the chair was the wisest chief among the three, he was like the most
@c    tender little worm of the wood, who killed eight hundred men at one
@c    onset.

@c    Jesbaham. . .The son of Hachamoni.  For this was the name of this hero,
@c    as appears from 1 Chron. or Paralip. 11.--Ibid.  Most tender, etc. . .He
@c    appeared like one tender and weak, but was indeed most valiant and
@c    strong.  It seems the Latin has here given the interpretation of the
@c    Hebrew name of the hero, to whom Jesbaham was like, instead of the name
@c    itself, which was Adino the Eznite, one much renowned of old for his
@c    valour.

@c    23:9. After him was Eleazar the son of Dodo the Ahohite, one of the
@c    three valiant men that were with David when they defied the
@c    Philistines, and they were there gathered together to battle.

@c    Dodo. . .In Latin, Patrui ejus, which is the interpretation of the
@c    Hebrew name Dodo.  The same occurs in ver. 24.

@c    23:10. And when the men of Israel were gone away, he stood and smote
@c    the Philistines till his hand was weary, and grew stiff with the sword:
@c    and the Lord wrought a great victory that day:  and the people that were
@c    fled away, returned to take spoils of them that were slain.

@c    23:11. And after him was Semma the son of Age of Arari.  And the
@c    Philistines were gathered together in a troop:  for there was a field
@c    full of lentils.  And when the people were fled from the face of the
@c    Philistines,

@c    23:12. He stood in the midst of the field, and defended it, and
@c    defeated the Philistines:  and the Lord gave a great victory.

@c    23:13. Moreover also before this the three who were princes among the
@c    thirty, went down and came to David in the harvest time into the cave
@c    of Odollam:  and the camp of the Philistines was in the valley of the
@c    giants.

@c    23:14. And David was then in a hold:  and there was a garrison of the
@c    Philistines then in Bethlehem.

@c    23:15. And David longed, and said:  O that some man would get me a drink
@c    of the water out of the cistern, that is in Bethlehem, by the gate.

@c    23:16. And the three valiant men broke through the camp of the
@c    Philistines, and drew water out of the cistern of Bethlehem, that was
@c    by the gate, and brought it to David:  but he would not drink, but
@c    offered it to the Lord,

@c    23:17. Saying:  The Lord be merciful to me, that I may not do this:
@c    shall I drink the blood of these men that went, and the peril of their
@c    lives?  therefore he would not drink.  These things did these three
@c    mighty men.

@c    23:18. Abisai also the brother of Joab, the son of Sarvia, was chief
@c    among three:  and he lifted up his spear against three hundred whom he
@c    slew, and he was renowned among the three,

@c    23:19. And the noblest of three, and was their chief, but to the three
@c    first he attained not.

@c    23:20. And Banaias the son of Joiada a most valiant man, of great
@c    deeds, of Cabseel:  he slew the two lions of Moab, and he went down, and
@c    slew a lion in the midst of a pit, in the time of snow.

@c    23:21. He also slew an Egyptian, a man worthy to be a sight, having a
@c    spear in his hand:  but he went down to him with a rod, and forced the
@c    spear out of the hand of the Egyptian, and slew him with his own spear.

@c    23:22. These things did Banaias the son of Joiada.

@c    23:23. And he was renowned among the three valiant men, who were the
@c    most honourable among the thirty:  but he attained not to the first
@c    three:  and David made him of his privy council.

@c    23:24. Asael the brother of Joab was one of the thirty, Elehanan the
@c    son of Dodo of Bethlehem.

@c    23:25. Semma of Harodi, Elica of Harodi,

@c    23:26. Heles of Phalti, Hira the son of Acces of Thecua,

@c    23:27. Abiezer of Anathoth, Mobonnai of Husati,

@c    23:28. Selmon the Ahohite, Maharai the Netophathite,

@c    23:29. Heled the son of Baana, also a Netophathite, Ithai the son of
@c    Ribai of Gabaath of the children of Benjamin,

@c    23:30. Banaia the Pharathonite, Heddai of the torrent Gaas,

@c    23:31. Abialbon the Arbathite, Azmaveth of Beromi,

@c    23:32. Eliaba of Salaboni.  The sons of Jassen, Jonathan,

@c    23:33. Semma of Orori, Aliam the son of Sarar the Arorite,

@c    23:34. Eliphelet the son of Aasbai the son of Machati, Eliam the son of
@c    Achitophel the Gelonite,

@c    23:35. Hesrai of Carmel, Pharai of Arbi,

@c    23:36. Igaal the son of Nathan of Soba, Bonni of Gadi,

@c    23:37. Selec of Ammoni, Naharai the Berothite, armourbearer of Joab the
@c    son of Sarvia,

@c    23:38. Ira the Jethrite, Gareb also a Jethrite;

@c    23:39. Urias the Hethite, thirty and seven in all.



@c    2 Kings Chapter 24


@c    David numbereth the people:  God sendeth a pestilence, which is stopt by
@c    David's prayer and sacrifice.

@c    24:1. And the anger of the Lord was again kindled against Israel, and
@c    stirred up David among them, saying:  Go, number Israel and Juda.

@c    Stirred up, etc. . .This stirring up was not the doing of God, but of
@c    Satan; as it is expressly declared, 1 Chron. or Paralip. 21.1.

@c    24:2. And the king said to Joab the general of his army:  Go through all
@c    the tribes of Israel from Dan to Bersabee, and number ye the people
@c    that I may know the number of them.

@c    24:3. And Joab said to the king:  The Lord thy God increase thy people,
@c    and make them as many more as they are now, and again multiply them a
@c    hundredfold in the sight of my lord the king:  but what meaneth my lord
@c    the king by this kind of thing?

@c    24:4. But the king's words prevailed over the words of Joab, and of the
@c    captains of the army:  and Joab, and the captains of the soldiers went
@c    out from the presence of the king, to number the people of Israel.

@c    24:5. And when they had passed the Jordan, they came to Aroer to the
@c    right side of the city, which is in the vale of Gad.

@c    24:6. And by Jazer they passed into Galaad, and to the lower land of
@c    Hodsi, and they came into the woodlands of Dan.  And going about by
@c    Sidon,

@c    24:7. They passed near the walls of Tyre, and all the land of the
@c    Hevite, and the Chanaanite, and they came to the south of Juda into
@c    Bersabee:

@c    24:8. And having gone through the whole land, after nine months and
@c    twenty days, they came to Jerusalem.

@c    24:9. And Joab gave up the sum of the number of the people to the king,
@c    and there were found of Israel eight hundred thousand valiant men that
@c    drew the sword:  and of Juda five hundred thousand fighting men.

@c    24:10. But David's heart struck him, after the people were numbered:
@c    and David said to the Lord:  I have sinned very much in what I have
@c    done:  but I pray thee, O Lord, to take away the iniquity of thy
@c    servant, because I have done exceeding foolishly.

@c    David's heart struck him, after the people were numbered. . .That is he
@c    was touched with a great remorse for the vanity and pride which had put
@c    him upon numbering the people.

@c    24:11. And David arose in the morning, and the word of the Lord came to
@c    Gad the prophet and the seer of David, saying:

@c    24:12. Go, and say to David:  Thus saith the Lord:  I give thee thy
@c    choice of three things, choose one of them which thou wilt, that I may
@c    do it to thee.

@c    24:13. And when Gad was come to David, he told him, saying:  Either
@c    seven years of famine shall come to thee in thy land:  or thou shalt
@c    flee three months before thy adversaries, and they shall pursue thee:
@c    or for three days there shall be a pestilence in thy land.  Now
@c    therefore deliberate, and see what answer I shall return to him that
@c    sent me.

@c    24:14. And David said to Gad:  I am in a great strait:  but it is better
@c    that I should fall into the hands of the Lord (for his mercies are
@c    many) than into the hands of men.

@c    24:15. And the Lord sent a pestilence upon Israel, from the morning
@c    unto the time appointed, and there died of the people from Dan to
@c    Bersabee seventy thousand men.

@c    24:16. And when the angel of the Lord had stretched out his hand over
@c    Jerusalem to destroy it, the Lord had pity on the affliction, and said
@c    to the angel that slew the people:  It is enough:  now hold thy hand.
@c    And the angel of the Lord was by the thrashingfloor of Areuna the
@c    Jebusite.

@c    24:17. And David said to the Lord, when he saw the angel striking the
@c    people:  It is I; I am he that have sinned, I have done wickedly:  these
@c    that are the sheep, what have they done?  let thy hand, I beseech thee,
@c    be turned against me, and against my father's house.

@c    24:18. And Gad came to David that day, and said:  Go up, and build an
@c    altar to the Lord in the thrashingfloor of Areuna the Jebusite.

@c    24:19. And David went up according to the word of Gad which the Lord
@c    had commanded him.

@c    24:20. And Areuna looked, and saw the king and his servants coming
@c    towards him:

@c    24:21. And going out he worshipped the king, bowing with his face to
@c    the earth, and said:  Wherefore is my lord the king come to his servant?
@c    And David said to him:  To buy the thrashingfloor of thee, and build an
@c    altar to the Lord, that the plague, which rageth among the people, may
@c    cease.

@c    24:22. And Areuna said to David:  Let my lord the king take, and offer,
@c    as it seemeth good to him:  thou hast here oxen for a holocaust, and the
@c    wain, and the yokes of the oxen for wood.

@c    24:23. All these things Areuna as a king gave to the king:  and Areuna
@c    said to the king:  The Lord thy God receive thy vow.

@c    24:24. And the king answered him, and said:  Nay, but I will buy it of
@c    thee, at a price, and I will not offer to the Lord my God holocausts
@c    free cost.  So David bought the floor, and the oxen, for fifty sicles of
@c    silver:

@c    24:25. And David built there an altar to the Lord, and offered
@c    holocausts and peace offerings:  and the Lord became merciful to the
@c    land, and the plague was stayed from Israel.
