@c    THE SECOND BOOK OF PARALIPOMENON



@c    2 Paralipomenon Chapter 1


@c    Solomon offereth sacrifices at Gabaon.  His choice of wisdom which God
@c    giveth him.

@c    1:1. And Solomon the son of David was strengthened in his kingdom, and
@c    the Lord his God was with him, and magnified him to a high degree.

@c    1:2. And Solomon gave orders to all Israel, to the captains of
@c    thousands, and of hundreds, and to the rulers, and to the judges of all
@c    Israel, and the heads of the families:

@c    1:3. And he went with all the multitude to the high place of Gabaon,
@c    where was the tabernacle of the covenant of the Lord, which Moses the
@c    servant of God made, in the wilderness.

@c    1:4. For David had brought the ark of God from Cariathiarim to the
@c    place, which he had prepared for it, and where he had pitched a
@c    tabernacle for it, that is, in Jerusalem.

@c    1:5. And the altar of brass, which Beseleel the son of Uri the son of
@c    Hur had made, was there before the tabernacle of the Lord:  and Solomon
@c    and all the assembly sought it:

@c    1:6. And Solomon went up thither to the brazen altar, before the
@c    tabernacle of the covenant of the Lord, and offered up on it a thousand
@c    victims.

@c    1:7. And behold that night God appeared to him, saying:  Ask what thou
@c    wilt that I should give thee.

@c    1:8. And Solomon said to God:  Thou hast shewn great kindness to my
@c    father David:  and hast made me king in his stead.

@c    1:9. Now therefore, O Lord God, let thy word be fulfilled, which thou
@c    hast promised to David my father:  for thou hast made me king over thy
@c    great people, which is as innumerable as the dust of the earth.

@c    1:10. Give me wisdom and knowledge that I may come in and go out before
@c    thy people:  for who can worthily judge this thy people, which is so
@c    great?

@c    1:11. And God said to Solomon:  Because this choice hath pleased thy
@c    heart, and thou hast not asked riches, and wealth, and glory, nor the
@c    lives of them that hate thee, nor many days of life:  but hast asked
@c    wisdom and knowledge, to be able to judge my people, over which I have
@c    made thee king,

@c    1:12. Wisdom and knowledge are granted to thee:  and I will give thee
@c    riches, and wealth, and glory, so that none of the kings before thee,
@c    nor after thee, shall be like thee.

@c    1:13. Then Solomon came from the high place of Gabaon to Jerusalem
@c    before the tabernacle of the covenant, and reigned over Israel.

@c    1:14. And he gathered to himself chariots and horsemen, and he had a
@c    thousand four hundred chariots, and twelve thousand horsemen:  and he
@c    placed them in the cities of the chariots, and with the king in
@c    Jerusalem.

@c    1:15. And the king made silver and gold to be in Jerusalem as stones,
@c    and cedar trees as sycamores, which grow in the plains in great
@c    multitude.

@c    1:16. And there were horses brought him from Egypt, and from Coa by the
@c    king's merchants, who went, and bought at a price,

@c    1:17. A chariot of four horses for six hundred pieces of silver, and a
@c    horse for a hundred and fifty:  in like manner market was made in all
@c    the kingdoms of the Hethites, and of the kings of Syria.



@c    2 Paralipomenon Chapter 2


@c    Solomon's embassy to Hiram, who sends him a skilful workman and timber.

@c    2:1. And Solomon determined to build a house to the name of the Lord,
@c    and a palace for himself.

@c    2:2. And he numbered out seventy thousand men to bear burdens, and
@c    eighty thousand to hew stones in the mountains, and three thousand six
@c    hundred to oversee them.

@c    2:3. He sent also to Hiram king of Tyre, saying:  As thou didst with
@c    David my father, and didst send him cedars, to build him a house, in
@c    which he dwelt:

@c    2:4. So do with me that I may build a house to the name of the Lord my
@c    God, to dedicate it to burn incense before him, and to perfume with
@c    aromatical spices, and for the continual setting forth of bread, and
@c    for the holocausts, morning and evening, and on the sabbaths, and on
@c    the new moons, and the solemnities of the Lord our God for ever, which
@c    are commanded for Israel.

@c    2:5. For the house which I desire to build, is great:  for our God is
@c    great above all gods.

@c    2:6. Who then can be able to build him a worthy house?  if heaven, and
@c    the heavens of heavens cannot contain him:  who am I that I should be
@c    able to build him a house?  but to this end only, that incense may be
@c    burnt before him.

@c    2:7. Send me therefore a skilful man, that knoweth how to work in gold,
@c    and in silver, in brass, and in iron, in purple, in scarlet and in
@c    blue, and that hath skill in engraving, with the artificers, which I
@c    have with me in Judea and Jerusalem, whom David my father provided.

@c    2:8. Send me also cedars, and fir trees, and pine trees from Libanus:
@c    for I know that thy servants are skilful in cutting timber in Libanus,
@c    and my servants shall be with thy servants,

@c    2:9. To provide me timber in abundance.  For the house which I desire to
@c    build, is to be exceeding great, and glorious.

@c    2:10. And I will give thy servants the workmen that are to cut down the
@c    trees, for their food twenty thousand cores of wheat, and as many cores
@c    of barley, and twenty thousand measures of wine, and twenty thousand
@c    measures of oil.

@c    2:11. And Hiram king of Tyre sent a letter to Solomon, saying:  Because
@c    the Lord hath loved his people, therefore he hath made thee king over
@c    them.

@c    2:12. And he added, saying:  Blessed be the Lord the God of Israel, who
@c    made heaven and earth, who hath given to king David a wise and knowing
@c    son, endued with understanding and prudence, to build a house to the
@c    Lord, and a palace for himself.

@c    2:13. I therefore have sent thee my father Hiram, a wise and most
@c    skilful man,

@c    2:14. The son of a woman of the daughters of Dan, whose father was a
@c    Tyrian, who knoweth how to work in gold, and in silver, in brass, and
@c    in iron, and in marble, and in timber, in purple also, and violet, and
@c    silk and scarlet:  and who knoweth to grave all sort of graving, and to
@c    devise ingeniously all that there may be need of in the work with thy
@c    artificers, and with the artificers of my lord David thy father.

@c    2:15. The wheat therefore, and the barley and the oil, and the wine,
@c    which thou, my lord, hast promised, send to thy servants.

@c    2:16. And we will cut down as many trees out of Libanus, as thou shalt
@c    want, and will convey them in floats by sea to Joppe:  and it will be
@c    thy part to bring them thence to Jerusalem.

@c    2:17. And Solomon numbered all the proselytes in the land of Israel,
@c    after the numbering which David his father had made, and they were
@c    found a hundred and fifty-three thousand and six hundred.

@c    2:18. And he set seventy thousand of them to carry burdens on their
@c    shoulders, and eighty thousand to hew stones in the mountains:  and
@c    three thousand and six hundred to be overseers of the work of the
@c    people.



@c    2 Paralipomenon Chapter 3


@c    The plan and ornaments of the temple:  the cherubims, the veil, and the
@c    pillars.

@c    3:1. And Solomon began to build the house of the Lord in Jerusalem, in
@c    mount Moria, which had been shewn to David his father, in the place
@c    which David had prepared in the thrashingfloor of Ornan the Jebusite.

@c    3:2. And he began to build in the second month, in the fourth year of
@c    his reign.

@c    3:3. Now these are the foundations, which Solomon laid, to build the
@c    house of God, the length by the first measure sixty cubits, the breadth
@c    twenty cubits.

@c    3:4. And the porch in the front, which was extended in length according
@c    to the measure of the breadth of the house, twenty cubits:  and the
@c    height was a hundred and twenty cubits:  and he overlaid it within with
@c    pure gold.

@c    3:5. And the greater house he ceiled with deal boards, and overlaid
@c    them with plates of fine gold throughout:  and he graved in them palm
@c    trees, and like little chains interlaced with one another.

@c    3:6. He paved also the floor of the temple with most precious marble,
@c    of great beauty.

@c    3:7. And the gold of the plates with which he overlaid the house, and
@c    the beams thereof, and the posts, and the walls, and the doors was of
@c    the finest:  and he graved cherubims on the walls.

@c    3:8. He made also the house of the holy of holies:  the length of it
@c    according to the breadth of the temple, twenty cubits, and the breadth
@c    of it in like manner twenty cubits:  and he overlaid it with plates of
@c    gold, amounting to about six hundred talents.

@c    3:9. He made also nails of gold, and the weight of every nail was fifty
@c    sicles:  the upper chambers also he overlaid with gold.

@c    3:10. He made also in the house of the holy of holies two cherubims of
@c    image work:  and he overlaid them with gold.

@c    3:11. The wings of the cherubims were extended twenty cubits, so that
@c    one wing was five cubits long, and reached to the wall of the house:
@c    and the other was also five cubits long, and reached to the wing of the
@c    other cherub.

@c    3:12. In like manner the wing of the other cherub, was five cubits
@c    long, and reached to the wall:  and his other wing was five cubits long,
@c    and touched the wing of the other cherub.

@c    3:13. So the wings of the two cherubims were spread forth, and were
@c    extended twenty cubits:  and they stood upright on their feet, and their
@c    faces were turned toward the house without.

@c    3:14. He made also a veil of violet, purple, scarlet, and silk:  and
@c    wrought in it cherubims.

@c    3:15. He made also before the doors of the temple two pillars, which
@c    were five and thirty cubits high:  and their chapiters were five cubits.

@c    3:16. He made also as it were little chains in the oracle, and he put
@c    them on the heads of the pillars:  and a hundred pomegranates, which he
@c    put between the little chains.

@c    3:17. These pillars he put at the entrance of the temple, one on the
@c    right hand, and the other on the left:  that which was on the right
@c    hand, he called Jachin:  and that on the left hand, Booz.



@c    2 Paralipomenon Chapter 4


@c    The altar of brass, the molten sea upon twelve oxen, the ten loaves,
@c    the candlesticks and other vessels and ornaments of the temple.

@c    4:1. He made also an altar of brass twenty cubits long, and twenty
@c    cubits broad, and ten cubits high.

@c    4:2. Also a molten sea of ten cubits from brim to brim, round in
@c    compass:  it was five cubits high, and a line of thirty cubits compassed
@c    it round about.

@c    4:3. And under it there was the likeness of oxen, and certain
@c    engravings on the outside of ten cubits compassed the belly of the sea,
@c    as it were with two rows.

@c    4:4. And the oxen were cast:  and the sea itself was set upon the twelve
@c    oxen, three of which looked toward the north, and other three toward
@c    the west:  and other three toward the south, and the other three that
@c    remained toward the east, and the sea stood upon them:  and the hinder
@c    parts of the oxen were inward under the sea.

@c    4:5. Now the thickness of it was a handbreadth, and the brim of it was
@c    like the brim of a cup, or of a crisped lily:  and it held three
@c    thousand measures.

@c    4:6. He made also ten lavers:  and he set five on the right hand, and
@c    five on the left, to wash in them all such things as they were to offer
@c    for holocausts:  but the sea was for the priests to wash in.

@c    4:7. And he made ten golden candlesticks, according to the form which
@c    they were commanded to be made by:  and he set them in the temple, five
@c    on the right hand, and five on the left.

@c    4:8. Moreover also ten tables:  and he set them in the temple, five on
@c    the right side, and five on the left.  Also a hundred bowls of gold.

@c    4:9. He made also the court of the priests, and a great hall, and doors
@c    in the hall, which he covered with brass.

@c    4:10. And he set the sea on the right side over against the east toward
@c    the south.

@c    4:11. And Hiram made caldrons, and fleshhooks, and bowls:  and finished
@c    all the king's work the house of God:

@c    4:12. That is to say, the two pillars, and the pommels, and the
@c    chapiters, and the network, to cover the chapiters over the pommels.

@c    4:13. And four hundred pomegranates, and two wreaths of network, so
@c    that two rows of pomegranates were joined to each wreath, to cover the
@c    pommels, and the chapiters of the pillars.

@c    4:14. He made also bases, and lavers, which he set upon the bases:

@c    4:15. One sea, and twelve oxen under the sea;

@c    4:16. And the caldrons, and fleshhooks, and bowls.  All the vessels did
@c    Hiram his father make for Solomon in the house of the Lord of the
@c    finest brass.

@c    4:17. In the country near the Jordan did the king cast them, in a clay
@c    ground between Sochot and Saredatha.

@c    4:18. And the multitude of vessels was innumerable, so that the weight
@c    of the brass was not known.

@c    4:19. And Solomon made all the vessels for the house of God, and the
@c    golden altar, and the tables, upon which were the loaves of
@c    proposition,

@c    4:20. The candlesticks also of most pure gold with their lamps to give
@c    light before the oracle, according to the manner.

@c    4:21. And certain flowers, and lamps, and golden tongs:  all were made
@c    of the finest gold.

@c    4:22. The vessels also for the perfumes, and the censers, and the
@c    bowls, and the mortars, of pure gold.  And he graved the doors of the
@c    inner temple, that is, for the holy of holies:  and the doors of the
@c    temple without were of gold.  And thus all the work was finished which
@c    Solomon made in the house of the Lord.



@c    2 Paralipomenon Chapter 5


@c    The ark is brought with great solemnity into the temple:  the temple is
@c    filled with the glory of God.

@c    5:1. Then Solomon brought in all those things that David his father had
@c    vowed, the silver, and the gold, and all the vessels he put among the
@c    treasures of the house of God.

@c    5:2. And after this he gathered together the ancients of Israel and all
@c    the princes of the tribes, and the heads of the families, of the
@c    children of Israel to Jerusalem, to bring the ark of the covenant of
@c    the Lord out of the city of David, which is Sion.

@c    5:3. And all the men of Israel came to the king in the solemn day of
@c    the seventh month.

@c    5:4. And when all the ancients of Israel were come, the Levites took up
@c    the ark,

@c    5:5. And brought it in, together with all the furniture of the
@c    tabernacle.  And the priests with the Levites carried the vessels of the
@c    sanctuary, which were in the tabernacle.

@c    5:6. And king Solomon and all the assembly of Israel and all that were
@c    gathered together before the ark, sacrificed rams, and oxen without
@c    number:  so great was the multitude of the victims.

@c    5:7. And the priests brought in the ark of the covenant of the Lord
@c    into its place, that is, to the oracle of the temple, into the holy of
@c    holies under the wings of the cherubims:

@c    5:8. So that the cherubims spread their wings over the place, in which
@c    the ark was set, and covered the ark itself and its staves.

@c    5:9. Now the ends of the staves wherewith the ark was carried, because
@c    they were some thing longer, were seen before the oracle:  but if a man
@c    were a little outward, he could not see them.  So the ark has been there
@c    unto this day.

@c    5:10. And there was nothing else in the ark but the two tables which
@c    Moses put there at Horeb when the Lord gave the law to the children of
@c    Israel, at their coming out of Egypt.

@c    5:11. Now when the priests were come out of the sanctuary, for all the
@c    priests that could be found there, were sanctified:  and as yet at that
@c    time the courses and orders of the ministries were not divided among
@c    them,

@c    5:12. Both the Levites and the singing men, that is, both they that
@c    were under Asaph, and they that were under Heman, and they that were
@c    under Idithun, with their sons, and their brethren, clothed with fine
@c    linen, sounded with cymbals, and psalteries, and harps, standing on the
@c    east side of the altar, and with them a hundred and twenty priests,
@c    sounding with trumpets.

@c    5:13. So when they all sounded together, both with trumpets, and voice,
@c    and cymbals, and organs, and with divers kind of musical instruments,
@c    and lifted up their voice on high:  the sound was heard afar off, so
@c    that when they began to praise the Lord, and to say:  Give glory to the
@c    Lord for he is good, for his mercy endureth for ever:  the house of God
@c    was filled with a cloud.

@c    5:14. Nor could the priests stand and minister by reason of the cloud.
@c    For the glory of the Lord had filled the house of God.



@c    2 Paralipomenon Chapter 6


@c    Solomon's blessings and prayer.

@c    6:1. Then Solomon said:  The Lord promised that he would dwell in a
@c    cloud.

@c    6:2. But I have built a house to his name, that he might dwell there
@c    for ever.

@c    6:3. And the king turned his face, and blessed all the multitude of
@c    Israel for all the multitude stood attentive and he said:

@c    6:4. Blessed be the Lord the God of Israel, who hath accomplished in
@c    deed that which he spoke to David my father, saying:

@c    6:5. From the day that I brought my people out of the land of Egypt, I
@c    chose no city among all the tribes of Israel, for a house to be built
@c    in it to my name:  neither chose I any other man, to be the ruler of my
@c    people Israel.

@c    6:6. But I chose Jerusalem, that my name might be there:  and I chose
@c    David to set him over my people Israel.

@c    6:7. And whereas David my father had a mind to build a house to the
@c    name of the Lord the God of Israel,

@c    6:8. The Lord said to him:  Forasmuch as it was thy will to build a
@c    house to my name, thou hast done well indeed in having such a will:

@c    6:9. But thou shalt not build the house, but thy son, who shall come
@c    out of thy loins, he shall build a house to my name.

@c    6:10. The Lord therefore hath accomplished his word which he spoke:  and
@c    I am risen up in the place of David my father, and sit upon the throne
@c    of Israel, as the Lord promised:  and have built a house to the name of
@c    the Lord God of Israel.

@c    6:11. And I have put in it the ark, wherein is the covenant of the
@c    Lord, which he made with the children of Israel.

@c    6:12. And he stood before the altar of the Lord, in presence of all the
@c    multitude of Israel, and stretched forth his hands.

@c    6:13. For Solomon had made a brazen scaffold, and had set it in the
@c    midst of the temple, which was five cubits long, and five cubits broad,
@c    and three cubits high:  and he stood upon it:  then kneeling down in the
@c    presence of all the multitude of Israel, and lifting up his hands
@c    towards heaven,

@c    6:14. He said:  O Lord God of Israel, there is no God like thee in
@c    heaven nor in earth:  who keepest covenant and mercy with thy servants,
@c    that walk before thee with all their hearts:

@c    6:15. Who hast performed to thy servant David my father all that thou
@c    hast promised him:  and hast accomplished in fact, what thou hast spoken
@c    with thy mouth, as also the present time proveth.

@c    6:16. Now then, O Lord God of Israel, fulfil to thy servant David my
@c    father, whatsoever thou hast promised him, saying:  There shall not fail
@c    thee a man in my sight, to sit upon the throne of Israel:  yet so that
@c    thy children take heed to their ways, and walk in my law, as thou hast
@c    walked before me.

@c    6:17. And now, Lord God of Israel, let thy word be established which
@c    thou hast spoken to thy servant David.

@c    6:18. Is it credible then that God should dwell with men on the earth?
@c    If heaven and the heavens of heavens do not contain thee, how much less
@c    this house, which I have built?

@c    6:19. But to this end only it is made, that thou mayest regard the
@c    prayer of thy servant and his supplication, O Lord my God:  and mayest
@c    hear the prayers which thy servant poureth out before thee.

@c    6:20. That thou mayest open thy eyes upon this house day and night,
@c    upon the place wherein thou hast promised that thy name should be
@c    called upon,

@c    6:21. And that thou wouldst hear the prayer which thy servant prayeth
@c    in it:  hearken then to the prayers of thy servant, and of thy people
@c    Israel.  Whosoever shall pray in its place, hear thou from thy dwelling
@c    place, that is, from heaven, and shew mercy.

@c    6:22. If any man sin against his neighbour, and come to swear against
@c    him, and bind himself with a curse before the altar in this house:

@c    6:23. Then hear thou from heaven, and do justice to thy servants, so to
@c    requite the wicked by making his wickedness fall upon his own head, and
@c    to revenge the just, rewarding him according to his justice.

@c    6:24. If thy people Israel be overcome by their enemies, (for they will
@c    sin against thee,) and being converted shall do penance, and call upon
@c    thy name, and pray to thee in this place,

@c    6:25. Then hear thou from heaven, and forgive the sin of thy people
@c    Israel and bring them back into the land which thou gavest to them, and
@c    their fathers.

@c    6:26. If the heavens be shut up, and there fall no rain by reason of
@c    the sin of the people, and they shall pray to thee in this place, and
@c    confess to thy name, and be converted from their sins, where thou dost
@c    afflict them,

@c    6:27. Then hear thou from heaven, O Lord, and forgive the sins of thy
@c    servants and of thy people Israel and teach them the good way in which
@c    they may walk:  and give rain to thy land which thou hast given to thy
@c    people to possess.

@c    6:28. If a famine arise in the land, or a pestilence or blasting, or
@c    mildew, or locusts, or caterpillars:  or if their enemies waste the
@c    country, and besiege the cities, whatsoever scourge or infirmity shall
@c    be upon them:

@c    6:29. Then if any of thy people Israel, knowing his own scourge and
@c    infirmity shall pray, and shall spread forth his hands in this house,

@c    6:30. Hear thou from heaven, from thy high dwelling place, and forgive,
@c    and render to every one according to his ways, which thou knowest him
@c    to have in his heart:  for thou only knowest the hearts of the children
@c    of men:

@c    6:31. That they may fear thee, and walk in thy ways all the days that
@c    they live upon the face of the land, which thou hast given to our
@c    fathers.

@c    6:32. If the stranger also, who is not of thy people Israel, come from
@c    a far country, for the sake of thy great name, and thy strong hand, and
@c    thy stretched out arm, and adore in this place:

@c    6:33. Hear thou from heaven thy firm dwelling place, and do all that
@c    which that stranger shall call upon thee for:  that all the people of
@c    the earth may know thy name, and may fear thee, as thy people Israel,
@c    and may know, that thy name is invoked upon this house, which I have
@c    built.

@c    6:34. If thy people go out to war against their enemies, by the way
@c    that thou shalt send them, and adore thee towards the way of this city,
@c    which thou hast chosen, and the house which I have built to thy name:

@c    6:35. Then hear thou from heaven their prayers, and their
@c    supplications, and revenge them.

@c    6:36. And if they sin against thee (for there is no man that sinneth
@c    not) and thou be angry with them, and deliver them up to their enemies,
@c    and they lead them away captive to a land either afar off, or near at
@c    hand,

@c    6:37. And if they be converted in their heart in the land to which they
@c    were led captive, and do penance, and pray to thee in the land of their
@c    captivity saying:  We have sinned, we have done wickedly, we have dealt
@c    unjustly:

@c    6:38. And return to thee with all their heart, and with all their soul,
@c    in the land of their captivity, to which they were led away, and adore
@c    thee towards the way of their own land which thou gavest their fathers,
@c    and of the city, which thou hast chosen, and the house which I have
@c    built to thy name:

@c    6:39. Then hear thou from heaven, that is, from thy firm dwelling
@c    place, their prayers, and do judgment, and forgive thy people, although
@c    they have sinned:

@c    6:40. For thou art my God:  let thy eyes, I beseech thee, be open, and
@c    let thy ears be attentive to the prayer, that is made in this place.

@c    6:41. Now therefore arise, O Lord God, into thy resting place, thou and
@c    the ark of thy strength:  let thy priests, O Lord God, put on salvation,
@c    and thy saints rejoice in good things.

@c    6:42. O Lord God, turn not away the face of thy anointed:  remember the
@c    mercies of David thy servant.



@c    2 Paralipomenon Chapter 7


@c    Fire from heaven consumeth the sacrifices.  The solemnity of the
@c    dedication of the temple.  God signifieth his having heard Solomon's
@c    prayer:  yet so if he continue to serve him.

@c    7:1. And when Solomon had made an end of his prayer, fire came down
@c    from heaven, and consumed the holocausts and the victims:  and the
@c    majesty of the Lord filled the house.

@c    7:2. Neither could the priests enter into the temple of the Lord,
@c    because the majesty of the Lord had filled the temple of the Lord.

@c    7:3. Moreover all the children of Israel saw the fire coming down, and
@c    the glory of the Lord upon the house:  and falling down with their faces
@c    to the ground, upon the stone pavement, they adored and praised the
@c    Lord:  because he is good, because his mercy endureth for ever.

@c    7:4. And the king and all the people sacrificed victims before the
@c    Lord.

@c    7:5. And king Solomon offered a sacrifice of twenty-two thousand oxen,
@c    and one hundred and twenty thousand rams:  and the king and all the
@c    people dedicated the house of God.

@c    7:6. And the priests stood in their offices:  and the Levites with the
@c    instruments of music of the Lord, which king David made to praise the
@c    Lord:  because his mercy endureth for ever, singing the hymns of David
@c    by their ministry:  and the priests sounded with trumpets before them,
@c    and all Israel stood.

@c    7:7. Solomon also sanctified the middle of the court before the temple
@c    of the Lord:  for he offered there the holocausts, and the fat of the
@c    peace offerings:  because the brazen altar, which he had made, could not
@c    hold the holocausts and the sacrifices and the fat:

@c    7:8. And Solomon kept the solemnity at that time seven days, and all
@c    Israel with him, a very great congregation, from the entrance of Emath
@c    to the torrent of Egypt.

@c    7:9. And he made on the eighth day a solemn assembly, because he had
@c    kept the dedication of the altar seven days, and had celebrated the
@c    solemnity seven days.

@c    7:10. So on the three and twentieth day of the seventh month he sent
@c    away the people to their dwellings, joyful and glad for the good that
@c    the Lord had done to David, and to Solomon, and to all Israel his
@c    people.

@c    7:11. And Solomon finished the house of the Lord, and the king's house,
@c    and all that he had designed in his heart to do, in the house of the
@c    Lord, and in his own house, and he prospered.

@c    7:12. And the Lord appeared to him by night, and said:  I have heard thy
@c    prayer, and I have chosen this place to myself for a house of
@c    sacrifice.

@c    7:13. If I shut up heaven, and there fall no rain, or if I give orders,
@c    and command the locust to devour the land, or if I send pestilence
@c    among my people:

@c    7:14. And my people, upon whom my name is called, being converted,
@c    shall make supplication to me, and seek out my face, and do penance for
@c    their most wicked ways:  then will I hear from heaven, and will forgive
@c    their sins and will heal their land.

@c    7:15. My eyes also shall be open, and my ears attentive to the prayer
@c    of him that shall pray in this place.

@c    7:16. For I have chosen, and have sanctified this place, that my name
@c    may be there for ever, and my eyes and my heart may remain there
@c    perpetually.

@c    7:17. And as for thee, if thou walk before me, as David thy father
@c    walked, and do according to all that I have commanded thee, and keep my
@c    justices and my judgments:

@c    7:18. I will raise up the throne of thy kingdom, as I promised to David
@c    thy father, saying:  There shall not fail thee a man of thy stock to be
@c    ruler in Israel.

@c    7:19. But if you turn away, and forsake my justices, and my
@c    commandments which I have set before you, and shall go and serve
@c    strange gods, and adore them,

@c    7:20. I will pluck you up by the root out of my land which I have given
@c    you:  and this house which I have sanctified to my name, I will cast
@c    away from before my face, and will make it a byword, and an example
@c    among all nations.

@c    7:21. And this house shall be for a proverb to all that pass by, and
@c    they shall be astonished and say:  Why hath the Lord done thus to this
@c    land, and to this house?

@c    7:22. And they shall answer:  Because they forsook the Lord the God of
@c    their fathers, who brought them out of the land of Egypt, and laid hold
@c    on strange gods, and adored them, and worshipped them:  therefore all
@c    these evils are come upon them.



@c    2 Paralipomenon Chapter 8


@c    Solomon's buildings and other acts.

@c    8:1. And at the end of twenty years after Solomon had built the house
@c    of the Lord and his own house:

@c    8:2. He built the cities which Hiram had given to Solomon, and caused
@c    the children of Israel to dwell there.

@c    8:3. He went also into Emath Suba, and possessed it.

@c    8:4. And he built Palmira in the desert, and he built other strong
@c    cities in Emath.

@c    8:5. And he built Beth-horon the upper, and Beth-horon the nether,
@c    walled cities with gates and bars and locks.

@c    8:6. Balaath also and all the strong cities that were Solomon's, and
@c    all the cities of the chariots, and the cities of the horsemen.  All
@c    that Solomon had a mind, and designed, he built in Jerusalem and in
@c    Libanus, and in all the land of his dominion.

@c    8:7. All the people that were left of the Hethites, and the Amorrhites,
@c    and the Pherezites, and the Hevites, and the Jebusites, that were not
@c    of the stock of Israel:

@c    8:8. Of their children, and of the posterity, whom the children of
@c    Israel had not slain, Solomon made to be the tributaries, unto this
@c    day.

@c    8:9. But of the children of Israel he set none to serve in the king's
@c    works:  for they were men of war, and chief captains, and rulers of his
@c    chariots and horsemen.

@c    8:10. And all the chief captains of king Solomon's army were two
@c    hundred and fifty, who taught the people.

@c    8:11. And he removed the daughter of Pharao from the city of David, to
@c    the house which he had built for her.  For the king said:  My wife shall
@c    not dwell in the house of David king of Israel, for it is sanctified:
@c    because the ark of the Lord came into it.

@c    8:12. Then Solomon offered holocausts to the Lord upon the altar of the
@c    Lord which he had built before the porch,

@c    8:13. That every day an offering might be made on it according to the
@c    ordinance of Moses, in the sabbaths, and on the new moons, and on the
@c    festival days three times a year, that is to say, in the feast of
@c    unleavened bread, and in the feast of weeks, and in the feast of
@c    tabernacles.

@c    8:14. And he appointed according to the order of David his father the
@c    offices of the priests in their ministries:  and the Levites in their
@c    order to give praise, and minister before the priests according to the
@c    duty of every day:  and the porters in their divisions by gate and gate:
@c    for so David the man of God had commanded.

@c    8:15. And the priests and Levites departed not from the king's
@c    commandments, as to any thing that he had commanded, and as to the
@c    keeping of the treasures.

@c    8:16. Solomon had all charges prepared, from the day that he founded
@c    the house of the Lord, until the day wherein he finished it.

@c    8:17. Then Solomon went to Asiongaber, and to Ailath, on the coast of
@c    the Red Sea, which is in the land of Edom.

@c    8:18. And Hiram sent him ships by the hands of his servants, and
@c    skilful mariners, and they went with Solomon's servants to Ophir, and
@c    they took thence four hundred and fifty talents of gold, and brought it
@c    to king Solomon.



@c    2 Paralipomenon Chapter 9


@c    The queen of Saba admireth the wisdom of Solomon.  His riches and glory.
@c    His death.

@c    9:1. And when the queen of Saba heard of the fame of Solomon, she came
@c    to try him with hard questions at Jerusalem, with great riches, and
@c    camels, which carried spices, and abundance of gold, and precious
@c    stones.  And when she was come to Solomon, she proposed to him all that
@c    was in her heart.

@c    9:2. And Solomon explained to her all that she proposed:  and there was
@c    not any thing that he did not make clear unto her.

@c    9:3. And when she had seen these things, to wit, the wisdom of Solomon,
@c    and the house which he had built,

@c    9:4. And the meats of his table, and the dwelling places of his
@c    servants, and the attendance of his officers, and their apparel, his
@c    cupbearers also, and their garments, and the victims which he offered
@c    in the house of the Lord:  there was no more spirit in her, she was so
@c    astonished.

@c    9:5. And she said to the king:  The word is true which I heard in my
@c    country of thy virtues and wisdom.

@c    9:6. I did not believe them that told it, until I came, and my eyes had
@c    seen, and I had proved that scarce one half of thy wisdom had been told
@c    me:  thou hast exceeded the same with thy virtues.

@c    9:7. Happy are thy men, and happy are thy servants, who stand always
@c    before thee, and hear thy wisdom.

@c    9:8. Blessed be the Lord thy God, who hath been pleased to set thee on
@c    his throne, king of the Lord thy God.  Because God loveth Israel, and
@c    will preserve them forever:  therefore hath he made thee king over them,
@c    to do judgment and justice.

@c    9:9. And she gave to the king a hundred and twenty talents of gold, and
@c    spices in great abundance, and most precious stones:  there were no such
@c    spices as these which the queen of Saba gave to king Solomon.

@c    9:10. And the servants also of Hiram, with the servants of Solomon,
@c    brought gold from Ophir, and thyine trees, and most precious stones:

@c    9:11. And the king made of the thyine trees stairs in the house of the
@c    Lord, and in the king's house, and harps and psalteries for the singing
@c    men:  never were there seen such trees in the land of Juda.

@c    9:12. And king Solomon gave to the queen of Saba all that she desired,
@c    and that she asked, and many more things than she brought to him:  so
@c    she returned, and went to her own country with her servants.

@c    9:13. And the weight of the gold, that was brought to Solomon every
@c    year, was six hundred and sixty-six talents of gold:

@c    9:14. Beside the sum which the deputies of divers nations, and the
@c    merchants were accustomed to bring, and all the kings of Arabia, and
@c    the lords of the lands, who brought gold and silver to Solomon.

@c    9:15. And king Solomon made two hundred golden spears, of the sum of
@c    six hundred pieces of gold, which went to every spear:

@c    9:16. And three hundred golden shields of three hundred pieces of gold,
@c    which went to the covering of every shield:  and the king put them in
@c    the armoury, which was compassed with a wood.

@c    9:17. The king also made a great throne of ivory, and overlaid it with
@c    pure gold.

@c    9:18. And six steps to go up to the throne, and a footstool of gold,
@c    and two arms one on either side, and two lions standing by the arms:

@c    9:19. Moreover twelve other little lions standing upon the steps on
@c    both sides:  there was not such a throne in any kingdom.

@c    9:20. And all the vessels of the king's table were of gold, and the
@c    vessels of the house of the forest of Libanus were of the purest gold.
@c    For no account was made of silver in those days.

@c    9:21. For the king's ships went to Tharsis with the servants of Hiram,
@c    once in three years:  and they brought thence gold and silver, and
@c    ivory, and apes, and peacocks.

@c    9:22. And Solomon was magnified above all the kings of the earth for
@c    riches and glory.

@c    9:23. And all the kings of the earth desired to see the face of
@c    Solomon, that they might hear the wisdom which God had given in his
@c    heart.

@c    9:24. And every year they brought him presents, vessels of silver and
@c    of gold, and garments, and armour, and spices, and horses, and mules.

@c    9:25. And Solomon had forty thousand horses in the stables, and twelve
@c    thousand chariots, and horsemen, and he placed them in the cities of
@c    the chariots and where the king was in Jerusalem.

@c    9:26. And he exercised authority over all the kings from the river
@c    Euphrates to the land of the Philistines, and to the borders of Egypt.

@c    9:27. And he made silver as plentiful in Jerusalem as stones:  and
@c    cedars as common as the sycamores, which grow in the plains.

@c    9:28. And horses were brought to him out of Egypt, and out of all
@c    countries.

@c    9:29. Now the rest of the acts of Solomon first and last are written in
@c    the words of Nathan the prophet, and in the books of Ahias the
@c    Silonite, and in the vision of Addo the seer, against Jeroboam the son
@c    of Nabat.

@c    9:30. And Solomon reigned in Jerusalem over all Israel forty years.

@c    9:31. And he slept with his fathers:  and they buried him in the city of
@c    David:  and Roboam his son reigned in his stead.



@c    2 Paralipomenon Chapter 10


@c    Roboam answereth the people roughly:  upon which ten tribes revolt.

@c    10:1. And Roboam went to Sichem:  for thither all Israel were assembled,
@c    to make him king.

@c    10:2. And when Jeroboam the son of Nabat, who was in Egypt, (for he was
@c    fled thither from Solomon,) heard it, forthwith he returned.

@c    10:3. And they sent for him, and he came with all Israel, and they
@c    spoke to Roboam, saying:

@c    10:4. Thy father oppressed with a most grievous yoke, do thou govern us
@c    with a lighter hand than thy father, who laid upon us a heavy
@c    servitude, and ease some thing of the burden, that we may serve thee.

@c    10:5. And he said to them:  Come to me again after three days.  And when
@c    the people were gone,

@c    10:6. He took counsel with the ancients, who had stood before his
@c    father Solomon, while he yet lived, saying:  What counsel give you to
@c    me, that I may answer the people?

@c    10:7. And they said to him:  If thou please this people, and soothe them
@c    with kind words, they will be thy servants for ever.

@c    10:8. But he forsook the counsel of the ancients, and began to treat
@c    with the young men, that had been brought up with him, and were in his
@c    train.

@c    10:9. And he said to them:  What seemeth good to you?  or what shall I
@c    answer this people, who have said to me:  Ease the yoke which thy father
@c    laid upon us?

@c    10:10. But they answered as young men, and brought up with him in
@c    pleasures, and said:  Thus shalt thou speak to the people, that said to
@c    thee:  Thy father made our yoke heavy, do thou ease it:  thus shalt thou
@c    answer them:  My little finger is thicker than the loins of my father.

@c    10:11. My father laid upon you a heavy yoke, and I will add more weight
@c    to it:  my father beat you with scourges, but I will beat you with
@c    scorpions.

@c    10:12. So Jeroboam, and all the people came to Roboam the third day, as
@c    he commanded them.

@c    10:13. And the king answered roughly, leaving the counsel of the
@c    ancients.

@c    10:14. And he spoke according to the advice of the young men:  My father
@c    laid upon you a heavy yoke, which I will make heavier:  my father beat
@c    you with scourges, but I will beat you with scorpions.

@c    10:15. And he condescended not to the people's requests:  for it was the
@c    will of God, that his word might be fulfilled which he had spoken by
@c    the hand of Ahias the Silonite to Jeroboam the son of Nabat.

@c    10:16. And all the people upon the king's speaking roughly, said thus
@c    unto him:  We have no part in David, nor inheritance in the son of Isai.
@c    Return to thy dwellings, O Israel, and do thou, O David feed thy own
@c    house.  And Israel went away to their dwellings.

@c    10:17. But Roboam reigned over the children of Israel that dwelt in the
@c    cities of Juda.

@c    10:18. And king Roboam sent Aduram, who was over the tributes, and the
@c    children of Israel stoned him, and he died:  and king Roboam made haste
@c    to get up into his chariot, and fled into Jerusalem.

@c    10:19. And Israel revolted from the house of David unto this day.



@c    2 Paralipomenon Chapter 11


@c    Roboam's reign.  His kingdom is strengthened.

@c    11:1. And Roboam came to Jerusalem, and called together all the house
@c    of Juda and of Benjamin, a hundred and fourscore thousand chosen men
@c    and warriors, to fight against Israel, and to bring back his kingdom to
@c    him.

@c    11:2. And the word of the Lord came to Semeias the man of God, saying:

@c    11:3. Speak to Roboam the son of Solomon the king of Juda, and to all
@c    Israel, in Juda and Benjamin:

@c    11:4. Thus saith the Lord:  You shall not go up, nor fight against your
@c    brethren:  let every man return to his own house, for by my will this
@c    thing has been done.  And when they heard the word of the Lord, they
@c    returned, and did not go against Jeroboam,

@c    11:5. And Roboam dwelt in Jerusalem, and built walled cities in Juda.

@c    11:6. And he built Bethlehem, and Etam, and Thecue,

@c    11:7. And Bethsur, and Socho, and Odollam,

@c    11:8. And Geth, and Maresa, and Ziph,

@c    11:9. And Aduram, and Lachis, and Azecha,

@c    11:10. Saraa also, and Aialon, and Hebron, which are in Juda and
@c    Benjamin, well fenced cities.

@c    11:11. And when he had enclosed them with walls, he put in them
@c    governors and storehouses of provisions, that is, of oil and of wine.

@c    11:12. Moreover in every city he made an armoury of shields and spears,
@c    and he fortified them with great diligence, and he reigned over Juda,
@c    and Benjamin,

@c    11:13. And the priests and Levites, that were in all Israel, came to
@c    him out of all their seats,

@c    11:14. Leaving their suburbs, and their possessions, and passing over
@c    to Juda, and Jerusalem, because Jeroboam and his sons had cast them
@c    off, from executing the priestly office to the Lord.

@c    11:15. And he made to himself priests for the high places, and for the
@c    devils, and for the calves which he had made.

@c    11:16. Moreover out of all the tribes of Israel, whosoever gave their
@c    heart to seek the Lord the God of Israel, came into Jerusalem to
@c    sacrifice their victims before the Lord the God of their fathers.

@c    11:17. And they strengthened the kingdom of Juda, and established
@c    Roboam the son of Solomon for three years:  for they walked in the ways
@c    of David and of Solomon, only three years.

@c    11:18. And Roboam took to wife Mahalath, the daughter of Jerimoth the
@c    son of David:  and Abihail the daughter of Eliab the son of Isai.

@c    11:19. And they bore him sons Jehus, and Somorias, and Zoom.

@c    11:20. And after her he married Maacha the daughter of Absalom, who
@c    bore him Abia, and Ethai, and Ziza, and Salomith.

@c    11:21. And Roboam loved Maacha the daughter of Absalom above all his
@c    wives and concubines:  for he had married eighteen wives, and threescore
@c    concubines:  and he begot eight and twenty sons, and threescore
@c    daughters.

@c    11:22. But he put at the head of them Abia the son of Maacha to be the
@c    chief ruler over all his brethren:  for he meant to make him king,

@c    11:23. Because he was wiser and mightier than all his sons, and in all
@c    the countries of Juda, and of Benjamin, and in all the walled cities:
@c    and he gave them provisions in abundance, and he sought many wives.



@c    2 Paralipomenon Chapter 12


@c    Roboam for his sins is delivered up into the hands of the king of
@c    Egypt:  who carrieth away all the treasures of the temple.

@c    12:1. And when the kingdom of Roboam was strengthened and fortified, he
@c    forsook the law of the Lord, and all Israel with him.

@c    12:2. And in the fifth year of the reign of Roboam, Sesac king of Egypt
@c    came up against Jerusalem (because they had sinned against the Lord)

@c    12:3. With twelve hundred chariots and threescore thousand horsemen:
@c    and the people were without number that came with him out of Egypt, to
@c    wit, Libyans, and Troglodites, and Ethiopians.

@c    12:4. And he took the strongest cities in Juda, and came to Jerusalem.

@c    12:5. And Semeias the prophet came to Roboam, and to the princes of
@c    Juda, that were gathered together in Jerusalem, fleeing from Sesac, and
@c    he said to them:  Thus saith the Lord:  You have left me, and I have left
@c    you in the hand of Sesac.

@c    12:6. And the princes of Israel, and the king, being in a
@c    consternation, said:  The Lord is just.

@c    12:7. And when the Lord saw that they were humbled, the word of the
@c    Lord came to Semeias, saying:  Because they are humbled, I will not
@c    destroy them, and I will give them a little help, and my wrath shall
@c    not fall upon Jerusalem by the hand of Sesac.

@c    12:8. But yet they shall serve him, that they may know the difference
@c    between my service, and the service of a kingdom of the earth.

@c    12:9. So Sesac king of Egypt departed from Jerusalem, taking away the
@c    treasures of the king's house, and he took all with him, and the golden
@c    shields that Solomon had made,

@c    12:10. Instead of which the king made brazen ones, and delivered them
@c    to the captains of the shieldbearers, who guarded the entrance of the
@c    palace.

@c    12:11. And when the king entered into the house of the Lord, the
@c    shieldbearers came and took them, and brought them back again to their
@c    armoury.

@c    12:12. But yet because they were humbled, the wrath of the Lord turned
@c    away from them, and they were not utterly destroyed:  for even in Juda
@c    there were found good works.

@c    12:13. King Roboam therefore was strengthened in Jerusalem, and
@c    reigned:  he was one and forty years old when he began to reign, and he
@c    reigned seventeen years in Jerusalem, the city which the Lord chose out
@c    of all the tribes of Israel, to establish his name there:  and the name
@c    of his mother was Naama an Ammonitess.

@c    12:14. But he did evil, and did not prepare his heart to seek the Lord.

@c    12:15. Now the acts of Roboam first and last are written in the books
@c    of Semeias the prophet, and of Addo the seer, and diligently recorded:
@c    and there was war between Roboam and Jeroboam all their days.

@c    12:16. And Roboam slept with his fathers, and was buried in the city of
@c    David.  And Abia his son reigned in his stead.



@c    2 Paralipomenon Chapter 13


@c    Abia's reign:  his victory over Jeroboam.

@c    13:1. In the eighteenth year of king Jeroboam, Abia reigned over Juda.

@c    13:2. Three years he reigned in Jerusalem, and his mother's name was
@c    Michaia, the daughter of Uriel of Gabaa:  and there was war between Abia
@c    and Jeroboam.

@c    Michaia. . .Alias Maacha.  Her father had also two names, viz., Absalom,
@c    or Abessalom, and Uriel.

@c    13:3. And when Abia had begun battle, and had with him four hundred
@c    thousand most valiant and chosen men, Jeroboam put his army in array
@c    against him, eight hundred thousand men, who were also chosen and most
@c    valiant for war.

@c    13:4. And Abia stood upon mount Semeron, which was in Ephraim, and
@c    said:  Hear me, O Jeroboam, and all Israel:

@c    13:5. Do you not know that the Lord God of Israel gave to David the
@c    kingdom over Israel for ever, to him and to his sons by a covenant of
@c    salt?

@c    A covenant of salt. . .That is, a firm and perpetual covenant.  See Num.
@c    18.19.

@c    13:6. And Jeroboam the son of Nabat, the servant of Solomon the son of
@c    David, rose up:  and rebelled against his lord.

@c    13:7. And there were gathered to him vain men, and children of Belial:
@c    and they prevailed against Roboam the son of Solomon:  for Roboam was
@c    unexperienced, and of a fearful heart, and could not resist them.

@c    13:8. And now you say that you are able to withstand the kingdom of the
@c    Lord, which he possesseth by the sons of David, and you have a great
@c    multitude of people, and golden calves, which Jeroboam hath made you
@c    for gods.

@c    13:9. And you have cast out the priests of the Lord, the sons of Aaron,
@c    and the Levites:  and you have made you priests, like all the nations of
@c    the earth:  whosoever cometh and consecrateth his hand with a bullock of
@c    the herd, and with seven rams, is made a priest of those who are no
@c    gods.

@c    13:10. But the Lord is our God, whom we forsake not, and the priests
@c    who minister to the Lord are the sons of Aaron, and the Levites are in
@c    their order.

@c    13:11. And they offer holocausts to the Lord, every day, morning and
@c    evening, and incense made according to the ordinance of the law, and
@c    the loaves are set forth on a most clean table, and there is with us
@c    the golden candlestick, and the lamps thereof, to be lighted always in
@c    the evening:  for we keep the precepts of the Lord our God, whom you
@c    have forsaken.

@c    13:12. Therefore God is the leader in our army, and his priests who
@c    sound with trumpets, and resound against you:  O children of Israel,
@c    fight not against the Lord the God of your fathers, for it is not good
@c    for you.

@c    13:13. While he spoke these things, Jeroboam caused an ambushment to
@c    come about behind him.  And while he stood facing the enemies, he
@c    encompassed Juda, who perceived it not, with his army.

@c    13:14. And when Juda looked back, they saw the battle coming upon them
@c    both before and behind, and they cried to the Lord:  and the priests
@c    began to sound with the trumpets.

@c    13:15. And all the men of Juda shouted:  and behold when they shouted,
@c    God terrified Jeroboam, and all Israel that stood against Abia and
@c    Juda.

@c    13:16. And the children of Israel fled before Juda, and the Lord
@c    delivered them into their hand.

@c    13:17. And Abia and his people slew them with a great slaughter, and
@c    there fell wounded of Israel five hundred thousand valiant men.

@c    13:18. And the children of Israel were brought down, at that time, and
@c    the children of Juda were exceedingly strengthened, because they had
@c    trusted in the Lord the God of their fathers.

@c    13:19. And Abia pursued after Jeroboam, and took cities from him,
@c    Bethel and her daughters, and Jesana with her daughters, Ephron also
@c    and her daughters.

@c    13:20. And Jeroboam was not able to resist any more, in the days of
@c    Abia:  and the Lord struck him, and he died.

@c    13:21. But Abia, being strengthened in his kingdom, took fourteen
@c    wives:  and begot two and twenty sons, and sixteen daughters.

@c    13:22. And the rest of the acts of Abia, and of his ways and works, are
@c    written diligently in the book of Addo the prophet.



@c    2 Paralipomenon Chapter 14


@c    The reign of Asa:  his victory over the Ethiopians.

@c    14:1. And Abia slept with his fathers, and they buried him in the city
@c    of David:  an Asa his son reigned in his stead:  in his days the land was
@c    quiet ten years.

@c    14:2. And Asa did that which was good and pleasing in the sight of his
@c    God, and he destroyed the altars of foreign worship, and the high
@c    places.

@c    14:3. And broke the statues, and cut down the groves.

@c    14:4. And he commanded Juda to seek the Lord the God of their fathers,
@c    and to do the law, and all the commandments.

@c    14:5. And he took away out of all the cities of Juda the altars, and
@c    temples, and reigned in peace.

@c    14:6. He built also strong cities in Juda, for he was quiet, and there
@c    had no wars risen in his time, the Lord giving peace.

@c    14:7. And he said to Juda:  Let us build these cities, and compass them
@c    with walls, and fortify them with towers, and gates, and bars, while
@c    all is quiet from wars, because we have sought the Lord the God of our
@c    fathers, and he hath given us peace round about.  So they built, and
@c    there was no hinderance in building.

@c    14:8. And Asa had in his army of men that bore shields and spears of
@c    Juda three hundred thousand, and of Benjamin that bore shields and drew
@c    bows, two hundred and eighty thousand, all these were most valiant men.

@c    14:9. And Zara the Ethiopian came out against them with his army of ten
@c    hundred thousand men, and with three hundred chariots:  and he came as
@c    far as Maresa.

@c    14:10. And Asa went out to meet him, and set his army in array for
@c    battle in the vale of Sephata, which is near Maresa:

@c    14:11. And he called upon the Lord God, and said:  Lord, there is no
@c    difference with thee, whether thou help with few, or with many:  help
@c    us, O Lord our God:  for with confidence in thee, and in thy name we are
@c    come against this multitude.  O Lord thou art our God, let not man
@c    prevail against thee.

@c    14:12. And the Lord terrified the Ethiopians before Asa and Juda:  and
@c    the Ethiopians fled.

@c    14:13. And Asa and the people that were with him pursued them to
@c    Gerara:  and the Ethiopians fell even to utter destruction, for the Lord
@c    slew them, and his army fought against them, and they were destroyed.
@c    And they took abundance of spoils,

@c    14:14. And they took all the cities round about Gerara:  for a great
@c    fear was come upon all men:  and they pillaged the cities, and carried
@c    off much booty.

@c    14:15. And they destroyed the sheepcotes, and took an infinite number
@c    of cattle, and of camels:  and returned to Jerusalem.



@c    2 Paralipomenon Chapter 15


@c    The prophecy of Azarias.  Asa's covenant with God.  He deposeth his
@c    mother.

@c    15:1. And the spirit of God came upon Azarias the son of Oded,

@c    15:2. And he went out to meet Asa, and said to him:  Hear ye me, Asa,
@c    and all Juda and Benjamin:  The Lord is with you, because you have been
@c    with him.  If you seek him, you shall find:  but if you forsake him, he
@c    will forsake you.

@c    15:3. And many days shall pass in Israel, without the true God, and
@c    without a priest a teacher, and without the law.

@c    15:4. And when in their distress they shall return to the Lord the God
@c    of Israel, and shall seek him, they shall find him.

@c    15:5. At that time there shall be no peace to him that goeth out and
@c    cometh in, but terrors on every side among all the inhabitants of the
@c    earth.

@c    15:6. For nation shall fight against nation, and city against city, for
@c    the Lord will trouble them with all distress.

@c    15:7. Do you therefore take courage, and let not your hands be
@c    weakened:  for there shall be a reward for your work.

@c    15:8. And when Asa had heard the words, and the prophecy of Azarias the
@c    son of Oded the prophet, he took courage, and took away the idols out
@c    of all the land of Juda, and out of Benjamin, and out of the cities of
@c    mount Ephraim, which he had taken, and he dedicated the altar of the
@c    Lord, which was before the porch of the Lord.

@c    15:9. And he gathered together all Juda and Benjamin, and the strangers
@c    with them of Ephraim, and Manasses, and Simeon:  for many were come over
@c    to him out of Israel, seeing that the Lord his God was with him.

@c    15:10. And when they were come to Jerusalem in the third month, in the
@c    fifteenth year of the reign of Asa,

@c    15:11. They sacrificed to the Lord in that day of the spoils, and of
@c    the prey, that they had brought, seven hundred oxen, and seven thousand
@c    rams.

@c    15:12. And he went in to confirm as usual the covenant, that they
@c    should seek the Lord the God of their fathers with all their heart, and
@c    with all their soul.

@c    15:13. And if any one, said he, seek not the Lord the God of Israel,
@c    let him die, whether little or great, man or woman.

@c    15:14. And they swore to the Lord with a loud voice with joyful
@c    shouting, and with sound of trumpet, and sound of cornets,

@c    15:15. All that were in Juda with a curse:  for with all their heart
@c    they swore, and with all their will they sought him, and they found
@c    him, and the Lord gave them rest round about.

@c    15:16. Moreover Maacha the mother of king Asa he deposed from the royal
@c    authority, because she had made in a grove an idol of Priapus:  and he
@c    entirely destroyed it, and breaking it into pieces, burnt it at the
@c    torrent Cedron.

@c    15:17. But high places were left in Israel:  nevertheless the heart of
@c    Asa was perfect all his days.

@c    15:18. And the things which his father had vowed, and he himself had
@c    vowed, he brought into the house of the Lord, gold and silver, and
@c    vessels of divers uses.

@c    15:19. And there was no war unto the five and thirtieth year of the
@c    kingdom of Asa.



@c    2 Paralipomenon Chapter 16


@c    Asa is reproved for seeking help from the Syrians:  his last acts and
@c    death.

@c    16:1. And in the six and thirtieth year of his kingdom, Baasa the king
@c    of Israel came up against Juda, and built a wall about Rama, that no
@c    one might safely go out or come in of the kingdom of Asa.

@c    Six and thirtieth year of his kingdom. . .That is, of the kingdom of
@c    Juda, taking the date of it from the beginning of the reign of Reboam.

@c    16:2. Then Asa brought out silver and gold out of the treasures of the
@c    house of the Lord, and of the king's treasures, and sent to Benadad
@c    king of Syria, who dwelt in Damascus, saying:

@c    16:3. There is a league between me and thee, as there was between my
@c    father and thy father, wherefore I have sent thee silver and gold, that
@c    thou mayst break thy league with Baasa king of Israel, and make him
@c    depart from me.

@c    16:4. And when Benadad heard this, he sent the captains of his armies
@c    against the cities of Israel:  and they took Ahion, and Dan, and
@c    Abelmaim, and all the walled cities of Nephtali.

@c    16:5. And when Baasa heard of it, he left off the building of Rama, and
@c    interrupted his work.

@c    16:6. Then king Asa took all Juda, and they carried away from Rama the
@c    stones, and the timber that Baasa had prepared for the building:  and he
@c    built with them Gabaa, and Maspha.

@c    16:7. At that time Hanani the prophet came to Asa king of Juda, and
@c    said to him:  Because thou hast had confidence in the king of Syria, and
@c    not in the Lord thy God, therefore hath the army of the king of Syria
@c    escaped out of thy hand.

@c    16:8. Were not the Ethiopians, and the Libyans much more numerous in
@c    chariots, and horsemen, and an exceeding great multitude:  yet because
@c    thou trustedst in the Lord, he delivered them into thy hand?

@c    16:9. For the eyes of the Lord behold all the earth, and give strength
@c    to those who with a perfect heart trust in him.  Wherefore thou hast
@c    done foolishly, and for this cause from this time wars shall arise
@c    against thee.

@c    16:10. And Asa was angry with the seer, and commanded him to be put in
@c    prison:  for he was greatly enraged because of this thing:  and he put to
@c    death many of the people at that time.

@c    16:11. But the works of Asa the first and last are written in the book
@c    of the kings of Juda and Israel.

@c    16:12. And Asa fell sick in the nine and thirtieth year of his reign,
@c    of a most violent pain in his feet, and yet in his illness he did not
@c    seek the Lord, but rather trusted in the skill of physicians.

@c    16:13. And he slept with his fathers:  and he died in the one and
@c    fortieth year of his reign.

@c    16:14. And they buried him in his own sepulchre, which he had made for
@c    himself in the city of David:  and they laid him on his bed full of
@c    spices and odoriferous ointments, which were made by the art of the
@c    perfumers, and they burnt them over him with very great pomp.



@c    2 Paralipomenon Chapter 17


@c    Josaphat's reign:  his care for the instruction of his people:  his
@c    numerous forces.

@c    17:1. And Josaphat his son reigned in his stead, and grew strong
@c    against Israel.

@c    17:2. And he placed numbers of soldiers in all the fortified cities of
@c    Juda.  And he put garrisons in the land of Juda, and in the cities of
@c    Ephraim, which Asa his father had taken.

@c    17:3. And the Lord was with Josaphat, because he walked in the first
@c    ways of David his father:  and trusted not in Baalim,

@c    17:4. But in the God of his father, and walked in his commandments, and
@c    not according to the sins of Israel.

@c    17:5. And the Lord established the kingdom in his hand, and all Juda
@c    brought presents to Josaphat:  and he acquired immense riches, and much
@c    glory.

@c    17:6. And when his heart had taken courage for the ways of the Lord, he
@c    took away also the high places and the groves out of Juda.

@c    17:7. And in the third year of his reign, he sent of his princes
@c    Benhail, and Abdias, and Zacharias, and Nathanael, and Micheas, to
@c    teach in the cites of Juda:

@c    17:8. And with them the Levites, Semeias, and Nathanias, and Zabadias,
@c    and Asael, and Semiramoth, and Jonathan, and Adonias, and Tobias, and
@c    Thobadonias Levites, and with them Elisama, and Joram priests.

@c    17:9. And they taught the people in Juda, having with them the book of
@c    the law of the Lord:  and they went about all the cities of Juda, and
@c    instructed the people.

@c    17:10. And the fear of the Lord came upon all the kingdoms of the lands
@c    that were round about Juda, and they durst not make war against
@c    Josaphat.

@c    17:11. The Philistines also brought presents to Josaphat, and tribute
@c    in silver, and the Arabians brought him cattle, seven thousand seven
@c    hundred rams, and as many he goats.

@c    17:12. And Josaphat grew, and became exceeding great:  and he built in
@c    Juda houses like towers, and walled cities.

@c    17:13. And he prepared many works in the cities of Juda:  and he had
@c    warriors, and valiant men in Jerusalem.

@c    17:14. Of whom this is the number of the houses and families of every
@c    one:  in Juda captains of the army, Ednas the chief, and with him three
@c    hundred thousand most valiant men.

@c    17:15. After him Johanan the captain, and with him two hundred and
@c    eighty thousand.

@c    17:16. And after him was Amasias the son of Zechri, consecrated to the
@c    Lord, and with him were two hundred thousand valiant men.

@c    17:17. After him was Eliada valiant in battle, and with him two hundred
@c    thousand armed with bow and shield.

@c    17:18. After him also was Jozabad, and with him a hundred and eighty
@c    thousand ready for war.

@c    17:19. All these were at the hand of the king, beside others, whom he
@c    had put in the walled cities, in all Juda.



@c    2 Paralipomenon Chapter 18


@c    Josaphat accompanies Achab in his expedition against Ramoth; where
@c    Achab is slain, as Micheas had foretold.

@c    18:1. Now Josaphat was rich and very glorious, and was joined by
@c    affinity to Achab.

@c    18:2. And he went down to him after some years to Samaria:  and Achab at
@c    his coming killed sheep and oxen in abundance for him and the people
@c    that came with him:  and he persuaded him to go up to Ramoth Galaad.

@c    18:3. And Achab king of Israel said to Josaphat king of Juda:  Come with
@c    me to Ramoth Galaad.  And he answered him:  Thou art as I am, and my
@c    people as thy people, and we will be with thee in the war.

@c    18:4. And Josaphat said to the king of Israel:  Inquire, I beseech thee,
@c    at present the word of the Lord.

@c    18:5. So the king of Israel gathered together of the prophets four
@c    hundred men, and he said to them:  Shall we go to Ramoth Galaad to
@c    fight, or shall we forbear?  But they said:  Go up, and God will deliver
@c    into the king's hand.

@c    18:6. And Josaphat said:  Is there not here a prophet of the Lord, that
@c    we may inquire also of him?

@c    18:7. And the king of Israel said to Josaphat:  There is one man, of
@c    whom we may ask the will of the Lord:  but I hate him, for he never
@c    prophesieth good to me, but always evil:  and it is Micheas the son of
@c    Jemla.  And Josaphat said:  Speak not thus, O king.

@c    18:8. And the king of Israel called one of the eunuchs, and said to
@c    him:  Call quickly Micheas the son of Jemla.

@c    18:9. Now the king of Israel, and Josaphat king of Juda, both sat on
@c    their thrones, clothed in royal robes, and they sat in the open court
@c    by the gate of Samaria, and all the prophets prophesied before them.

@c    18:10. And Sedecias the son of Chanaana made him horns of iron, and
@c    said:  Thus saith the Lord:  With these shalt thou push Syria, till thou
@c    destroy it.

@c    18:11. And all the prophets prophesied in like manner, and said:  Go up
@c    to Ramoth Galaad, and thou shalt prosper, and the Lord will deliver
@c    them into the king's hand.

@c    18:12. And the messenger that went to call Micheas, said to him:  Behold
@c    the words of all the prophets with one mouth declare good to the king:
@c    I beseech thee therefore let not thy word disagree with them, and speak
@c    thou also good success.

@c    18:13. And Micheas answered him:  As the Lord liveth, whatsoever my God
@c    shall say to me, that will I speak.

@c    18:14. So he came to the king:  and the king said to him:  Micheas, shall
@c    we go to Ramoth Galaad to fight, or forbear?  And he answered him:  Go
@c    up, for all shall succeed prosperously, and the enemies shall be
@c    delivered into your hands.

@c    18:15. And the king said:  I adjure thee again and again to say nothing
@c    but the truth to me, in the name of the Lord.

@c    18:16. Then he said:  I saw all Israel scattered in the mountains, like
@c    sheep without a shepherd:  and the Lord said:  These have no masters:
@c    let every man return to his own house in peace.

@c    18:17. And the king of Israel said to Josaphat:  Did I not tell thee
@c    that this man would not prophesy me any good, but evil?

@c    18:18. Then he said:  Hear ye therefore the word of the Lord:  I saw the
@c    Lord sitting on his throne, and all the army of heaven standing by him
@c    on the right hand and on the left,

@c    18:19. And the Lord said:  Who shall deceive Achab king of Israel, that
@c    he may go up and fall in Ramoth Galaad?  And when one spoke in this
@c    manner, and another otherwise:

@c    Who shall deceive, etc. . .See the annotations, 3 Kings 22.

@c    18:20. There came forth a spirit, and stood before the Lord, and said:
@c    I will deceive him.  And the Lord said to him:  By what means wilt thou
@c    deceive him?

@c    18:21. And he answered:  I will go out, and be a lying spirit in the
@c    mouth of all his prophets.  And the Lord said:  Thou shalt deceive, and
@c    shalt prevail:  go out, and do so.

@c    18:22. Now therefore behold the Lord hath put a spirit of lying in the
@c    mouth of all thy prophets, and the Lord hath spoken evil against thee.

@c    18:23. And Sedecias the son of Chanaana came, and struck Micheas on the
@c    cheek and said:  Which way went the spirit of the Lord from me, to speak
@c    to thee?

@c    18:24. And Micheas said:  Thou thyself shalt see in that day, when thou
@c    shalt go in from chamber to chamber, to hide thyself.

@c    18:25. And the king of Israel commanded, saying:  Take Micheas, and
@c    carry him to Amon the governor of the city, and to Joas the son of
@c    Amelech,

@c    18:26. And say:  Thus saith the king:  Put this fellow in prison, and
@c    give him bread and water in a small quantity till I return in peace.

@c    18:27. And Micheas said:  If thou return in peace, the Lord hath not
@c    spoken by me.  And he said:  Hear, all ye people.

@c    18:28. So the king of Israel and Josaphat king of Juda went up to
@c    Ramoth Galaad.

@c    18:29. And the king of Israel said to Josaphat:  I will change my dress,
@c    and so I will go to the battle, but put thou on thy own garments.  And
@c    the king of Israel having changed his dress, went to the battle.

@c    18:30. Now the king of Syria had commanded the captains of his cavalry,
@c    saying:  Fight ye not with small, or great, but with the king of Israel
@c    only.

@c    18:31. So when the captains of the cavalry saw Josaphat, they said:
@c    This is the king of Israel.  And they surrounded him to attack him:  but
@c    he cried to the Lord, and he helped him, and turned them away from him.

@c    18:32. For when the captains of the cavalry saw, that he was not the
@c    king of Israel, they left him.

@c    18:33. And it happened that one of the people shot an arrow at a
@c    venture, and struck the king of Israel between the neck and the
@c    shoulders, and he said to his chariot man:  Turn thy hand, and carry me
@c    out of the battle, for I am wounded.

@c    18:34. And the fight was ended that day:  but the king of Israel stood
@c    in his chariot against the Syrians until the evening, and died at the
@c    sunset.



@c    2 Paralipomenon Chapter 19


@c    Josaphat's charge to the judges and to the Levites.

@c    19:1. And Josaphat king of Juda returned to his house in peace to
@c    Jerusalem.

@c    19:2. And Jehu the son of Hanani the seer met him, and said to him:
@c    Thou helpest the ungodly, and thou art joined in friendship with them
@c    that hate the Lord, and therefore thou didst deserve indeed the wrath
@c    of the Lord:

@c    19:3. But good works are found in thee, because thou hast taken away
@c    the groves out of the land of Juda, and hast prepared thy heart to seek
@c    the Lord the God of thy fathers.

@c    19:4. And Josaphat dwelt at Jerusalem:  and he went out again to the
@c    people from Bersabee to mount Ephraim, and brought them back to the
@c    Lord the God of their fathers.

@c    19:5. And he set judges of the land in all the fenced cities of Juda,
@c    in every place.

@c    19:6. And charging the judges, he said:  Take heed what you do:  for you
@c    exercise not the judgment of man, but of the Lord:  and whatsoever you
@c    judge, it shall redound to you.

@c    19:7. Let the fear of the Lord be with you, and do all things with
@c    diligence:  for there is no iniquity with the Lord our God, nor respect
@c    of persons, nor desire of gifts.

@c    19:8. In Jerusalem also Josaphat appointed Levites, and priests and
@c    chiefs of the families of Israel, to judge the judgment and the cause
@c    of the Lord for the inhabitants thereof.

@c    19:9. And he charged them, saying, Thus shall you do in the fear of the
@c    Lord faithfully, and with a perfect heart.

@c    19:10. Every cause that shall come to you of your brethren, that dwell
@c    in their cities, between kindred and kindred, wheresoever there is
@c    question concerning the law, the commandment, the ceremonies, the
@c    justifications:  shew it them, that they may not sin against the Lord,
@c    and that wrath may not come upon you and your brethren:  and so doing
@c    you shall not sin.

@c    19:11. And Amarias the priest your high priest shall be chief in the
@c    things which regard God:  and Zabadias the son of Ismahel, who is ruler
@c    in the house of Juda, shall be over those matters which belong to the
@c    king's office:  and you have before you the Levites for masters, take
@c    courage and do diligently, and the Lord will be with you in good
@c    things.



@c    2 Paralipomenon Chapter 20


@c    The Ammonites, Moabites, and Syrians combine against Josaphat:  he
@c    seeketh God's help by public prayer and fasting.  A prophet foretelleth
@c    that God will fight for his people:  the enemies destroy one another.
@c    Josaphat with his men gathereth the spoils.  He reigneth in peace, but
@c    his navy perisheth, for his society with wicked Ochozias.

@c    20:1. After this the children of Moab, and the children of Ammon, and
@c    with them of the Ammonites, were gathered together to fight against
@c    Josaphat.

@c    20:2. And there came messengers, and told Josaphat, saying:  There
@c    cometh a great multitude against thee from beyond the sea, and out of
@c    Syria, and behold they are in Asasonthamar, which is Engaddi.

@c    20:3. And Josaphat being seized with fear betook himself wholly to pray
@c    to the Lord, and he proclaimed a fast for all Juda.

@c    20:4. And Juda gathered themselves together to pray to the Lord:  and
@c    all came out of their cities to make supplication to him.

@c    20:5. And Josaphat stood in the midst of the assembly of Juda, and
@c    Jerusalem, in the house of the Lord before the new court,

@c    20:6. And said:  O Lord God of our fathers, thou art God in heaven, and
@c    rulest over all the kingdoms and nations, in thy hand is strength and
@c    power, and no one can resist thee.

@c    20:7. Didst not thou our God kill all the inhabitants of this land
@c    before thy people Israel, and gavest it to the seed of Abraham thy
@c    friend for ever?

@c    20:8. And they dwelt in it, and built in it a sanctuary to thy name,
@c    saying:

@c    20:9. If evils fall upon us, the sword of judgment, or pestilence, or
@c    famine, we will stand in thy presence before this house, in which thy
@c    name is called upon:  and we will cry to thee in our afflictions, and
@c    thou wilt hear, and save us.

@c    20:10. Now therefore behold the children of Ammon, and of Moab, and
@c    mount Seir, through whose lands thou didst not allow Israel to pass,
@c    when they came out of Egypt, but they turned aside from them, and slew
@c    them not,

@c    20:11. Do the contrary, and endeavour to cast us out of the possession
@c    which thou hast delivered to us.

@c    20:12. O our God, wilt thou not then judge them?  as for us we have not
@c    strength enough, to be able to resist this multitude, which cometh
@c    violently upon us.  But as we know not what to do, we can only turn our
@c    eyes to thee.

@c    20:13. And all Juda stood before the Lord with their little ones, and
@c    their wives, and their children.

@c    20:14. And Jahaziel the son of Zacharias, the son of Banaias, the son
@c    of Jehiel, the son of Mathanias, a Levite of the sons of Asaph, was
@c    there, upon whom the spirit of the Lord came in the midst of the
@c    multitude,

@c    20:15. And he said:  Attend ye, all Juda, and you that dwell in
@c    Jerusalem, and thou king Josaphat:  Thus saith the Lord to you:  Fear ye
@c    not, and be not dismayed at this multitude:  for the battle is not
@c    yours, but God's.

@c    20:16. To morrow you shall go down against them:  for they will come up
@c    by the ascent named Sis, and you shall find them at the head of the
@c    torrent, which is over against the wilderness of Jeruel.

@c    20:17. It shall not be you that shall fight, but only stand with
@c    confidence, and you shall see the help of the Lord over you, O Juda,
@c    and Jerusalem:  fear ye not, nor be you dismayed:  to morrow you shall go
@c    out against them, and the Lord will be with you.

@c    20:18. Then Josaphat, and Juda, and all the inhabitants of Jerusalem
@c    fell flat on the ground before the Lord, and adored him.

@c    20:19. And the Levites of the sons of Caath, and of the sons of Core
@c    praised the Lord the God of Israel with a loud voice, on high.

@c    20:20. And they rose early in the morning, and went out through the
@c    desert of Thecua:  and as they were marching, Josaphat standing in the
@c    midst of them, said:  Hear me, ye men of Juda, and all the inhabitants
@c    of Jerusalem:  believe in the Lord your God, and you shall be secure:
@c    believe his prophets, and all things shall succeed well.

@c    20:21. And he gave counsel to the people, and appointed the singing men
@c    of the Lord, to praise him by their companies, and to go before the
@c    army, and with one voice to say:  Give glory to the Lord, for his mercy
@c    endureth for ever.

@c    20:22. And when they began to sing praises, the Lord turned their
@c    ambushments upon themselves, that is to say, of the children of Ammon,
@c    and of Moab, and of mount Seir, who were come out to fight against
@c    Juda, and they were slain.

@c    20:23. For the children of Ammon, and of Moab, rose up against the
@c    inhabitants of mount Seir, to kill and destroy them:  and when they had
@c    made an end of them, they turned also against one another, and
@c    destroyed one another.

@c    20:24. And when Juda came to the watch tower, that looketh toward the
@c    desert, they saw afar off all the country, for a great space, full of
@c    dead bodies, and that no one was left that could escape death.

@c    20:25. Then Josaphat came, and all the people with him to take away the
@c    spoils of the dead, and they found among the dead bodies, stuff of
@c    various kinds, and garments, and most precious vessels:  and they took
@c    them for themselves, insomuch that they could not carry all, nor in
@c    three days take away the spoils, the booty was so great.

@c    20:26. And on the fourth day they were assembled in the valley of
@c    Blessing:  for there they blessed the Lord, and therefore they called
@c    that place the valley of Blessing until this day.

@c    20:27. And every man of Juda, and the inhabitants of Jerusalem
@c    returned, and Josaphat at their head, into Jerusalem with great joy,
@c    because the Lord had made them rejoice over their enemies.

@c    20:28. And they came into Jerusalem with psalteries, and harps, and
@c    trumpets into the house of the Lord.

@c    20:29. And the fear of the Lord fell upon all the kingdoms of the lands
@c    when they heard that the Lord had fought against the enemies of Israel.

@c    20:30. And the kingdom of Josaphat was quiet, and God gave him peace
@c    round about.

@c    20:31. And Josaphat reigned over Juda, and he was five and thirty years
@c    old, when he began to reign:  and he reigned five and twenty years in
@c    Jerusalem:  and the name of his mother was Azuba the daughter of Selahi.

@c    20:32. And he walked in the way of his father Asa and departed not from
@c    it, doing the things that were pleasing before the Lord.

@c    20:33. But yet he took not away the high places, and the people had not
@c    yet turned their heart to the Lord the God of their fathers.

@c    20:34. But the rest of the acts of Josaphat, first and last, are
@c    written in the words of Jehu the son of Hanani, which he digested into
@c    the books of the kings of Israel.

@c    20:35. After these things Josaphat king of Juda made friendship with
@c    Ochozias king of Israel, whose works were very wicked.

@c    20:36. And he was partner with him in making ships, to go to Tharsis:
@c    and they made the ships in Asiongaber.

@c    20:37. And Eliezer the son of Dodau of Maresa prophesied to Josaphat,
@c    saying:  Because thou hast made a league with Ochozias, the Lord hath
@c    destroyed thy works, and the ships are broken, and they could not go to
@c    Tharsis.



@c    2 Paralipomenon Chapter 21


@c    Joram's wicked reign:  his punishment and death.

@c    21:1. And Josaphat slept with his fathers, and was buried with them in
@c    the city of David:  and Joram his son reigned in his stead.

@c    21:2. And he had brethren the sons of Josaphat, Azarias, and Jahiel,
@c    and Zacharias, and Azaria, and Michael, and Saphatias, all these were
@c    the sons of Josaphat king of Juda.

@c    21:3. And their father gave them great gifts of silver, and of gold,
@c    and pensions, with strong cities in Juda:  but the kingdom he gave to
@c    Joram, because he was the eldest.

@c    21:4. So Joram rose up over the kingdom of his father:  and when he had
@c    established himself, he slew all his brethren with the sword, and some
@c    of the princes of Israel.

@c    21:5. Joram was two and thirty years old when he began to reign:  and he
@c    reigned eight years in Jerusalem.

@c    21:6. And he walked in the ways of the kings of Israel, as the house of
@c    Achab had done:  for his wife was a daughter of Achab, and he did evil
@c    in the sight of the Lord.

@c    21:7. But the Lord would not destroy the house of David:  because of the
@c    covenant which he had made with him:  and because he had promised to
@c    give a lamp to him, and to his sons for ever.

@c    21:8. In those days Edom revolted, from being subject to Juda, and made
@c    themselves a king.

@c    21:9. And Joram went over with his princes, and all his cavalry with
@c    him, and rose in the night, and defeated the Edomites who had
@c    surrounded him, and all the captains of his cavalry.

@c    21:10. However Edom revolted, from being under the dominion of Juda
@c    unto this day:  at that time Lobna also revolted, from being under his
@c    hand.  For he had forsaken the Lord the God of his fathers.

@c    21:11. Moreover he built also high places in the cities of Juda, and he
@c    made the inhabitants of Jerusalem to commit fornication, and Juda to
@c    transgress.

@c    21:12. And there was a letter brought him from Eliseus the prophet, in
@c    which it was written:  Thus saith the Lord the God of David thy father:
@c    Because thou hast not walked in the ways of Josaphat thy father nor in
@c    the ways of Asa king of Juda,

@c    21:13. But hast walked in the ways of the kings of Israel, and hast
@c    made Juda and the inhabitants of Jerusalem to commit fornication,
@c    imitating the fornication of the house of Achab, moreover also thou
@c    hast killed thy brethren, the house of thy father, better men than
@c    thyself,

@c    21:14. Behold the Lord will strike thee with a great plague, with all
@c    thy people, and thy children, and thy wives, and all thy substance.

@c    21:15. And thou shalt be sick of a very grievous disease of thy bowels,
@c    till thy vital parts come out by little and little every day.

@c    21:16. And the Lord stirred up against Joram the spirit of the
@c    Philistines, and of the Arabians, who border on the Ethiopians.

@c    21:17. And they came up into the land of Juda, and wasted it, and they
@c    carried away all the substance that was found in the king's house, his
@c    sons also, and his wives:  so that there was no son left him but
@c    Joachaz, who was the youngest.

@c    Joachaz. . .Alias Ochozias.

@c    21:18. And besides all this the Lord struck him with an incurable
@c    disease in his bowels.

@c    21:19. And as day came after day, and time rolled on, two whole years
@c    passed:  then after being wasted with a long consumption, so as to void
@c    his very bowels, his disease ended with his life.  And he died of a most
@c    wretched illness, and the people did not make a funeral for him
@c    according to the manner of burning, as they had done for his ancestors.

@c    21:20. He was two and thirty years old when he began his reign, and he
@c    reigned eight years in Jerusalem.  And he walked not rightly, and they
@c    buried him in the city of David:  but not in the sepulchres of the
@c    kings.



@c    2 Paralipomenon Chapter 22


@c    The reign and death of Ochozias.  The tyranny of Athalia.

@c    22:1. And the inhabitants of Jerusalem made Ochozias his youngest son
@c    king in his place:  for the rovers of the Arabians, who had broke in
@c    upon the camp, had killed all that were his elder brothers.  So Ochozias
@c    the son of Joram king of Juda reigned.

@c    22:2. Ochozias was forty-two years old when he began to reign, and he
@c    reigned one year in Jerusalem, and the name of his mother was Athalia
@c    the daughter of Amri.

@c    Forty-two, etc. . .Divers Greek Bibles read thirty-two, agreeably to 4
@c    Kings 8.17.

@c    22:3. He also walked in the ways of the house of Achab:  for his mother
@c    pushed him on to do wickedly.

@c    22:4. So he did evil in the sight of the Lord, as the house of Achab
@c    did:  for they were his counsellors after the death of his father, to
@c    his destruction.

@c    22:5. And he walked after their counsels.  And he went with Joram the
@c    son of Achab king of Israel, to fight against Hazael king of Syria, at
@c    Ramoth Galaad:  and the Syrians wounded Joram.

@c    22:6. And he returned to be healed in Jezrahel:  for he received many
@c    wounds in the foresaid battle.  And Ochozias the son of Joram king of
@c    Juda, went down to visit Joram the son of Achab in Jezrahel where he
@c    lay sick.

@c    22:7. For it was the will of God against Ochozias that he should come
@c    to Joram:  and when he was come should go out also against Jehu the son
@c    of Namsi, whom the Lord had anointed to destroy the house of Achab.

@c    22:8. So when Jehu was rooting out the house of Achab, he found the
@c    princes of Juda, and the sons of the brethren of Ochozias, who served
@c    him, and he slew them.

@c    22:9. And he sought for Ochozias himself, and took him lying hid in
@c    Samaria:  and when he was brought to him, he killed him, and they buried
@c    him:  because he was the son of Josaphat, who had sought the Lord with
@c    all his heart.  And there was no more hope that any one should reign of
@c    the race of Ochozias.

@c    22:10. For Athalia his mother, seeing that her son was dead, rose up,
@c    and killed all the royal family of the house of Joram.

@c    22:11. But Josabeth the king's daughter took Joas the son of Ochozias,
@c    and stole him from among the king's sons that were slain.  And she hid
@c    him with his nurse in a bedchamber:  now Josabeth that hid him, was
@c    daughter of king Joram, wife of Joiada the high priest, and sister of
@c    Ochozias, and therefore Athalia did not kill him.

@c    22:12. And he was with them hid in the house of God six years, during
@c    which Athalia reigned over the land.



@c    2 Paralipomenon Chapter 23


@c    Joiada the high priest causeth Joas to be made king:  Athalia to be
@c    slain, and idolatry to be destroyed.

@c    23:1. And in the seventh year Joiada being encouraged, took the
@c    captains of hundreds, to wit, Azarias the son of Jeroham, and Ismahel
@c    the son of Johanan, and Azarias the son of Obed, and Maasias the son of
@c    Adaias, and Elisaphat the son of Zechri:  and made a covenant with them.

@c    23:2. And they went about Juda, and gathered together the Levites out
@c    of all the cities of Juda, and the chiefs of the families of Israel,
@c    and they came to Jerusalem.

@c    23:3. And all the multitude made a covenant with the king in the house
@c    of God:  and Joiada said to them:  Behold the king's son shall reign, as
@c    the Lord hath said of the sons of David.

@c    23:4. And this is the thing that you shall do:

@c    23:5. A third part of you that come to the sabbath, of the priests, and
@c    of the Levites, and of the porters shall be at the gates:  and a third
@c    part at the king's house:  and a third at the gate that is called the
@c    Foundation:  but let all the rest of the people be in the courts of the
@c    house of the Lord.

@c    To the sabbath. . .That is, to perform in your weeks the functions of
@c    your office, or the weekly watches.

@c    23:6. And let no one come into the house of the Lord, but the priests,
@c    and they that minister of the Levites:  let them only come in, because
@c    they are sanctified:  and let all the rest of the people keep the
@c    watches of the Lord.

@c    23:7. And let the Levites be round about the king, every man with his
@c    arms; and if any other come into the temple, let him be slain; and let
@c    them be with the king, both coming in, and going out.

@c    23:8. So the Levites, and all Juda did according to all that Joiada the
@c    high priest had commanded:  and they took every one his men that were
@c    under him, and that came in by the course of the sabbath, with those
@c    who had fulfilled the sabbath, and were to go out.  For Joiada the high
@c    priest permitted not the companies to depart, which were accustomed to
@c    succeed one another every week.

@c    23:9. And Joiada the priest gave to the captains the spears, and the
@c    shields, and targets of king David, which he had dedicated in the house
@c    of the Lord.

@c    23:10. And he set all the people with swords in their hands from the
@c    right side of the temple, to the left side of the temple, before the
@c    altar, and the temple, round about the king.

@c    23:11. And they brought out the king's son, and put the crown upon him,
@c    and the testimony, and gave him the law to hold in his hand, and they
@c    made him king:  and Joiada the high priest and his sons anointed him:
@c    and they prayed for him, and said:  God save the king.

@c    23:12. Now when Athalia heard the noise of the people running and
@c    praising the king, she came in to the people, into the temple of the
@c    Lord.

@c    23:13. And when she saw the king standing upon the step in the
@c    entrance, and the princes, and the companies about him, and all the
@c    people of the land rejoicing, and sounding with trumpets, and playing
@c    on instruments of divers kinds, and the voice of those that praised,
@c    she rent her garments, and said:  Treason, treason.

@c    23:14. And Joiada the high priest going out to the captains, and the
@c    chiefs of the army, said to them:  Take her forth without the precinct
@c    of the temple, and when she is without let her be killed with the
@c    sword.  For the priest commanded that she should not be killed in the
@c    house of the Lord.

@c    23:15. And they laid hold on her by the neck:  and when she was come
@c    within the horse gate of the palace, they killed her there.

@c    23:16. And Joiada made a covenant between himself and all the people,
@c    and the king, that they should be the people of the lord.

@c    23:17. And all the people went into the house of Baal, and destroyed
@c    it:  and they broke down his altars and his idols:  and they slew Mathan
@c    the priest of Baal before the altars.

@c    23:18. And Joiada appointed overseers in the house of the Lord, under
@c    the hands of the priests, and the Levites, whom David had distributed
@c    in the house of the Lord:  to offer holocausts to the Lord, as it is
@c    written in the law of Moses, with joy and singing, according to the
@c    disposition of David.

@c    23:19. He appointed also porters in the gates of the house of the Lord,
@c    that none who was unclean in any thing should enter in.

@c    23:20. And he took the captains of hundreds, and the most valiant men,
@c    and the chiefs of the people, and all the people of the land, and they
@c    brought down the king from the house of the Lord, and brought him
@c    through the upper gate into the king's house, and set him on the royal
@c    throne.

@c    23:21. And all the people of the land rejoiced, and the city was quiet:
@c    but Athalia was slain with the sword.



@c    2 Paralipomenon Chapter 24


@c    Joas reigneth well all the days of Joiada:  afterwards falleth into
@c    idolatry and causeth Zacharias to be slain.  He is slain himself by his
@c    servants.

@c    24:1. Joas was seven years old when he began to reign:  and he reigned
@c    forty years in Jerusalem:  the name of his mother was Sebia of Bersabee.

@c    24:2. And he did that which is good before the Lord all the days of
@c    Joiada the priest.

@c    24:3. And Joiada took for him two wives, by whom he had sons and
@c    daughters.

@c    24:4. After this Joas had a mind to repair the house of the Lord.

@c    24:5. And he assembled the priests, and the Levites, and said to them:
@c    Go out to the cities of Juda, and gather of all Israel money to repair
@c    the temple of your God, from year to year:  and do this with speed:  but
@c    the Levites were negligent.

@c    24:6. And the king called Joiada the chief, and said to him:  Why hast
@c    thou not taken care to oblige the Levites to bring in out of Juda and
@c    Jerusalem the money that was appointed by Moses the servant of the Lord
@c    for all the multitude of Israel to bring into the tabernacle of the
@c    testimony?

@c    24:7. For that wicked woman Athalia, and her children have destroyed
@c    the house of God, and adorned the temple of Baal with all the things
@c    that had been dedicated in the temple of the Lord.

@c    24:8. And the king commanded, and they made a chest:  and set it by the
@c    gate of the house of the Lord on the outside.

@c    24:9. And they made a proclamation in Juda and Jerusalem, that every
@c    man should bring to the Lord the money which Moses the servant of God
@c    appointed for all Israel, in the desert.

@c    24:10. And all the princes, and all the people rejoiced:  and going in
@c    they contributed and cast so much into the chest of the Lord, that it
@c    was filled.

@c    24:11. And when it was time to bring the chest before the king by the
@c    hands of the Levites, (for they saw there was much money,) the king's
@c    scribe, and he whom the high priest had appointed went in:  and they
@c    poured out the money that was in the chest:  and they carried back the
@c    chest to its place:  and thus they did from day to day, and there was
@c    gathered an immense sum of money.

@c    24:12. And the king and Joiada gave it to those who were over the works
@c    of the house of the Lord:  but they hired with it stonecutters, and
@c    artificers of every kind of work to repair the house of the Lord:  and
@c    such as wrought in iron and brass, to uphold what began to be falling.

@c    24:13. And the workmen were diligent, and the breach of the walls was
@c    closed up by their hands, and they set up the house of the Lord in its
@c    former state, and made it stand firm.

@c    24:14. And when they had finished all the works, they brought the rest
@c    of the money before the king and Joiada:  and with it were made vessels
@c    for the temple for the ministry, and for holocausts and bowls, and
@c    other vessels of gold and silver:  and holocausts were offered in the
@c    house of the Lord continually all the days of Joiada.

@c    24:15. But Joiada grew old and was full of days, and died when he was a
@c    hundred and thirty years old.

@c    24:16. And they buried him in the city of David among the kings,
@c    because he had done good to Israel, and to his house.

@c    24:17. And after the death of Joiada, the princes of Juda went in, and
@c    worshipped the king:  and he was soothed by their services and hearkened
@c    to them.

@c    24:18. And they forsook the temple of the Lord the God of their
@c    fathers, and served groves and idols, and wrath came upon Juda and
@c    Jerusalem for this sin.

@c    24:19. And he sent prophets to them to bring them back to the Lord, and
@c    they would not give ear when they testified against them.

@c    24:20. The spirit of God then came upon Zacharias the son of Joiada the
@c    priest, and he stood in the sight of the people, and said to them:  Thus
@c    saith the Lord God:  Why transgress you the commandment of the Lord
@c    which will not be for your good, and have forsaken the Lord, to make
@c    him forsake you?

@c    24:21. And they gathered themselves together against him, and stoned
@c    him at the king's commandment in the court of the house of the Lord.

@c    24:22. And king Joas did not remember the kindness that Joiada his
@c    father had done to him, but killed his son.  And when he died, he said:
@c    The Lord see, and require it.

@c    24:23. And when a year was come about, the army of Syria came up
@c    against him:  and they came to Juda and Jerusalem, and killed all the
@c    princes of the people, and they sent all the spoils to the king of
@c    Damascus.

@c    24:24. And whereas there came a very small number of the Syrians, the
@c    Lord delivered into their hands an infinite multitude, because they had
@c    forsaken the Lord the God of their fathers:  and on Joas they executed
@c    shameful judgments.

@c    24:25. And departing they left him in great diseases:  and his servants
@c    rose up against him, for revenge of the blood of the son of Joiada the
@c    priest, and they slew him in his bed, and he died:  and they buried him
@c    in the city of David, but not in the sepulchres of the kings.

@c    24:26. Now the men that conspired against him were Zabad the son of
@c    Semmaath an Ammonitess, and Jozabad the son of Semarith a Moabitess.

@c    24:27. And concerning his sons, and the sum of money which was gathered
@c    under him, and the repairing the house of God, they are written more
@c    diligently in the book of kings:  and Amasias his son reigned in his
@c    stead.



@c    2 Paralipomenon Chapter 25


@c    Amasias' reign:  he beginneth well, but endeth ill:  he is overthrown by
@c    Joas, and slain by his people.

@c    25:1. Amasias was five and twenty years old when he began to reign, and
@c    he reigned nine and twenty years in Jerusalem, the name of his mother
@c    was Joadan of Jerusalem.

@c    25:2. And he did what was good in the sight of the Lord:  but yet not
@c    with a perfect heart.

@c    25:3. And when he saw himself strengthened in his kingdom, he put to
@c    death the servants that had slain the king his father.

@c    25:4. But he slew not their children, as it is written in the book of
@c    the law of Moses, where the Lord commanded, saying:  The fathers shall
@c    not be slain for the children, nor the children for their fathers, but
@c    every man shall die for his own sin.

@c    25:5. Amasias therefore gathered Juda together, and appointed them by
@c    families, and captains of thousands and of hundreds in all Juda, and
@c    Benjamin:  and he numbered them from twenty years old and upwards, and
@c    found three hundred thousand young men that could go out to battle, and
@c    could hold the spear and shield.

@c    25:6. He hired also of Israel a hundred thousand valiant men, for a
@c    hundred talents of silver.

@c    25:7. But a man of God came to him, and said:  O king, let not the army
@c    of Israel go out with thee, for the Lord is not with Israel, and all
@c    the children of Ephraim:

@c    25:8. And if thou think that battles consist in the strength of the
@c    army, God will make thee to be overcome by the enemies:  for it
@c    belongeth to God both to help, and to put to flight.

@c    25:9. And Amasias said to the man of God:  What will then become of the
@c    hundred talents which I have given to the soldiers of Israel?  and the
@c    man of God answered him:  The Lord is rich enough to be able to give
@c    thee much more than this.

@c    25:10. Then Amasias separated the army, that came to him out of
@c    Ephraim, to go home again:  but they being much enraged against Juda,
@c    returned to their own country.

@c    25:11. And Amasias taking courage led forth his people, and went to the
@c    vale of saltpits, and slew of the children of Seir ten thousand.

@c    25:12. And other ten thousand men the sons of Juda took, and brought to
@c    the steep of a certain rock, and cast them down headlong from the top,
@c    and they all were broken to pieces.

@c    25:13. But that army which Amasias had sent back, that they should not
@c    go with him to battle, spread themselves among the cities of Juda, from
@c    Samaria to Beth-horon, and having killed three thousand took away much
@c    spoil.

@c    25:14. But Amasias after he had slain the Edomites, set up the gods of
@c    the children of Seir, which he had brought thence, to be his gods, and
@c    adored them, and burnt incense to them.

@c    25:15. Wherefore the Lord being angry against Amasias, sent a prophet
@c    to him, to say to him:  Why hast thou adored gods that have not
@c    delivered their own people out of thy hand?

@c    25:16. And when he spoke these things, he answered him:  Art thou the
@c    king's counsellor?  be quiet, lest I kill thee.  And the prophet
@c    departing, said:  I know that God is minded to kill thee, because thou
@c    hast done this evil, and moreover hast not hearkened to my counsel.

@c    25:17. Then Amasias king of Juda taking very bad counsel, sent to Joas
@c    the son of Joachaz the son of Jehu, king of Israel, saying:  Come, let
@c    us see one another.

@c    25:18. But he sent back the messengers, saying:  The thistle that is in
@c    Libanus, sent to the cedar in Libanus, saying:  Give thy daughter to my
@c    son to wife:  and behold the beasts that were in the wood of Libanus
@c    passed by and trod down the thistle.

@c    25:19. Thou hast said:  I have overthrown Edom, and therefore thy heart
@c    is lifted up with pride:  stay at home, why dost thou provoke evil
@c    against thee, that both thou shouldst fall and Juda with thee.

@c    25:20. Amasias would not hearken to him, because it was the Lord's will
@c    that he should be delivered into the hands of enemies, because of the
@c    gods of Edom.

@c    25:21. So Joas king of Israel went up, and they presented themselves to
@c    be seen by one another:  and Amasias king of Juda was in Bethsames of
@c    Juda:

@c    25:22. And Juda fell before Israel, and they fled to their dwellings.

@c    25:23. And Joas king of Israel took Amasias king of Juda, the son of
@c    Joas, the son of Joachaz, in Bethsames, and brought him to Jerusalem:
@c    and broke down the walls thereof from the gate of Ephraim, to the gate
@c    of the corner, four hundred cubits.

@c    25:24. And he took all the gold, and silver, and all the vessels, that
@c    he found in the house of God, and with Obededom, and in the treasures
@c    of the king's house, moreover also the sons of the hostages, he brought
@c    back to Samaria.

@c    25:25. And Amasias the son of Joas king of Juda lived, after the death
@c    of Joas the son of Joachaz king of Israel, fifteen years.

@c    25:26. Now the rest of the acts of Amasias, the first and last, are
@c    written in the book of the kings of Juda and Israel.

@c    25:27. And after he revolted from the Lord, they made a conspiracy
@c    against him in Jerusalem.  And he fled into Lachis, and they sent, and
@c    killed him there.

@c    25:28. And they brought him back upon horses, and buried him with his
@c    fathers in the city of David.



@c    2 Paralipomenon Chapter 26


@c    Ozias reigneth prosperously, till he invadeth the priests' office, upon
@c    which he is struck with a leprosy.

@c    26:1. And all the people of Juda took his son Ozias, who was sixteen
@c    years old, and made him king in the room of Amasias his father.

@c    26:2. He built Ailath, and restored it to the dominion of Juda, after
@c    that the king slept with his fathers.

@c    26:3. Ozias was sixteen years old when he began to reign, and he
@c    reigned two and fifty years in Jerusalem:  the name of his mother was
@c    Jechelia of Jerusalem.

@c    26:4. And he did that which was right in the eyes of the Lord,
@c    according to all that Amasias his father had done.

@c    26:5. And he sought the Lord in the days of Zacharias that understood
@c    and saw God:  and as long as he sought the Lord, he directed him in all
@c    things.

@c    26:6. Moreover he went forth and fought against the Philistines, and
@c    broke down the wall of Geth, and the wall of Jabnia, and the wall of
@c    Azotus:  and he built towns in Azotus, and among the Philistines.

@c    26:7. And God helped him against the Philistines, and against the
@c    Arabians, that dwelt in Gurbaal, and against the Ammonites.

@c    26:8. And the Ammonites gave gifts to Ozias:  and his name was spread
@c    abroad even to the entrance of Egypt for his frequent victories.

@c    26:9. And Ozias built towers in Jerusalem over the gate of the corner,
@c    and over the gate of the valley, and the rest, in the same side of the
@c    wall, and fortified them.

@c    26:10. And he built towers in the wilderness, and dug many cisterns,
@c    for he had much cattle both in the plains, and in the waste of the
@c    desert:  he had also vineyards and dressers of vines in the mountains,
@c    and in Carmel:  for he was a man that loved husbandry.

@c    26:11. And the army of his fighting men, that went out to war, was
@c    under the hand of Jehiel the scribe, and Maasias the doctor, and under
@c    the hand of Henanias, who was one of the king's captains.

@c    26:12. And the whole number of the chiefs by the families of valiant
@c    men were two thousand six hundred.

@c    26:13. And the whole army under them three hundred and seven thousand
@c    five hundred:  who were fit for war, and fought for the king against the
@c    enemy.

@c    26:14. And Ozias prepared for them, that is, for the whole army,
@c    shields, and spears, and helmets, and coats of mail, and bows, and
@c    slings to cast stones.

@c    26:15. And he made in Jerusalem engines of diverse kinds, which he
@c    placed in the towers, and in the corners of the walls, to shoot arrows,
@c    and great stones:  and his name went forth far abroad, for the Lord
@c    helped him, and had strengthened him.

@c    26:16. But when he was made strong, his heart was lifted up to his
@c    destruction, and he neglected the Lord his God:  and going into the
@c    temple of the Lord, he had a mind to burn incense upon the altar of
@c    incense.

@c    26:17. And immediately Azarias the priest going in after him, and with
@c    him fourscore priests of the Lord, most valiant men,

@c    26:18. Withstood the king and said:  It doth not belong to thee, Ozias,
@c    to burn incense to the Lord, but to the priests, that is, to the sons
@c    of Aaron, who are consecrated for this ministry:  go out of the
@c    sanctuary, do not despise:  for this thing shall not be accounted to thy
@c    glory by the Lord God.

@c    26:19. And Ozias was angry, and holding in his hand the censer to burn
@c    incense, threatened the priests.  And presently there rose a leprosy in
@c    his forehead before the priests, in the house of the Lord at the altar
@c    of incense.

@c    26:20. And Azarias the high priest, and all the rest of the priests
@c    looked upon him, and saw the leprosy in his forehead, and they made
@c    haste to thrust him out.  Yea himself also being frightened, hasted to
@c    go out, because he had quickly felt the stroke of the Lord.

@c    26:21. And Ozias the king was a leper unto the day of his death, and he
@c    dwelt in a house apart being full of the leprosy, for which he had been
@c    cast out of the house of the Lord.  And Joatham his son governed the
@c    king's house, and judged the people of the land.

@c    26:22. But the rest of the acts of Ozias first and last were written by
@c    Isaias the son of Amos, the prophet.

@c    26:23. And Ozias slept with his fathers, and they buried him in the
@c    field of the royal sepulchres, because he was a leper:  and Joatham his
@c    son reigned in his stead.



@c    2 Paralipomenon Chapter 27


@c    Joatham's good reign.

@c    27:1. Joatham was five and twenty years old when he began to reign, and
@c    he reigned sixteen years in Jerusalem:  the name of his mother was
@c    Jerusa the daughter of Sadoc.

@c    27:2. And he did that which was right before the Lord, according to all
@c    that Ozias his father had done, only that he entered not into the
@c    temple of the Lord, and the people still transgressed.

@c    27:3. He built the high gate of the house of the Lord, and on the wall
@c    of Ophel he built much.

@c    27:4. Moreover he built cities in the mountains of Juda, and castles
@c    and towers in the forests.

@c    27:5. He fought against the king of the children of Ammon, and overcame
@c    them, and the children of Ammon gave him at that time a hundred talents
@c    of silver, and ten thousand measures of wheat, and as many measures of
@c    barley:  so much did the children of Ammon give him in the second and
@c    third year.

@c    27:6. And Joatham was strengthened, because he had his way directed
@c    before the Lord his God.

@c    27:7. Now the rest of the acts of Joatham, and all his wars, and his
@c    works, are written in the book of the kings of Israel and Juda.

@c    27:8. He was five and twenty years old when he began to reign, and he
@c    reigned sixteen years in Jerusalem.

@c    27:9. And Joatham slept with his fathers, and they buried him in the
@c    city of David:  and Achaz his son reigned in his stead.



@c    2 Paralipomenon Chapter 28


@c    The wicked and unhappy reign of Achaz.

@c    28:1. Achaz was twenty years old when he began to reign, and he reigned
@c    sixteen years in Jerusalem:  he did not that which was right in the
@c    sight of the Lord as David his father had done,

@c    28:2. But walked in the ways of the kings of Israel; moreover also he
@c    cast statues for Baalim.

@c    28:3. It was he that burnt incense in the valley of Benennom, and
@c    consecrated his sons in the fire according to the manner of the
@c    nations, which the Lord slew at the coming of the children of Israel.

@c    28:4. He sacrificed also, and burnt incense in the high places, and on
@c    the hills, and under every green tree.

@c    28:5. And the Lord his God delivered him into the hands of the king of
@c    Syria, who defeated him, and took a great booty out of his kingdom, and
@c    carried it to Damascus:  he was also delivered into the hands of the
@c    king of Israel, who overthrew him with a great slaughter.

@c    28:6. For Phacee the son of Romelia slew of Juda a hundred and twenty
@c    thousand in one day, all valiant men, because they had forsaken the
@c    Lord the God of their fathers.

@c    28:7. At the same time Zechri a powerful man of Ephraim, slew Maasias
@c    the king's son, and Ezricam the governor of his house, and Elcana who
@c    was next to the king.

@c    28:8. And the children of Israel carried away of their brethren two
@c    hundred thousand women, boys, and girls, and an immense booty:  and they
@c    brought it to Samaria.

@c    28:9. At that time there was a prophet of the Lord there, whose name
@c    was Oded:  and he went out to meet the army that came to Samaria, and
@c    said to them:  Behold the Lord the God of your fathers being angry with
@c    Juda, hath delivered them into your hands, and you have butchered them
@c    cruelly, so that your cruelty hath reached up to heaven.

@c    28:10. Moreover you have a mind to keep under the children of Juda and
@c    Jerusalem for your bondmen and bondwomen, which ought not to be done:
@c    for you have sinned in this against the Lord your God.

@c    28:11. But hear ye my counsel, and release the captives that you have
@c    brought of your brethren, because a great indignation of the Lord
@c    hangeth over you.

@c    28:12. Then some of the chief men of the sons of Ephraim, Azarias the
@c    son of Johanan, Barachias the son of Mosollamoth, Ezechias the son of
@c    Sellum, and Amasa the son of Adali, stood up against them that came
@c    from the war.

@c    28:13. And they said to them:  You shall not bring in the captives
@c    hither, lest we sin against the Lord.  Why will you add to our sins, and
@c    heap up upon our former offences?  for the sin is great, and the fierce
@c    anger of the Lord hangeth over Israel.

@c    28:14. So the soldiers left the spoils, and all that they had taken,
@c    before the princes and all the multitude.

@c    28:15. And the men, whom we mentioned above, rose up and took the
@c    captives, and with the spoils clothed all them that were naked:  and
@c    when they had clothed and shod them, and refreshed them with meat and
@c    drink, and anointed them because of their labour, and had taken care of
@c    them, they set such of them as could not walk, and were feeble, upon
@c    beasts, and brought them to Jericho the city of palm trees to their
@c    brethren, and they returned to Samaria.

@c    28:16. At that time king Achaz sent to the king of the Assyrians asking
@c    help.

@c    28:17. And the Edomites came and slew many of Juda, and took a great
@c    booty.

@c    28:18. The Philistines also spread themselves among the cities of the
@c    plains, and to the south of Juda:  and they took Bethsames, and Aialon,
@c    and Gaderoth, and Socho, and Thamnan, and Gamzo, with their villages,
@c    and they dwelt in them.

@c    28:19. For the Lord had humbled Juda because of Achaz the king of Juda,
@c    for he had stripped it of help, and had contemned the Lord.

@c    For he had stripped it of help. . .That is, Achaz stripped the kingdom
@c    of Juda of the divine assistance by his wickedness, and by his
@c    introducing idolatry.

@c    28:20. And he brought against him Thelgathphalnasar king of the
@c    Assyrians, who also afflicted him, and plundered him without any
@c    resistance.

@c    28:21. And Achaz stripped the house of the Lord, and the house of the
@c    kings, and of the princes, and gave gifts to the king of the Assyrians,
@c    and yet it availed him nothing.

@c    28:22. Moreover also in the time of his distress he increased contempt
@c    against the Lord:  king Achaz himself by himself,

@c    28:23. Sacrificed victims to the gods of Damascus that struck him, and
@c    he said:  The gods of the kings of Syria help them, and I will appease
@c    them with victims, and they will help me; whereas on the contrary they
@c    were the ruin of him, and of all Israel.

@c    28:24. Then Achaz having taken away all the vessels of the house of
@c    God, and broken them, shut up the doors of the temple of God, and made
@c    himself altars in all the corners of Jerusalem.

@c    28:25. And in all the cities of Juda he built altars to burn
@c    frankincense, and he provoked the Lord the God of his fathers to wrath.

@c    28:26. But the rest of his acts, and all his works first and last are
@c    written in the book of the kings of Juda and Israel.

@c    28:27. And Achaz slept with his fathers, and they buried him in the
@c    city of Jerusalem:  for they received him not into the sepulchres of the
@c    kings of Israel.  And Ezechias his son reigned in his stead.



@c    2 Paralipomenon Chapter 29


@c    Ezechias purifieth the temple, and restoreth religion.

@c    29:1. Now Ezechias began to reign, when he was five and twenty years
@c    old, and he reigned nine and twenty years in Jerusalem:  the name of his
@c    mother was Abia, the daughter of Zacharias.

@c    29:2. And he did that which was pleasing in the sight of the Lord,
@c    according to all that David his father had done.

@c    29:3. In the first year and month of his reign he opened the doors of
@c    the house of the Lord, and repaired them.

@c    29:4. And he brought the priests and the Levites, and assembled them in
@c    the east street.

@c    29:5. And he said to them:  Hear me, ye Levites, and be sanctified,
@c    purify the house of the Lord the God of your fathers, and take away all
@c    filth out of the sanctuary.

@c    29:6. Our fathers have sinned and done evil in the sight of the Lord
@c    God, forsaking him:  they have turned away their faces from the
@c    tabernacle of the Lord, and turned their backs.

@c    29:7. They have shut up the doors that were in the porch, and put out
@c    the lamps, and have not burnt incense, nor offered holocausts in the
@c    sanctuary of the God of Israel.

@c    29:8. Therefore the wrath of the Lord hath been stirred up against Juda
@c    and Jerusalem, and he hath delivered them to trouble, and to
@c    destruction, and to be hissed at, as you see with your eyes.

@c    29:9. Behold, our fathers are fallen by the sword, our sons, and our
@c    daughters, and wives are led away captives for this wickedness.

@c    29:10. Now therefore I have a mind that we make a covenant with the
@c    Lord the God of Israel, and he will turn away the wrath of his
@c    indignation from us.

@c    29:11. My sons, be not negligent:  the Lord hath chosen you to stand
@c    before him, and to minister to him, and to worship him, and to burn
@c    incense to him.

@c    29:12. Then the Levites arose, Mahath the son of Amasai, and Joel the
@c    son of Azarias, of the sons of Caath:  and of the sons of Merari, Cis
@c    the son of Abdi, and Azarias the son of Jalaleel.  And of the sons of
@c    Gerson, Joah the son of Zemma, and Eden the son of Joah.

@c    29:13. And of the sons of Elisaphan, Samri, and Jahiel.  Also of the
@c    sons of Asaph, Zacharias, and Mathanias.

@c    29:14. And of the sons of Heman, Jahiel, and Semei:  and of the sons of
@c    Idithun, Semeias, and Oziel.

@c    29:15. And they gathered together their brethren, and sanctified
@c    themselves, and went in according to the commandment of the king, and
@c    the precept of the Lord, to purify the house of God.

@c    29:16. And the priests went into the temple of the Lord to sanctify it,
@c    and brought out all the uncleanness that they found within to the
@c    entrance of the house of the Lord, and the Levites took it away, and
@c    carried it out abroad to the torrent Cedron.

@c    29:17. And they began to cleanse on the first day of the first month,
@c    and on the eighth day of the same month they came into the porch of the
@c    temple of the Lord, and they purified the temple in eight days, and on
@c    the sixteenth day of the same month they finished what they had begun.

@c    29:18. And they went in to king Ezechias, and said to him:  We have
@c    sanctified all the house of the Lord, and the altar of holocaust, and
@c    the vessels thereof, and the table of proposition with all its vessels,

@c    29:19. And all the furniture of the temple, which king Achaz in his
@c    reign had defiled, after his transgression; and behold they are all set
@c    forth before the altar of the Lord.

@c    29:20. And king Ezechias rising early, assembled all the rulers of the
@c    city, and went up into the house of the Lord:

@c    29:21. And they offered together seven bullocks, and seven rams, and
@c    seven lambs, and seven he goats for sin, for the kingdom, for the
@c    sanctuary, for Juda:  and he spoke to the priests the sons of Aaron, to
@c    offer them upon the altar of the Lord.

@c    29:22. Therefore they killed the bullocks, and the priests took the
@c    blood, and poured it upon the altar; they killed also the rams, and
@c    their blood they poured also upon the altar, and they killed the lambs,
@c    and poured the blood upon the altar.

@c    29:23. And they brought the he goats for sin before the king, and the
@c    whole multitude, and they laid their hand upon them:

@c    29:24. And the priests immolated them, and sprinkled their blood before
@c    the altar for an expiation of all Israel:  for the king had commanded
@c    that the holocaust and the sin offering should be made for all Israel.

@c    29:25. And he set the Levites in the house of the Lord with cymbals,
@c    and psalteries, and harps according to the regulation of David the
@c    king, and of Gad the seer, and of Nathan the prophet:  for it was the
@c    commandment of the Lord by the hand of his prophets.

@c    29:26. And the Levites stood, with the instruments of David, and the
@c    priests with trumpets.

@c    29:27. And Ezechias commanded that they should offer holocausts upon
@c    the altar:  and when the holocausts were offered, they began to sing
@c    praises to the Lord, and to sound with trumpets, and divers instruments
@c    which David the king of Israel had prepared.

@c    29:28. And all the multitude adored, and the singers, and the
@c    trumpeters, were in their office till the holocaust was finished.

@c    29:29. And when the oblation was ended, the king, and all that were
@c    with him bowed down and adored.

@c    29:30. And Ezechias and the princes commanded the Levites to praise the
@c    Lord with the words of David, and Asaph the seer:  and they praised him
@c    with great joy, and bowing the knee adored.

@c    29:31. And Ezechias added, and said:  You have filled your hands to the
@c    Lord, come and offer victims, and praises in the house of the Lord.  And
@c    all the multitude offered victims, and praises, and holocausts with a
@c    devout mind.

@c    29:32. And the number of the holocausts which the multitude offered,
@c    was seventy bullocks, a hundred rams, and two hundred lambs.

@c    29:33. And they consecrated to the Lord six hundred oxen, and three
@c    thousand sheep.

@c    29:34. But the priests were few, and were not enough to flay the
@c    holocausts:  wherefore the Levites their brethren helped them, till the
@c    work was ended, and priests were sanctified, for the Levites are
@c    sanctified with an easier rite than the priests.

@c    29:35. So there were many holocausts, and the fat of peace offerings,
@c    and the libations of holocausts:  and the service of the house of the
@c    Lord was completed.

@c    29:36. And Ezechias, and all the people rejoiced because the ministry
@c    of the Lord was accomplished.  For the resolution of doing this thing
@c    was taken suddenly.



@c    2 Paralipomenon Chapter 30


@c    Ezechias inviteth all Israel to celebrate the pasch; the solemnity is
@c    kept fourteen days.

@c    30:1. And Ezechias sent to all Israel and Juda:  and he wrote letters to
@c    Ephraim and Manasses, that they should come to the house of the Lord in
@c    Jerusalem, and keep the phase to the Lord the God of Israel,

@c    30:2. For the king, taking counsel, and the princes, and all the
@c    assembly of Jerusalem, decreed to keep the phase the second month.

@c    30:3. For they could not keep it in its time; because there were not
@c    priests enough sanctified, and the people was not as yet gathered
@c    together to Jerusalem.

@c    The host of heaven. . .The sun, moon, and stars.

@c    30:4. And the thing pleased the king, and all the people.

@c    30:5. And they decreed to send messengers to all Israel from Bersabee
@c    even to Dan, that they should come, and keep the phase to the Lord the
@c    God of Israel in Jerusalem:  for many had not kept it as it is
@c    prescribed by the law.

@c    30:6. And the posts went with letters by commandment of the king, and
@c    his princes, to all Israel and Juda, proclaiming according to the
@c    king's orders:  Ye children of Israel, turn again to the Lord the God of
@c    Abraham, and of Isaac, and of Israel:  and he will return to the remnant
@c    of you that have escaped the hand of the king of the Assyrians.

@c    30:7. Be not like your fathers, and brethren, who departed from the
@c    Lord the God of their fathers, and he hath given them up to
@c    destruction, as you see.

@c    30:8. Harden not your necks, as your fathers did:  yield yourselves to
@c    the Lord, and come to his sanctuary, which he hath sanctified forever:
@c    serve the Lord the God of your fathers, and the wrath of his
@c    indignation shall be turned away from you.

@c    30:9. For if you turn again to the Lord, your brethren, and children
@c    shall find mercy before their masters, that have led them away captive,
@c    and they shall return into this land:  for the Lord your God is
@c    merciful, and will not turn away his face from you, if you return to
@c    him.

@c    30:10. So the posts went speedily from city to city, through the land
@c    of Ephraim, and of Manasses, even to Zabulon, whilst they laughed at
@c    them and mocked them.

@c    30:11. Nevertheless some men of Aser, and of Manasses, and of Zabulon,
@c    yielding to the counsel, came to Jerusalem.

@c    30:12. But the hand of God was in Juda, to give them one heart to do
@c    the word of the Lord, according to the commandment of the king, and of
@c    the princes.

@c    30:13. And much people were assembled to Jerusalem to celebrate the
@c    solemnity of the unleavened bread in the second month:

@c    30:14. And they arose and destroyed the altars that were in Jerusalem,
@c    and took away all things in which incense was burnt to idols and cast
@c    them into the torrent Cedron.

@c    30:15. And they immolated the phase on the fourteenth day of the second
@c    month.  And the priests and the Levites being at length sanctified
@c    offered holocausts in the house of the Lord.

@c    30:16. And they stood in their order according to the disposition and
@c    law of Moses the man of God:  but the priests received the blood which
@c    was to be poured out, from the hands of the Levites,

@c    30:17. Because a great number was not sanctified:  and therefore the
@c    Levites immolated the phase for them that came not in time to be
@c    sanctified to the Lord.

@c    30:18. For a great part of the people from Ephraim, and Manasses, and
@c    Issachar, and Zabulon, that had not been sanctified, ate the phase
@c    otherwise than it is written:  and Ezechias prayed for them, saying:  The
@c    Lord who is good will shew mercy,

@c    30:19. To all them, who with their whole heart, seek the Lord the God
@c    of their fathers:  and will not impute it to them that they are not
@c    sanctified.

@c    30:20. And the Lord heard him, and was merciful to the people.

@c    30:21. And the children of Israel, that were found at Jerusalem, kept
@c    the feast of unleavened bread seven days with great joy, praising the
@c    Lord every day.  the Levites also, and the priests, with instruments
@c    that agreed to their office.

@c    30:22. And Ezechias spoke to the heart of all the Levites, that had
@c    good understanding concerning the Lord:  and they ate during the seven
@c    days of the solemnity, immolating victims of peace offerings, and
@c    praising the Lord the God of their fathers.

@c    30:23. And it pleased the whole multitude to keep other seven days:
@c    which they did with great joy.

@c    30:24. For Ezechias the king of Juda had given to the multitude a
@c    thousand bullocks, and seven thousand sheep:  and the princes had given
@c    the people a thousand bullocks, and ten thousand sheep:  and a great
@c    number of priests was sanctified.

@c    30:25. And all the multitude of Juda with the priests and Levites, and
@c    all the assembly, that came out of Israel; and the proselytes of the
@c    land of Israel, and that dwelt in Juda were full of joy.

@c    30:26. And there was a great solemnity in Jerusalem, such as had not
@c    been in that city since the time of Solomon the son of David king of
@c    Israel.

@c    30:27. And the priests and the Levites rose up and blessed the people:
@c    and their voice was heard:  and their prayer came to the holy dwelling
@c    place of heaven.



@c    2 Paralipomenon Chapter 31


@c    Idolatry is abolished; and provisions made for the ministers.

@c    31:1. And when these things had been duly celebrated, all Israel that
@c    were found in the cities of Juda, went out, and they broke the idols,
@c    and cut down the groves, demolished the high places, and destroyed the
@c    altars, not only out of all Juda and Benjamin, but out of Ephraim also
@c    and Manasses, till they had utterly destroyed them:  then all the
@c    children of Israel returned to their possessions and cities.

@c    31:2. And Ezechias appointed companies of the priests, and the Levites,
@c    by their courses, every man in his own office, to wit, both of the
@c    priests, and of the Levites, for holocausts, and for peace offerings,
@c    to minister, and to praise, and to sing in the gates of the camp of the
@c    Lord.

@c    31:3. And the king's part was, that of his proper substance the
@c    holocaust should be offered always morning and evening, and on the
@c    sabbaths, and the new moons and the other solemnities, as it is written
@c    in the law of Moses.

@c    31:4. He commanded also the people that dwelt in Jerusalem, to give to
@c    the priests, and the Levites their portion, that they might attend to
@c    the law of the Lord.

@c    31:5. Which when it was noised abroad in the ears of the people, the
@c    children of Israel offered in abundance the firstfruits of corn, wine,
@c    and oil, and honey:  and brought the tithe of all things which the
@c    ground bringeth forth.

@c    31:6. Moreover the children of Israel and Juda, that dwelt in the
@c    cities of Juda, brought in the tithes of oxen, and sheep, and the
@c    tithes of holy things, which they had vowed to the Lord their God:  and
@c    carrying them all, made many heaps.

@c    31:7. In the third month they began to lay the foundations of the
@c    heaps, and in the seventh month, they finished them.

@c    31:8. And when Ezechias and his princes came in, they saw the heaps,
@c    and they blessed the Lord and the people of Israel.

@c    31:9. And Ezechias asked the priests and the Levites, why the heaps lay
@c    so.

@c    31:10. Azarias the chief priest of the race of Sadoc answered him,
@c    saying:  Since the firstfruits began to be offered in the house of the
@c    Lord, we have eaten, and have been filled, and abundance is left,
@c    because the Lord hath blessed his people:  and of that which is left is
@c    this great store which thou seest.

@c    31:11. Then Ezechias commanded to prepare storehouses in the house of
@c    the Lord.  And when they had done so,

@c    31:12. They brought in faithfully both the firstfruits, and the tithes,
@c    and all they had vowed.  And the overseer of them was Chonenias the
@c    Levite, and Semei his brother was the second,

@c    31:13. And after him Jehiel, and Azarias, and Nahath, and Asael, and
@c    Jerimoth, and Jozabad, and Eliel, and Jesmachias, and Mahath, and
@c    Banaias, overseers under the hand of Chonenias, and Semei his brother,
@c    by the commandment of Ezechias the king, and Azarias the high priest of
@c    the house of God, to whom all things appertained.

@c    31:14. But Core the son of Jemna the Levite, the porter of the east
@c    gate, was overseer of the things which were freely offered to the Lord,
@c    and of the firstfruits and the things dedicated for the holy of holies.

@c    31:15. And under his charge were Eden, and Benjamin, Jesue, and
@c    Semeias, and Amarias, and Sechenias, in the cities of the priests, to
@c    distribute faithfully portions to their brethren, both little and
@c    great:

@c    31:16. Besides the males from three years old and upward, to all that
@c    went into the temple of the Lord, and whatsoever there was need of in
@c    the ministry, and their offices according to their courses, day by day.

@c    31:17. To the priests by their families, and to the Levites from the
@c    twentieth year and upward, by their classes and companies.

@c    31:18. And to all the multitude, both to their wives, and to their
@c    children of both sexes, victuals were given faithfully out of the
@c    things that had been sanctified.

@c    31:19. Also of the sons of Aaron who were in the fields and in the
@c    suburbs of each city, there were men appointed, to distribute portions
@c    to all the males, among the priests and the Levites.

@c    31:20. So Ezechias did all things which we have said in all Juda, and
@c    wrought that which was good, and right, and truth, before the Lord his
@c    God,

@c    31:21. In all the service of the house of the Lord according to the law
@c    and the ceremonies, desiring to seek his God with all his heart, and he
@c    did it and prospered.



@c    2 Paralipomenon Chapter 32


@c    Sennacherib invadeth Juda:  his army is destroyed by an angel.  Ezechias
@c    recovereth from his sickness:  his other acts.

@c    32:1. After these things, and this truth, Sennacherib king of the
@c    Assyrians came and entered into Juda, and besieged the fenced cities,
@c    desiring to take them.

@c    32:2. And when Ezechias saw that Sennacherib was come, and that the whole
@c    force of the war was turning against Jerusalem,

@c    32:3. He took counsel with the princes, and the most valiant men, to stop
@c    up the heads of the springs, that were without the city:  and as they
@c    were all of this mind,

@c    32:4. He gathered together a very great multitude, and they stopped up
@c    all the springs, and the brook, that ran through the midst of the land,
@c    saying:  Lest the kings of the Assyrians should come, and find abundance
@c    of water.

@c    32:5. He built up also with great diligence all the wall that had been
@c    broken down, and built towers upon it, and another wall without:  and he
@c    repaired Mello in the city of David, and made all sorts of arms and
@c    shields:

@c    32:6. And he appointed captains of the soldiers of the army:  and he
@c    called them all together in the street of the gate of the city, and spoke
@c    to their heart, saying:

@c    32:7. Behave like men, and take courage:  be not afraid nor dismayed for
@c    the king of the Assyrians, nor for all the multitude that is with him:
@c    for there are many more with us than with him.

@c    32:8. For with him is an arm of flesh:  with us the Lord our God, who is
@c    our helper, and fighteth for us.  And the people were encouraged with
@c    these words of Ezechias king of Juda.

@c    32:9. After this, Sennacherib king of the Assyrians sent his servants to
@c    Jerusalem, (for he with all his army was besieging Lachis,) to Ezechias
@c    king of Juda, and to all the people that were in the city, saying:

@c    32:10. Thus saith Sennacherib king of the Assyrians:  In whom do you
@c    trust, that you sit still besieged in Jerusalem?

@c    32:11. Doth not Ezechias deceive you, to give you up to die by hunger and
@c    thirst, affirming that the Lord your God shall deliver you from the hand
@c    of the king of the Assyrians?

@c    32:12. Is it not this same Ezechias, that hath destroyed his high places,
@c    and his altars, and commanded Juda and Jerusalem, saying:  You shall
@c    worship before one altar, and upon it you shall burn incense?

@c    32:13. Know you not what I and my fathers have done to all the people of
@c    the lands?  have the gods of any nations and lands been able to deliver
@c    their country out of my hand?

@c    32:14. Who is there among all the gods of the nations, which my fathers
@c    have destroyed, that could deliver his people out of my hand, that your
@c    God should be able to deliver you out of this hand?

@c    32:15. Therefore let not Ezechias deceive you, nor delude you with a vain
@c    persuasion, and do not believe him.  For if no god of all the nations and
@c    kingdoms, could deliver his people out of my hand, and out of the hand of
@c    my fathers, consequently neither shall your God be able to deliver you
@c    out of my hand.

@c    32:16. And many other things did his servants speak against the Lord God,
@c    and against Ezechias his servant.

@c    32:17. He wrote also letters full of blasphemy against the Lord the God
@c    of Israel, and he spoke against him:  As the gods of other nations could
@c    not deliver their people out of my hand, so neither can the God of
@c    Ezechias deliver his people out of this hand.

@c    32:18. Moreover he cried out with a loud voice, in the Jews' tongue, to
@c    the people that sat on the walls of Jerusalem, that he might frighten
@c    them, and take the city.

@c    32:19. And he spoke against the God of Jerusalem, as against the gods of
@c    the people of the earth, the works of the hands of men.

@c    32:20. And Ezechias the king, and Isaias the prophet the son of Amos,
@c    prayed against this blasphemy, and cried out to heaven.

@c    32:21. And the Lord sent an angel, who cut off all the stout men and the
@c    warriors, and the captains of the army of the king of the Assyrians:  and
@c    he returned with disgrace into his own country.  And when he was come
@c    into the house of his god, his sons that came out of his bowels, slew him
@c    with the sword.

@c    32:22. And the Lord saved Ezechias and the inhabitants of Jerusalem, out
@c    of the hand of Sennacherib king of the Assyrians, and out of the hand of
@c    all, and gave them treasures on every side.

@c    32:23. Many also brought victims, and sacrifices to the Lord to
@c    Jerusalem, and presents to Ezechias king of Juda:  and he was magnified
@c    thenceforth in the sight of all nations.

@c    32:24. In those days Ezechias was sick even to death, and he prayed to
@c    the Lord:  and he heard him, and gave him a sign.

@c    32:25. But he did not render again according to the benefits which he had
@c    received, for his heart was lifted up:  and wrath was enkindled against
@c    him, and against Juda and Jerusalem.

@c    32:26. And he humbled himself afterwards, because his heart had been
@c    lifted up, both he and the inhabitants of Jerusalem:  and therefore the
@c    wrath of the Lord came not upon them in the days of Ezechias.

@c    32:27. And Ezechias was rich, and very glorious, and he gathered himself
@c    great treasures of silver and of gold, and of precious stones, of spices,
@c    and of arms, of all kinds, and of vessels of great price.

@c    32:28. Storehouses also of corn, of wine, and of oil, and stalls for all
@c    beasts, and folds for cattle.

@c    32:29. And he built himself cities:  for he had flocks of sheep, and
@c    herds without number, for the Lord had given him very much substance.

@c    32:30. This same Ezechias was, he that stopped the upper source of the
@c    waters of Gihon, and turned them away underneath toward the west of the
@c    city of David:  in all his works he did prosperously what he would.

@c    32:31. But yet in the embassy of the princes of Babylon, that were sent
@c    to him, to inquire of the wonder that had happened upon the earth, God
@c    left him that he might be tempted, and all things might be made known
@c    that were in his heart.

@c    32:32. Now the rest of the acts of Ezechias, and of his mercies are
@c    written in the book of the kings of Juda and Israel.

@c    32:33. And Ezechias slept with his fathers, and they buried him above the
@c    sepulchres of the sons of David:  and all Juda, and all the inhabitants
@c    of Jerusalem celebrated his funeral:  and Manasses his son reigned in his
@c    stead.



@c    2 Paralipomenon Chapter 33


@c    Manasses for his manifold wickedness is led captive to Babylon:  he
@c    repenteth, and is restored to his kingdom, and destroyeth idolatry:  his
@c    successor Amon is slain by his servants.

@c    33:1. Manasses was twelve years old when he began to reign, and he
@c    reigned fifty-five years in Jerusalem.

@c    33:2. And he did evil before the Lord, according to all the
@c    abominations of the nations, which the Lord cast out before the
@c    children of Israel:

@c    33:3. And he turned, and built again the high places which Ezechias his
@c    father had destroyed:  and he built altars to Baalim, and made groves,
@c    and he adored all the host of heaven, and worshipped them.

@c    The host of heaven. . .The sun, moon, and stars.

@c    33:4. He built also altars in the house of the Lord, whereof the Lord
@c    had said:  In Jerusalem shall my name be for ever.

@c    33:5. And he built them for all the host of heaven in the two courts of
@c    the house of the Lord.

@c    33:6. And he made his sons to pass through the fire in the valley of
@c    Benennom:  he observed dreams, followed divinations, gave himself up to
@c    magic arts, had with him magicians, and enchanters:  and he wrought many
@c    evils before the Lord, to provoke him to anger.

@c    33:7. He set also a graven, and a molten statue in the house of God, of
@c    which God had said to David, and to Solomon his son:  In this house, and
@c    in Jerusalem, which I have chosen out of all the tribes of Israel, will
@c    I put my name for ever.

@c    33:8. And I will not make the foot of Israel to be removed out of the
@c    land which I have delivered to their fathers:  yet so if they will take
@c    heed to do what I have commanded them, and all the law, and the
@c    ceremonies, and judgments by the hand of Moses.

@c    33:9. So Manasses seduced Juda, and the inhabitants of Jerusalem, to do
@c    evil beyond all the nations, which the Lord had destroyed before the
@c    face of the children of Israel.

@c    33:10. And the Lord spoke to his people, and they would not hearken.

@c    33:11. Therefore he brought upon them the captains of he army of the
@c    king of the Assyrians:  and they took Manasses, and carried him bound
@c    with chains and fetters to Babylon.

@c    33:12. And after that he was in distress he prayed to the Lord his God:
@c    and did penance exceedingly before the God of his fathers.

@c    33:13. And he entreated him, and besought him earnestly:  and he heard
@c    his prayer, and brought him again to Jerusalem into his kingdom, and
@c    Manasses knew that the Lord was God.

@c    33:14. After this he built a wall without the city of David, on the
@c    west side of Gihon in the valley, from the entering in of the gate
@c    round about to Ophel, and raised it up to a great height:  and he
@c    appointed captains of the army in all the fenced cities of Juda:

@c    33:15. And he took away the strange gods, and the idol out of the house
@c    of the Lord:  the altars also which he had made in the mount of the
@c    house of the Lord, and in Jerusalem, and he cast them all out of the
@c    city.

@c    33:16. And he repaired the altar of the Lord, and sacrificed upon it
@c    victims, and peace offerings, and praise:  and he commanded Juda to
@c    serve the Lord the God of Israel.

@c    33:17. Nevertheless the people still sacrificed in the high places to
@c    the Lord their God.

@c    33:18. But the rest of the acts of Manasses, and his prayer to his God,
@c    and the words of the seers that spoke to him in the name of the Lord
@c    the God of Israel, are contained in the words of the kings of Israel.

@c    33:19. His prayer also, and his being heard and all his sins, and
@c    contempt, and places wherein he built high places, and set up groves,
@c    and statues before he did penance, are written in the words of Hozai.

@c    33:20. And Manasses slept with his fathers, and they buried him in his
@c    house:  and his son Amon reigned in his stead.

@c    33:21. Amon was two and twenty years old when he began to reign, and he
@c    reigned two years in Jerusalem.

@c    33:22. And he did evil in the sight of the Lord, as Manasses his father
@c    had done:  he sacrificed to all the idols which Manasses his father had
@c    made, and served them.

@c    33:23. And he did not humble himself before the lord, as Manasses his
@c    father had humbled himself, but committed far greater sin.

@c    33:24. And his servants conspired against him, and slew him in his own
@c    house.

@c    33:25. But the rest of the multitude of the people slew them that had
@c    killed Amon, and made Josias his son king in his stead.



@c    2 Paralipomenon Chapter 34


@c    Josias destroyeth idolatry, repaireth the temple, and reneweth the
@c    covenant between God and the people.

@c    34:1. Josias was eight years old when he began to reign, and he reigned
@c    one and thirty years in Jerusalem.

@c    34:2. And he did that which was right in the sight of the Lord, and
@c    walked in the ways of David his father:  he declined not, neither to the
@c    right hand, nor to the left.

@c    34:3. And in the eighth year of his reign, when he was yet a boy, he
@c    began to seek the God of his father David:  and in the twelfth year
@c    after he began to reign, he cleansed Juda and Jerusalem from the high
@c    places, and the groves, and the idols, and the graven things.

@c    34:4. And they broke down before him the altars of Baalim, and
@c    demolished the idols that had been set upon them:  and he cut down the
@c    groves and the graven things, and broke them in pieces:  and strewed the
@c    fragments upon the graves of them that had sacrificed to them.

@c    34:5. And he burnt the bones of the priests on the altars of the idols,
@c    and he cleansed Juda and Jerusalem.

@c    34:6. And in the cities of Manasses, and of Ephraim, and of Simeon,
@c    even to Nephtali he demolished all.

@c    34:7. And when he had destroyed the altars, and the groves, and had
@c    broken the idols in pieces, and had demolished all profane temples
@c    throughout all the land of Israel, he returned to Jerusalem.

@c    34:8. Now in the eighteenth year of his reign, when he had cleansed the
@c    land, and the temple of the Lord, he sent Saphan the son of Elselias,
@c    and Maasias the governor of the city, Joha the son of Joachaz the
@c    recorder, to repair the house of the Lord his God.

@c    34:9. And they came to Helcias the high priest:  and received of him the
@c    money which had been brought into the house of the Lord, and which the
@c    Levites and porters had gathered together from Manasses, and Ephraim,
@c    and all the remnant of Israel, and from all Juda, and Benjamin, and the
@c    inhabitants of Jerusalem,

@c    34:10. Which they delivered into the hands of them that were over the
@c    workmen in the house of the Lord, to repair the temple, and mend all
@c    that was weak.

@c    34:11. But they gave it to the artificers, and to the masons, to buy
@c    stones out of the quarries, and timber for the couplings of the
@c    building, and to rafter the houses, which the kings of Juda had
@c    destroyed.

@c    34:12. And they did all faithfully.  Now the overseers of the workmen
@c    were Jahath and Abdias of the sons of Merari, Zacharias and Mosollam of
@c    the sons of Caath, who hastened the work:  all Levites skilful to play
@c    on instruments.

@c    34:13. But over them that carried burdens for divers uses, were
@c    scribes, and masters of the number of the Levites, and porters.

@c    34:14. Now when they carried out the money that had been brought into
@c    the temple of the Lord, Helcias the priest found the book of the law of
@c    the Lord, by the hand of Moses.

@c    34:15. And he said to Saphan the scribe:  I have found the book of the
@c    law in the house of the Lord:  and he delivered it to him.

@c    34:16. But he carried the book to the king, and told him, saying:  Lo,
@c    all that thou hast committed to thy servants, is accomplished.

@c    34:17. They have gathered together the silver that was found in the
@c    house of the Lord:  and it is given to the overseers of the artificers,
@c    and of the workmen, for divers works.

@c    34:18. Moreover Helcias the priest gave me this book.  And he read it
@c    before the king.

@c    34:19. And when he had heard the words of the law, he rent his
@c    garments:

@c    34:20. And he commanded Helcias, and Ahicam the son of Saphan, and
@c    Abdon the son of Micha, and Saphan the scribe, and Asaa the king's
@c    servant, saying:

@c    34:21. Go, and pray to the Lord for me, and for the remnant of Israel,
@c    and Juda, concerning all the words of this book, which is found:  for
@c    the great wrath of the Lord hath fallen upon us, because our fathers
@c    have not kept the words of the Lord, to do all things that are written
@c    in this book.

@c    34:22. And Helcias and they that were sent with him by the king, went
@c    to Olda the prophetess, the wife of Sellum the son of Thecuath, the son
@c    of Hasra keeper of the wardrobe:  who dwelt in Jerusalem in the Second
@c    part:  and they spoke to her the words above mentioned.

@c    34:23. And she answered them:  Thus saith the Lord the God of Israel:
@c    Tell the man that sent you to me:

@c    34:24. Thus saith the Lord:  Behold I will bring evils upon this place,
@c    and upon the inhabitants thereof, and all the curses that are written
@c    in this book which they read before the king of Juda.

@c    34:25. Because they have forsaken me, and have sacrificed to strange
@c    gods, to provoke me to wrath with all the works of their hands,
@c    therefore my wrath shall fail upon this place, and shall not be
@c    quenched.

@c    34:26. But as to the king of Juda that sent you to beseech the Lord,
@c    thus shall you say to him:  Thus saith the Lord the God of Israel:
@c    Because thou hast heard the words of this book,

@c    34:27. And thy heart was softened, and thou hast humbled thyself in the
@c    sight of God for the things that are spoken against this place, and the
@c    inhabitants of Jerusalem, and reverencing my face, hast rent thy
@c    garments, and wept before me:  I also have heard thee, saith the Lord.

@c    34:28. For now I will gather thee to thy fathers, and thou shalt be
@c    brought to thy tomb in peace:  and thy eyes shall not see all the evil
@c    that I will bring upon this place, and the inhabitants thereof.  They
@c    therefore reported to the king all that she had said.

@c    34:29. And he called together all the ancients of Juda and Jerusalem.

@c    34:30. And went up to the house of the Lord, and all the men of Juda,
@c    and the inhabitants of Jerusalem, the priests and the Levites, and all
@c    the people from the least to the greatest.  And the king read in their
@c    hearing, in the house of the Lord, all the words of the book.

@c    34:31. And standing up in his tribunal, he made a covenant before the
@c    Lord to walk after him, and keep his commandments, and testimonies, and
@c    justifications with all his heart, and with all his soul, and to do the
@c    things that were written in that book which he had read.

@c    34:32. And he adjured all that were found in Jerusalem and Benjamin to
@c    do the same:  and the inhabitants of Jerusalem did according to the
@c    covenant of the Lord the God of their fathers.

@c    34:33. And Josias took away all the abominations out of all the
@c    countries of the children of Israel and made all that were left in
@c    Israel, to serve the Lord their God.  As long as he lived they departed
@c    not from the Lord the God of their fathers.



@c    2 Paralipomenon Chapter 35


@c    Josias celebrateth a most solemn pasch.  He is slain by the king of
@c    Egypt.

@c    35:1. And Josias kept a phase to the Lord in Jerusalem, and it was
@c    sacrificed on the fourteenth day of the first month.

@c    35:2. And he set the priests in their offices, and exhorted them to
@c    minister in the house of the Lord.

@c    35:3. And he spoke to the Levites, by whose instruction all Israel was
@c    sanctified to the Lord, saying:  Put the ark in the sanctuary of the
@c    temple, which Solomon the son of David king of Israel built:  for you
@c    shall carry it no more:  but minister now to the Lord your God, and to
@c    his people Israel.

@c    35:4. And prepare yourselves by your houses, and families according to
@c    your courses, as David king of Israel commanded, and Solomon his son
@c    hath written.

@c    35:5. And serve ye in the sanctuary by the families and companies of
@c    Levi.

@c    35:6. And being sanctified kill the phase, and prepare your brethren,
@c    that they may do according to the words which the Lord spoke by the
@c    hand of Moses.

@c    35:7. And Josias gave to all the people that were found there in the
@c    solemnity of the phase, of lambs and of kids of the flocks, and of
@c    other small cattle thirty thousand, and of oxen three thousand, all
@c    these were of the king's substance.

@c    35:8. And his princes willingly offered what they had vowed, both to
@c    the people and to the priests and the Levites.  Moreover Helcias, and
@c    Zacharias, and Jahiel rulers of the house of the Lord, gave to the
@c    priests to keep the phase two thousand six hundred small cattle, and
@c    three hundred oxen.

@c    35:9. And Chonenias, and Semeias and Nathanael, his brethren, and
@c    Hasabias, and Jehiel, and Jozabad princes of the Levites, gave to the
@c    rest of the Levites to celebrate the phase five thousand small cattle,
@c    and five hundred oxen.

@c    35:10. And the ministry was prepared, and the priests stood in their
@c    office:  the Levites also in their companies, according to the king's
@c    commandment.

@c    35:11. And the phase was immolated:  and the priests sprinkled the blood
@c    with their hand, and the Levites flayed the holocausts:

@c    35:12. And they separated them, to give them by the houses and families
@c    of every one, and to be offered to the Lord, as it is written in the
@c    book of Moses, and with the oxen they did in like manner.

@c    35:13. And they roasted the phase with fire, according to that which is
@c    written in the law:  but the victims of peace offerings they boiled in
@c    caldrons, and kettles, and pots, and they distributed them speedily
@c    among all the people.

@c    35:14. And afterwards they made ready for themselves, and for the
@c    priests:  for the priests were busied in offering of holocausts and the
@c    fat until night, wherefore the Levites prepared for themselves, and for
@c    the priests the sons of Aaron last.

@c    35:15. And the singers the sons of Asaph stood in their order,
@c    according to the commandment of David, and Asaph, and Heman, and
@c    Idithun, the prophets of the king:  and the porters kept guard at every
@c    gate, so as not to depart one moment from their service, and therefore
@c    their brethren the Levites prepared meats for them.

@c    35:16. So all the service of the Lord was duly accomplished that day,
@c    both in keeping the phase and offering holocausts upon the altar of the
@c    Lord, according to the commandment of king Josias.

@c    35:17. And the children of Israel that were found there, kept the phase
@c    at that time, and the feast of unleavened seven days.

@c    35:18. There was no phase like to this in Israel, from the days of
@c    Samuel the prophet:  neither did any of all the kings of Israel keep
@c    such a phase as Josias kept, with the priests, and the Levites, and all
@c    Juda, and Israel that were found, and the inhabitants of Jerusalem.

@c    35:19. In the eighteenth year of the reign of Josias was this phase
@c    celebrated.

@c    35:20. After that Josias had repaired the temple, Nechao king of Egypt
@c    came up to fight in Charcamis by the Euphrates:  and Josias went out to
@c    meet him.

@c    35:21. But he sent messengers to him, saying:  What have I to do with
@c    thee, O king of Juda?  I come not against thee this day, but I fight
@c    against another house, to which God hath commanded me to go in haste:
@c    forbear to do against God, who is with me, lest he kill thee.

@c    35:22. Josias would not return, but prepared to fight against him, and
@c    hearkened not to the words of Nechao from the mouth of God, but went to
@c    fight in the field of Mageddo.

@c    35:23. And there he was wounded by the archers, and he said to his
@c    servants:  Carry me out of the battle, for I am grievously wounded.

@c    35:24. And they removed him from the chariot into another, that
@c    followed him after the manner of kings, and they carried him away to
@c    Jerusalem, and he died, and was buried in the monument of his fathers,
@c    and all Juda and Jerusalem mourned for him,

@c    35:25. Particularly Jeremias:  whose lamentations for Josias all the
@c    singing men and singing women repeat unto this day, and it became like
@c    a law in Israel:  Behold it is found written in the Lamentations.

@c    35:26. Now the rest of the acts of Josias and of his mercies, according
@c    to what was commanded by the law of the Lord:

@c    35:27. And his works first and last, are written in the book of the
@c    kings of Juda and Israel.



@c    2 Paralipomenon Chapter 36


@c    The reigns of Joachaz, Joakim, Joachin, and Sedecias:  the captivity of
@c    Babylon released at length by Cyrus.

@c    36:1. Then the people of the land took Joachaz the son of Josias, and
@c    made him king instead of his father in Jerusalem.

@c    36:2. Joachaz was three and twenty years old when he began to reign,
@c    and he reigned three months in Jerusalem.

@c    36:3. And the king of Egypt came to Jerusalem, and deposed him, and
@c    condemned the land in a hundred talents of silver, and a talent of
@c    gold.

@c    36:4. And he made Eliakim his brother king in his stead, over Juda and
@c    Jerusalem:  and he turned his name to Joakim:  but he took Joachaz with
@c    him and carried him away into Egypt.

@c    36:5. Joakim was five and twenty years old when he began to reign, and
@c    he reigned eleven years in Jerusalem:  and he did evil before the Lord
@c    his God.

@c    36:6. Against him came up Nabuchodonosor king of the Chaldeans, and led
@c    him bound in chains into Babylon.

@c    36:7. And he carried also thither the vessels of the Lord, and put them
@c    in his temple.

@c    36:8. But the rest of the acts of Joakim, and his abominations, which
@c    he wrought, and the things that were found in him, are contained in the
@c    book of the kings of Juda and Israel.  And Joachin his son reigned in
@c    his stead.

@c    36:9. Joachin was eight years old when he began to reign, and he
@c    reigned three months and ten days in Jerusalem, and he did evil in the
@c    sight of the Lord.

@c    Eight years old. . .He was associated by his father to the kingdom, when
@c    he was but eight years old; but after his father's death, when he
@c    reigned alone, he was eighteen years old.  4 Kings 24.8.

@c    36:10. And at the return of the year, king Nabuchodonosor sent, and
@c    brought him to Babylon, carrying away at the same time the most
@c    precious vessels of the house of the Lord:  and he made Sedecias his
@c    uncle king over Juda and Jerusalem.

@c    36:11. Sedecias was one and twenty years old when he began to reign:
@c    and he reigned eleven years in Jerusalem.

@c    36:12. And he did evil in the eyes of the Lord his God, and did not
@c    reverence the face of Jeremias the prophet speaking to him from the
@c    mouth of the Lord.

@c    36:13. He also revolted from king Nabuchodonosor, who had made him
@c    swear by God:  and he hardened his neck and his heart, from returning to
@c    the Lord the God of Israel.

@c    36:14. Moreover all the chief of the priests, and the people wickedly
@c    transgressed according to all the abominations of the Gentiles:  and
@c    they defiled the house of the Lord, which he had sanctified to himself
@c    in Jerusalem.

@c    36:15. And the Lord the God of their fathers sent to them, by the hand
@c    of his messengers, rising early, and daily admonishing them:  because he
@c    spared his people and his dwelling place.

@c    36:16. But they mocked the messengers of God, and despised his words,
@c    and misused the prophets, until the wrath of the Lord arose against his
@c    people, and there was no remedy.

@c    36:17. For he brought upon them the king of the Chaldeans, and he slew
@c    their young men with the sword in the house of his sanctuary, he had no
@c    compassion on young man, or maiden, old man or even him that stooped
@c    for age, but he delivered them all into his hands.

@c    36:18. And all the vessels of the house of Lord, great and small, and
@c    the treasures of the temple and of the king, and of the princes he
@c    carried away to Babylon.

@c    36:19. And the enemies set fire to the house of God, and broke down the
@c    wall of Jerusalem, burnt all the towers, and what soever was precious
@c    they destroyed.

@c    36:20. Whosoever escaped the sword, was led into Babylon, and there
@c    served the king and his sons, till the reign of the king of Persia,

@c    36:21. That the word of the Lord by the mouth of Jeremias might be
@c    fulfilled, and the land might keep her sabbaths:  for all the days of
@c    the desolation she kept a sabbath, till the seventy years were expired.

@c    36:22. But in the first year of Cyrus king of the Persians, to fulfil
@c    the word of the Lord, which he had spoken by the mouth of Jeremias, the
@c    Lord stirred up the heart of Cyrus, king of the Persians:  who commanded
@c    it to be proclaimed through all his kingdom, and by writing also,
@c    saying:

@c    36:23. Thus saith Cyrus king of the Persians:  All the kingdoms of the
@c    earth hath the Lord the God of heaven given to me, and he hath charged
@c    me to build him a house in Jerusalem, which is in Judea:  who is there
@c    among you of all his people?  The Lord his God be with him, and let him
@c    go up.
