@c    THE BOOK OF NEHEMIAS, WHICH IS CALLED THE SECOND OF ESDRAS



@c    This Book takes its name from the writer, who was cupbearer to
@c    Artaxerxes (surnamed Longimanus) king of Persia, and was sent by him
@c    with a commission to rebuild the walls of Jerusalem.  It is also called
@c    the second book of Esdras; because it is a continuation of the history,
@c    begun by Esdras, of the state of the people of God after their return
@c    from captivity.



@c    2 Esdras Chapter 1


@c    Nehemias hearing the miserable state of his countrymen in Judea,
@c    lamenteth, fasteth, and prayeth to God for their relief.

@c    1:1. The words of Nehemias the son of Helchias.  And it came to pass in
@c    the month of Casleu, in the twentieth year, as I was in the castle of
@c    Susa,

@c    1:2. That Hanani one of my brethren came, he and some men of Juda; and
@c    I asked them concerning the Jews, that remained and were left of the
@c    captivity, and concerning Jerusalem.

@c    1:3. And they said to me:  They that have remained, and are left of the
@c    captivity there in the province, are in great affliction, and reproach:
@c    and the wall of Jerusalem is broken down, and the gates thereof are
@c    burnt with fire.

@c    1:4. And when I had heard these words, I sat down, and wept, and
@c    mourned for many days:  and I fasted, and prayed before the face of the
@c    God of heaven.

@c    1:5. And I said:  I beseech thee, O Lord God of heaven, strong, great,
@c    and terrible, who keepest covenant and mercy with those that love thee,
@c    and keep thy commandments:

@c    1:6. Let thy ears be attentive, and thy eyes open, to hear the prayer
@c    of thy servant, which I pray before thee now, night and day, for the
@c    children of Israel thy servants:  and I confess the sins of the children
@c    of Israel, by which they have sinned against thee:  I and my father's
@c    house have sinned.

@c    1:7. We have been seduced by vanity, and have not kept thy
@c    commandments, and ceremonies and judgments, which thou hast commanded
@c    thy servant Moses.

@c    1:8. Remember the word that thou commandedst to Moses thy servant,
@c    saying:  If you shall transgress, I will scatter you abroad among the
@c    nations:

@c    1:9. But if you return to me, and keep my commandments, and do them,
@c    though you should be led away to the uttermost parts of the world, I
@c    will gather you from thence, and bring you back to the place which I
@c    have chosen for my name to dwell there.

@c    1:10. And these are thy servants, and thy people:  whom thou hast
@c    redeemed by thy great strength, and by thy mighty hand.

@c    1:11. I beseech thee, O Lord, let thy ear be attentive to the prayer of
@c    thy servant, and to the prayer of thy servants who desire to fear thy
@c    name:  and direct thy servant this day, and give him mercy before this
@c    man.  For I was the king's cupbearer.



@c    2 Esdras Chapter 2


@c    Nehemias with commission from king Artaxerxes cometh to Jerusalem:  and
@c    exhorteth the Jews to rebuild the walls.

@c    2:1. And it came to pass in the month of Nisan, in the twentieth year
@c    of Artaxerxes the king:  that wine was before him, and I took up the
@c    wine, and gave it to the king:  and I was as one languishing away before
@c    his face.

@c    2:2. And the king said to me:  Why is thy countenance sad, seeing thou
@c    dost not appear to be sick?  this is not without cause, but some evil, I
@c    know not what, is in thy heart.  And I was seized with an exceeding
@c    great fear:

@c    2:3. And I said to the king:  O king, live for ever:  why should not my
@c    countenance be sorrowful, seeing the city of the place of the
@c    sepulchres of my fathers is desolate, and the gates thereof are burnt
@c    with fire?

@c    2:4. Then the king said to me:  For what dost thou make request?  And I
@c    prayed to the God of heaven,

@c    2:5. And I said to the king:  If it seem good to the king, and if thy
@c    servant hath found favour in thy sight, that thou wouldst send me into
@c    Judea to the city of the sepulchre of my father, and I will build it.

@c    2:6. And the king said to me, and the queen that sat by him:  For how
@c    long shall thy journey be, and when wilt thou return?  And it pleased
@c    the king, and he sent me:  and I fixed him a time.

@c    2:7. And I said to the king:  If it seem good to the king, let him give
@c    me letters to the governors of the country beyond the river, that they
@c    convey me over, till I come into Judea:

@c    2:8. And a letter to Asaph the keeper of the king's forest, to give me
@c    timber that I may cover the gates of the tower of the house, and the
@c    walls of the city, and the house that I shall enter into.  And the king
@c    gave me according to the good hand of my God with me.

@c    2:9. And I came to the governors of the country beyond the river, and
@c    gave them the king's letters.  And the king had sent with me captains of
@c    soldiers, and horsemen.

@c    2:10. And Sanaballat the Horonite, and Tobias the servant, the
@c    Ammonite, heard it, and it grieved them exceedingly, that a man was
@c    come, who sought the prosperity of the children of Israel.

@c    2:11. And I came to Jerusalem, and was there three days.

@c    2:12. And I arose in the night, I and some few men with me, and I told
@c    not any man what God had put in my heart to do in Jerusalem, and there
@c    was no beast with me, but the beast that I rode upon.

@c    2:13. And I went out by night by the gate of the valley, and before the
@c    dragon fountain, and to the dung gate, and I viewed the wall of
@c    Jerusalem which was broken down, and the gates thereof which were
@c    consumed with fire.

@c    2:14. And I passed to the gate of the fountain, and to the king's
@c    aqueduct, and there was no place for the beast on which I rode to pass.

@c    2:15. And I went up in the night by the torrent, and viewed the wall,
@c    and going back I came to the gate of the valley, and returned.

@c    2:16. But the magistrates knew not whither I went, or what I did:
@c    neither had I as yet told any thing to the Jews, or to the priests, or
@c    to the nobles, or to the magistrates, or to the rest that did the work.

@c    2:17. Then I said to them:  You know the affliction wherein we are,
@c    because Jerusalem is desolate, and the gates thereof are consumed with
@c    fire:  come, and let us build up the walls of Jerusalem, and let us be
@c    no longer a reproach.

@c    2:18. And I shewed them how the hand of my God was good with me, and
@c    the king's words, which he had spoken to me, and I said:  Let us rise
@c    up, and build.  And their hands were strengthened in good.

@c    2:19. But Sanaballat the Horonite, and Tobias the servant, the
@c    Ammonite, and Gossem the Arabian heard of it, and they scoffed at us,
@c    and despised us, and said:  What is this thing that you do?  are you
@c    going to rebel against the king?

@c    2:20. And I answered them, and said to them:  The God of heaven he
@c    helpeth us, and we are his servants:  let us rise up and build:  but you
@c    have no part, nor justice, nor remembrance in Jerusalem.



@c    2 Esdras Chapter 3


@c    They begin to build the walls:  the names and order of the builders.

@c    3:1. Then Eliasib the high priest arose, and his brethren the priests,
@c    and they built the flock gate:  they sanctified it, and set up the doors
@c    thereof, even unto the tower of a hundred cubits they sanctified it
@c    unto the tower of Hananeel.

@c    3:2. And next to him the men of Jericho built:  and next to them built
@c    Zachur the son of Amri.

@c    3:3. But the fish gate the sons of Asnaa built:  they covered it, and
@c    set up the doors thereof, and the locks, and the bars.  And next to them
@c    built Marimuth the son of Urias the son of Accus.

@c    4. And next to him built Mosollam the son of Barachias, the son of
@c    Merezebel, and next to them built Sadoc the son of Baana.

@c    5. And next to them the Thecuites built:  but their great men did not
@c    put their necks to the work of their Lord.

@c    3:6. And Joiada the son of Phasea, and Mosollam the son of Besodia
@c    built the old gate:  they covered it and set up the doors thereof, and
@c    the locks, and the bars.

@c    3:7. And next to them built Meltias the Gabaonite, and Jadon the
@c    Meronathite, the men of Gabaon and Maspha, for the governor that was in
@c    the country beyond the river.

@c    3:8. And next to him built Eziel the son of Araia the goldsmith:  and
@c    next to him built Ananias the son of the perfumer:  and they left
@c    Jerusalem unto the wall of the broad street.

@c    3:9. And next to him built Raphaia the son of Hur, lord of the street
@c    of Jerusalem.

@c    3:10. And next to him Jedaia the son of Haromaph over against his own
@c    house:  and next to him built Hattus the son of Hasebonia.

@c    3:11. Melchias the son of Herem, and Hasub the son of Phahath Moab,
@c    built half the street, and the tower of the furnaces.

@c    3:12. And next to him built Sellum the son of Alohes, lord of half the
@c    street of Jerusalem, he and his daughters.

@c    3:13. And the gate of the valley Hanun built, and the inhabitants of
@c    Zanoe:  they built it, and set up the doors thereof, and the locks, and
@c    the bars, and a thousand cubits in the wall unto the gate of the
@c    dunghill.

@c    3:14. And the gate of the dunghill Melchias the son of Rechab built,
@c    lord of the street of Bethacharam:  he built it, and set up the doors
@c    thereof, and the locks, and the bars.

@c    3:15. And the gate of the fountain, Sellum, the son of Cholhoza, built,
@c    lord of the street of Maspha:  he built it, and covered it, and set up
@c    the doors thereof, and the locks, and the bars, and the walls of the
@c    pool of Siloe unto the king's guard, and unto the steps that go down
@c    from the city of David.

@c    3:16. After him built Nehemias the son of Azboc, lord of half the
@c    street of Bethsur, as far as over against the sepulchre of David, and
@c    to the pool, that was built with great labour, and to the house of the
@c    mighty.

@c    3:17. After him built the Levites, Rehum the son of Benni.  After him
@c    built Hasebias, lord of half the street of Ceila in his own street.

@c    3:18. After him built their brethren Bavai the son of Enadad, lord of
@c    half Ceila.

@c    3:19. And next to him Aser the son of Josue, lord of Maspha, built
@c    another measure, over against the going up of the strong corner.

@c    3:20. After him in the mount Baruch the son of Zachai built another
@c    measure, from the corner to the door of the house of Eliasib the high
@c    priest.

@c    3:21. After him Merimuth the son of Urias the son of Haccus, built
@c    another measure, from the door of the house of Eliasib, to the end of
@c    the house of Eliasib.

@c    3:22. And after him built the priests, the men of the plains of the
@c    Jordan.

@c    3:23. After him built Benjamin and Hasub, over against their own house:
@c    and after him built Azarias the son of Maasias the son of Ananias over
@c    against his house.

@c    3:24. After him built Bennui the son of Hanadad another measure, from
@c    the house of Azarias unto the bending, and unto the corner.

@c    3:25. Phalel, the son of Ozi, over against the bending and the tower,
@c    which lieth out from the king's high house, that is, in the court of
@c    the prison:  after him Phadaia the son of Pharos.

@c    3:26. And the Nathinites dwelt in Ophel, as far as over against the
@c    water gate toward the east, and the tower that stood out.

@c    3:27. After him the Thecuites built another measure over against, from
@c    the great tower that standeth out unto the wall of the temple.

@c    3:28. And upward from the horse gate the priests built, every man over
@c    against his house.

@c    3:29. After them built Sadoc the son of Emmer over against his house.
@c    And after him built Semaia the son of Sechenias, keeper of the east
@c    gate.

@c    3:30. After him built Hanania the son of Selemia, and Hanun the sixth
@c    son of Seleph, another measure:  after him built Mosollam the son of
@c    Barachias over against his treasury.  After him Melcias the goldsmith's
@c    son built unto the house of the Nathinites, and of the sellers of small
@c    wares, over against the judgment gate, and unto the chamber of the
@c    corner.

@c    3:31. And within the chamber of the corner of the flock gate, the
@c    goldsmiths and the merchants built.



@c    2 Esdras Chapter 4


@c    The building is carried on notwithstanding the opposition of their
@c    enemies.

@c    4:1. And it came to pass, that when Sanaballat heard that we were
@c    building the wall he was angry:  and being moved exceedingly he scoffed
@c    at the Jews.

@c    4:2. And said before his brethren, and the multitude of the Samaritans:
@c    What are the silly Jews doing?  Will the Gentiles let them alone?  will
@c    they sacrifice and make an end in a day?  are they able to raise stones
@c    out of the heaps of the rubbish, which are burnt?

@c    4:3. Tobias also the Ammonite who was by him said:  Let them build:  if a
@c    fox go up, he will leap over their stone wall.

@c    4:4. Hear thou our God, for we are despised:  turn their reproach upon
@c    their own head, and give them to be despised in a land of captivity.

@c    4:5. Cover not their iniquity, and let not their sin be blotted out
@c    from before thy face, because they have mocked thy builders.

@c    4:6. So we built the wall, and joined it all together unto the half
@c    thereof:  and the heart of the people was excited to work.

@c    4:7. And it came to pass, when Sanaballat, and Tobias, and the
@c    Arabians, and the Ammonites, and the Azotians heard that the walls of
@c    Jerusalem were made up, and the breaches began to be closed, that they
@c    were exceedingly angry.

@c    4:8. And they all assembled themselves together, to come, and to fight
@c    against Jerusalem, and to prepare ambushes.

@c    4:9. And we prayed to our God, and set watchmen upon the wall day and
@c    night against them.

@c    4:10. And Juda said:  The strength of the bearer of burdens is decayed,
@c    and the rubbish is very much, and we shall not be able to build the
@c    wall.

@c    4:11. And our enemies said:  Let them not know, nor understand, till we
@c    come in the midst of them, and kill them, and cause the work to cease.

@c    4:12. And it came to pass, that when the Jews that dwelt by them came
@c    and told us ten times, out of all the places from whence they came to
@c    us,

@c    4:13. I set the people in the place behind the wall round about in
@c    order, with their swords, and spears, and bows.

@c    4:14. And I looked and rose up:  and I said to the chief men and the
@c    magistrates, and to the rest of the common people:  be not afraid of
@c    them.  Remember the Lord who is great and terrible, and fight for your
@c    brethren, your sons, and your daughters, and your wives, and your
@c    houses.

@c    4:15. And it came to pass, when our enemies heard that the thing had
@c    been told us, that God defeated their counsel.  And we returned all of
@c    us to the walls, every man to his work.

@c    4:16. And it came to pass from that day forward, that half of their
@c    young men did the work, and half were ready for to fight, with spears,
@c    and shields, and bows, and coats of mail, and the rulers were behind
@c    them in all the house of Juda.

@c    4:17. Of them that built on the wall and that carried burdens, and that
@c    laded:  with one of his hands he did the work, and with the other he
@c    held a sword.

@c    4:18. For every one of the builders was girded with a sword about his
@c    reins.  And they built, and sounded with a trumpet by me.

@c    4:19. And I said to the nobles, and to the magistrates, and to the rest
@c    of the common people:  The work is great and wide, and we are separated
@c    on the wall one far from another:

@c    4:20. In what place soever you shall hear the sound of the trumpet, run
@c    all thither unto us:  our God will fight for us.

@c    4:21. And let us do the work:  and let one half of us hold our spears
@c    from the rising of the morning, till the stars appear.

@c    4:22. At that time also I said to the people:  Let every one with his
@c    servant stay in the midst of Jerusalem, and let us take our turns in
@c    the night, and by day, to work.

@c    4:23. Now I and my brethren, and my servants, and the watchmen that
@c    followed me, did not put off our clothes:  only every man stripped
@c    himself when he was to be washed.



@c    2 Esdras Chapter 5


@c    Nehemias blameth the rich, for their oppressing the poor.  His
@c    exhortation, and bounty to his countrymen.

@c    5:1. Now there was a great cry of the people, and of their wives
@c    against their brethren the Jews.

@c    5:2. And there were some that said:  Our sons and our daughters are very
@c    many:  let us take up corn for the price of them, and let us eat and
@c    live.

@c    5:3. And there were some that said:  Let us mortgage our lands, and our
@c    vineyards, and our houses, and let us take corn because of the famine.

@c    5:4. And others said:  Let us borrow money for the king's tribute, and
@c    let us give up our fields and vineyards:

@c    5:5. And now our flesh is as the flesh of our brethren:  and our
@c    children as their children.  Behold we bring into bondage our sons and
@c    our daughters, and some of our daughters are bondwomen already, neither
@c    have we wherewith to redeem them, and our fields and our vineyards
@c    other men possess.

@c    5:6. And I was exceedingly angry when I heard their cry according to
@c    these words.

@c    5:7. And my heart thought with myself:  and I rebuked the nobles and
@c    magistrates, and said to them:  Do you every one exact usury of your
@c    brethren?  And I gathered together a great assembly against them,

@c    5:8. And I said to them:  We, as you know, have redeemed according to
@c    our ability our brethren the Jews, that were sold to the Gentiles:  and
@c    will you then sell your brethren, for us to redeem them?  And they held
@c    their peace, and found not what to answer.

@c    5:9. And I said to them:  The thing you do is not good:  why walk you not
@c    in the fear of our God, that we be not exposed to the reproaches of the
@c    Gentiles our enemies?

@c    5:10. Both I and my brethren, and my servants, have lent money and corn
@c    to many:  let us all agree not to call for it again; let us forgive the
@c    debt that is owing to us.

@c    5:11. Restore ye to them this day their fields, and their vineyards,
@c    and their oliveyards, and their houses:  and the hundredth part of the
@c    money, and of the corn, the wine, and the oil, which you were wont to
@c    exact of them, give it rather for them.

@c    5:12. And they said:  We will restore, and we will require nothing of
@c    them:  and we will do as thou sayest.  And I called the priests and took
@c    an oath of them, to do according to what I had said.

@c    5:13. Moreover I shook my lap, and said:  So may God shake every man
@c    that shall not accomplish this word, out of his house, and out of his
@c    labours, thus may he be shaken out, and become empty.  And all the
@c    multitude said:  Amen.  And they praised God.  And the people did
@c    according to what was said.

@c    5:14. And from the day, in which the king commanded me to be governor
@c    in the land of Juda, from the twentieth year even to the two and
@c    thirtieth year of Artaxerxes the king, for twelve years, I and my
@c    brethren did not eat the yearly allowance that was due to the
@c    governors.

@c    5:15. But the former governors that had been before me, were chargeable
@c    to the people, and took of them in bread, and wine, and in money every
@c    day forty sicles:  and their officers also oppressed the people.  But I
@c    did not so for the fear of God.

@c    5:16. Moreover I built in the work of the wall, and I bought no land,
@c    and all my servants were gathered together to the work.

@c    5:17. The Jews also and the magistrates to the number of one hundred
@c    and fifty men, were at my table, besides them that came to us from
@c    among the nations that were round about us.

@c    5:18. And there was prepared for me day be day one ox, and six choice
@c    rams, besides fowls, and once in ten days I gave store of divers wines,
@c    and many other things:  yet I did not require my yearly allowance as
@c    governor:  for the people were very much impoverished.

@c    5:19. Remember me, O my God, for good according to all that I have done
@c    for this people.



@c    2 Esdras Chapter 6


@c    The enemies seek to terrify Nehemias.  He proceedeth and finisheth the
@c    wall.

@c    6:1. And it came to pass, when Sanaballat, and Tobias, and Gossem the
@c    Arabian, and the rest of our enemies, heard that I had built the wall,
@c    and that there was no breach left in it, (though at that time I had not
@c    set up the doors in the gates,)

@c    6:2. Sanaballat and Gossem sent to me, saying:  Come, and let us make a
@c    league together in the villages, in the plain of Ono.  But they thought
@c    to do me mischief.

@c    6:3. And I sent messengers to them, saying:  I am doing a great work,
@c    and I cannot come down, lest it be neglected whilst I come, and go down
@c    to you.

@c    6:4. And they sent to me according to this word, four times:  and I
@c    answered them after the same manner.

@c    6:5. And Sanaballat sent his servant to me the fifth time according to
@c    the former word, and he had a letter in his hand written in this
@c    manner:

@c    6:6. It is reported amongst the Gentiles, and Gossem hath said it, that
@c    thou and the Jews think to rebel, and therefore thou buildest the wall,
@c    and hast a mind to set thyself king over them:  for which end

@c    6:7. Thou hast also set up prophets, to preach of thee at Jerusalem,
@c    saying:  There is a king in Judea.  The king will hear of these things:
@c    therefore come now, that we may take counsel together.

@c    6:8. And I sent to them, saying:  There is no such thing done as thou
@c    sayest:  but thou feignest these things out of thy own heart.

@c    6:9. For all these men thought to frighten us, thinking that our hands
@c    would cease from the work, and that we would leave off.  Wherefore I
@c    strengthened my hands the more:

@c    6:10. And I went into the house of Samaia the son of Delaia, the son of
@c    Metabeel privately.  And he said:  Let us consult together in the house
@c    of God in the midst of the temple:  and let us shut the doors of the
@c    temple, for they will come to kill thee, and in the night they will
@c    come to slay thee.

@c    6:11. And I said:  Should such a man as I flee?  and who is there that
@c    being as I am, would go into the temple, to save his life?  I will not
@c    go in.

@c    6:12. And I understood that God had not sent him, but that he had
@c    spoken to me as if he had been prophesying, and Tobias, and Sanaballat
@c    had hired him.

@c    6:13. For he had taken money, that I being afraid should do this thing,
@c    and sin, and they might have some evil to upbraid me withal.

@c    6:14. Remember me, O Lord, for Tobias and Sanaballat, according to
@c    their works of this kind:  and Noadias the prophet, and the rest of the
@c    prophets that would have put me in fear.

@c    6:15. But the wall was finished the five and twentieth day of the month
@c    of Elul, in two and fifty days.

@c    6:16. And it came to pass when all our enemies heard of it, that all
@c    nations which were round about us, were afraid, and were cast down
@c    within themselves, for they perceived that this work was the work of
@c    God.

@c    6:17. Moreover in those days many letters were sent by the principal
@c    men of the Jews to Tobias, and from Tobias there came letters to them.

@c    6:18. For there were many in Judea sworn to him, because he was the son
@c    in law of Sechenias the son of Area, and Johanan his son had taken to
@c    wife the daughter of Mosollam the son of Barachias.

@c    6:19. And they praised him also before me, and they related my words to
@c    him:  And Tobias sent letters to put me in fear.



@c    2 Esdras Chapter 7


@c    Nehemias appointeth watchmen in Jerusalem.  The list of those who came
@c    first from Babylon.

@c    7:1. Now after the wall was built, and I had set up the doors, and
@c    numbered the porters and singing men, and Levites:

@c    7:2. I commanded Hanani my brother, and Hananias ruler of the house of
@c    Jerusalem, (for he seemed as a sincere man, and one that feared God
@c    above the rest,)

@c    7:3. And I said to them:  Let not the gates of Jerusalem be opened till
@c    the sun be hot.  And while they were yet standing by the gates were
@c    shut, and barred:  and I set watchmen of the inhabitants of Jerusalem,
@c    every one by their courses, and every man over against his house.

@c    7:4. And the city was very wide and great, and the people few in the
@c    midst thereof, and the houses were not built.

@c    7:5. But God had put in my heart, and I assembled the princes and
@c    magistrates, and common people, to number them:  and I found a book of
@c    the number of them who came up at first and therein it was found
@c    written:

@c    7:6. These are the children of the province, who came up from the
@c    captivity of them that had been carried away, whom Nabuchodonosor the
@c    king of Babylon had carried away, and who returned into Judea, every
@c    one into his own city.

@c    7:7. Who came with Zorobabel, Josue, Nehemias, Azarias, Raamias,
@c    Nahamani, Mardochai, Belsam, Mespharath, Begoia, Nahum, Baana.  The
@c    number of the men of the people of Israel:

@c    7:8. The children of Pharos, two thousand one hundred seventy-two.

@c    7:9. The children of Sephatia, three hundred seventy-two.

@c    7:10. The children of Area, six hundred fifty-two.

@c    7:11. The children of Phahath Moab of the children of Josue and Joab,
@c    two thousand eight hundred eighteen.

@c    7:12. The children of Elam, one thousand two hundred fifty-four.

@c    7:13. The children of Zethua, eight hundred forty-five.

@c    7:14. The children of Zachai, seven hundred sixty.

@c    7:15. The children of Bannui, six hundred forty-eight.

@c    7:16. The children of Bebai, six hundred twenty-eight.

@c    7:17. The children of Azgad, two thousand three hundred twenty-two.

@c    7:18. The children of Adonicam, six hundred sixty-seven.

@c    7:19. The children of Beguai, two thousand sixty-seven.

@c    7:20. The children of Adin, six hundred fifty-five.

@c    7:21. The children of Ater, children of Hezechias, ninety-eight.

@c    7:22. The children of Hasem, three hundred twenty-eight.

@c    7:23. The children of Besai, three hundred twenty-four.

@c    7:24. The children of Hareph, a hundred and twelve.

@c    7:25. The children of Gabaon, ninety-five.

@c    7:26. The children of Bethlehem, and Netupha, a hundred eighty-eight.

@c    7:27. The men of Anathoth, a hundred twenty-eight.

@c    7:28. The men of Bethazmoth, forty-two.

@c    7:29. The men of Cariathiarim, Cephira, and Beroth, seven hundred
@c    forty-three.

@c    7:30. The men of Rama and Geba, six hundred twenty-one.

@c    7:31. The men of Machmas, a hundred twenty-two.

@c    7:32. The men of Bethel and Hai, a hundred twenty-three.

@c    7:33. The men of the other Nebo, fifty-two.

@c    7:34. The men of the other Elam, one thousand two hundred fifty-four.

@c    7:35. The children of Harem, three hundred and twenty.

@c    7:36. The children of Jericho, three hundred forty-five.

@c    7:37. The children of Lod, of Hadid and Ono, seven hundred twenty-one.

@c    7:38. The children of Senaa, three thousand nine hundred thirty.

@c    7:39. The priests:  the children of Idaia in the house of Josue, nine
@c    hundred and seventy-three.

@c    7:40. The children of Emmer, one thousand fifty-two.

@c    7:41. The children of Phashur, one thousand two hundred forty-seven.

@c    7:42. The children of Arem, one thousand and seventeen.  The Levites:

@c    7:43. The children of Josue and Cedmihel, the sons

@c    7:44. Of Oduia, seventy-four.  The singing men:

@c    7:45. The children of Asaph, a hundred forty-eight.

@c    7:46. The porters:  the children of Sellum, the children of Ater, the
@c    children of Telmon, the children of Accub, the children of Hatita, the
@c    children of Sobai:  a hundred thirty-eight.

@c    7:47. The Nathinites:  the children of Soha, the children of Hasupha,
@c    the children of Tebbaoth,

@c    7:48. The children of Ceros, the children os Siaa, the children of
@c    Phadon, the children of Lebana, the children of Hagaba, the children of
@c    Selmai,

@c    7:49. The children of Hanan, the children of Geddel, the children of
@c    Gaher,

@c    7:50. The children of Raaia, the children of Rasin, the children of
@c    Necoda,

@c    7:51. The children of Gezem, the children of Asa, the children of
@c    Phasea,

@c    7:52. The children of Besai, the children of Munim, the children of
@c    Nephussim,

@c    7:53. The children of Bacbuc, the children of Hacupha, the children of
@c    Harhur,

@c    7:54. The children of Besloth, the children of Mahida, the children of
@c    Harsa,

@c    7:55. The children of Bercos, the children of Sisara, the children of
@c    Thema,

@c    7:56. The children of Nasia, the children of Hatipha,

@c    7:57. The children of the servants of Solomon, the children of Sothai,
@c    the children of Sophereth, the children of Pharida,

@c    7:58. The children of Jahala, the children of Darcon, the children of
@c    Jeddel,

@c    7:59. The children of Saphatia, the children of Hatil, the children of
@c    Phochereth, who was born of Sabaim, the son of Amon.

@c    7:60. All the Nathinites, and the children of the servants of Solomon,
@c    three hundred ninety-two.

@c    7:61. And these are they that came up from Telmela, Thelharsa, Cherub,
@c    Addon, and Emmer:  and could not shew the house of their fathers, nor
@c    their seed, whether they were of Israel.

@c    7:62. The children of Dalaia, the children of Tobia, the children of
@c    Necoda, six hundred forty-two.

@c    7:63. And of the priests, the children of Habia, the children of Accos,
@c    the children of Berzellai, who took a wife of the daughters of
@c    Berzellai the Galaadite, and he was called by their name.

@c    7:64. These sought their writing in the record, and found it not:  and
@c    they were cast out of the priesthood.

@c    7:65. And Athersatha said to them, that they should not eat of the
@c    holies of holies, until there stood up a priest learned and skilful.

@c    7:66. All the multitude as it were one man, forty-two thousand three
@c    hundred sixty,

@c    7:67. Beside their menservants and womenservants, who were seven
@c    thousand three hundred thirty-seven:  and among them singing men, and
@c    singing women, two hundred forty-five.

@c    7:68. Their horses, seven hundred thirty-six:  their mules two hundred
@c    forty-five.

@c    7:69. Their camels, four hundred thirty-five, their asses, six thousand
@c    seven hundred and twenty.

@c    (Hitherto is related what was written in the record.  From this place
@c    forward goeth on the history of Nehemias.)

@c    7:70. And some of the heads of the families gave unto the work.
@c    Athersatha gave into the treasure a thousand drams of gold, fifty
@c    bowls, and five hundred and thirty garments for priests.

@c    Athersatha. . .That is, Nehemias; as appears from chap. 12.  Either that
@c    he was so called at the court of the king of Persia, where he was
@c    cupbearer:  or that, as some think, this name signifies governor; and he
@c    was at that time governor of Judea.

@c    7:71. And some of the heads of families gave to the treasure of the
@c    work, twenty thousand drams of gold, and two thousand two hundred
@c    pounds of silver.

@c    7:72. And that which the rest of the people gave, was twenty thousand
@c    drams of gold, and two thousand pounds of silver, and sixty-seven
@c    garments for priests.

@c    7:73. And the priests, and the Levites, and the porters, and the
@c    singing men, and the rest of the common people, and the Nathinites, and
@c    all Israel dwelt in their cities.



@c    2 Esdras Chapter 8


@c    Esdras readeth the law before the people.  Nehemias comforteth them.
@c    They celebrate the feast of tabernacles.

@c    8:1. And the seventh month came:  and the children of Israel were in
@c    their cities.  And all the people were gathered together as one man to
@c    the street which is before the water gate, and they spoke to Esdras the
@c    scribe, to bring the book of the law of Moses, which the Lord had
@c    commanded to Israel.

@c    8:2. Then Esdras the priest brought the law before the multitude of men
@c    and women, and all those that could understand, in the first day of the
@c    seventh month.

@c    8:3. And he read it plainly in the street that was before the water
@c    gate, from the morning until midday, before the men, and the women, and
@c    all those that could understand:  and the ears of all the people were
@c    attentive to the book.

@c    8:4. And Esdras the scribe stood upon a step of wood, which he had made
@c    to speak upon, and there stood by him Mathathias, and Semeia, and Ania,
@c    and Uria, and Helcia, and Maasia, on his right hand:  and on the left,
@c    Phadaia, Misael, and Melchia, and Hasum, and Hasbadana, Zacharia and
@c    Mosollam.

@c    8:5. And Esdras opened the book before all the people:  for he was above
@c    all the people:  and when he had opened it, all the people stood.

@c    8:6. And Esdras blessed the Lord the great God:  and all the people
@c    answered, Amen, amen:  lifting up their hands:  and they bowed down, and
@c    adored God with their faces to the ground.

@c    8:7. Now Josue, and Bani, and Serebia, Jamin, Accub, Sephtai, Odia,
@c    Maasia, Celtia, Azarias, Jozabed, Hanan, Phalaia, the Levites, made
@c    silence among the people to hear the law:  and the people stood in their
@c    place.

@c    8:8. And they read in the book of the law of God distinctly and plainly
@c    to be understood:  and they understood when it was read.

@c    8:9. And Nehemias (he is Athersatha) and Esdras the priest and scribe,
@c    and the Levites who interpreted to all the people, said:  This is a holy
@c    day to the Lord our God:  do not mourn, nor weep:  for all the people
@c    wept, when they heard the words of the law.

@c    8:10. And he said to them:  Go, eat fat meats, and drink sweet wine, and
@c    send portions to them that have not prepared for themselves:  because it
@c    is the holy day of the Lord, and be not sad:  for the joy of the Lord is
@c    our strength.

@c    8:11. And the Levites stilled all the people, saying:  Hold your peace,
@c    for the day is holy, and be not sorrowful.

@c    8:12. So all the people went to eat and drink, and to send portions,
@c    and to make great mirth:  because they understood the words that he had
@c    taught them.

@c    8:13. And on the second day the chiefs of the families of all the
@c    people, the priests, and the Levites were gathered together to Esdras
@c    the scribe, that he should interpret to them the words of the law.

@c    8:14. And they found written in the law, that the Lord had commanded by
@c    the hand of Moses, that the children of Israel should dwell in
@c    tabernacles, on the feast, in the seventh month:

@c    8:15. And that they should proclaim and publish the word in all their
@c    cities, and in Jerusalem, saying:  Go forth to the mount, and fetch
@c    branches of olive, and branches of beautiful wood, branches of myrtle,
@c    and branches of palm, and branches of thick trees, to make tabernacles,
@c    as it is written.

@c    8:16. And the people went forth, and brought.  And they made themselves
@c    tabernacles every man on the top of his house, and in their courts, and
@c    in the courts of the house of God, and in the street of the water gate,
@c    and in the street of the gate of Ephraim.

@c    8:17. And all the assembly of them that were returned from the
@c    captivity, made tabernacles, and dwelt in tabernacles:  for since the
@c    days of Josue the son of Nun the children of Israel had not done so,
@c    until that day:  and there was exceeding great joy.

@c    8:18. And he read in the book of the law of God day by day, from the
@c    first day till the last, and they kept the solemnity seven days, and in
@c    the eighth day a solemn assembly according to the manner.



@c    2 Esdras Chapter 9


@c    The people repent with fasting and sackcloth.  The Levites confess God's
@c    benefits, and the people's ingratitude:  they pray for them, and make a
@c    covenant with God.

@c    9:1. And in the four and twentieth day of the month the children of
@c    Israel came together with fasting and with sackcloth, and earth upon
@c    them.

@c    9:2. And the seed of the children of Israel separated themselves from
@c    every stranger:  and they stood, and confessed their sins, and the
@c    iniquities of their fathers.

@c    9:3. And they rose up to stand:  and they read in the book of the law of
@c    the Lord their God, four times in the day, and four times they
@c    confessed, and adored the Lord their God.

@c    9:4. And there stood up upon the step of the Levites, Josue, and Bani,
@c    and Cedmihel, Sabania, Bonni, Sarebias, Bani, and Chanani:  and they
@c    cried with a loud voice to the Lord their God.

@c    9:5. And the Levites Josue and Cedmihel, Bonni, Hasebnia, Serebia,
@c    Oduia, Sebnia, and Phathahia, said:  Arise, bless the Lord your God from
@c    eternity to eternity:  and blessed be the high name of thy glory with
@c    all blessing and praise.

@c    9:6. Thou thyself, O Lord alone, thou hast made heaven, and the heaven
@c    of heavens, and all the host thereof:  the earth and all things that are
@c    in it:  the seas and all that are therein:  and thou givest life to all
@c    these things, and the host of heaven adoreth thee.

@c    9:7. Thou O Lord God, art he who chosest Abram, and broughtest him
@c    forth out of the fire of the Chaldeans, and gavest him the name of
@c    Abraham.

@c    The fire of the Chaldeans. . .The city of Ur in Chaldea, the name of
@c    which signifies fire.  Or out of the fire of the tribulations and
@c    temptations, to which he was there exposed.--The ancient Rabbins
@c    understood this literally, affirming that Abram was cast into the fire
@c    by the idolaters, and brought out by a miracle without any hurt.

@c    9:8. And thou didst find his heart faithful before thee:  and thou
@c    madest a covenant with him, to give him the land of the Chanaanite, of
@c    the Hethite, and of the Amorrhite, and of the Pherezite, and of the
@c    Jebusite, and of the Gergezite, to give it to his seed:  and thou hast
@c    fulfilled thy words, because thou art just.

@c    9:9. And thou sawest the affliction of our fathers in Egypt:  and thou
@c    didst hear their cry by the Red Sea.

@c    9:10. And thou shewedst signs and wonders upon Pharao, and upon all his
@c    servants, and upon the people of his land:  for thou knewest that they
@c    dealt proudly against them:  and thou madest thyself a name, as it is at
@c    this day.

@c    9:11. And thou didst divide the sea before them, and they passed
@c    through the midst of the sea on dry land:  but their persecutors thou
@c    threwest into the depth, as a stone into mighty waters.

@c    9:12. And in a pillar of a cloud thou wast their leader by day, and in
@c    a pillar of fire by night, that they might see the way by which they
@c    went.

@c    9:13. Thou camest down also to mount Sinai, and didst speak with them
@c    from heaven, and thou gavest them right judgments, and the law of
@c    truth, ceremonies, and good precepts.

@c    9:14. Thou madest known to them thy holy sabbath, and didst prescribe
@c    to them commandments, and ceremonies, and the law by the hand of Moses
@c    thy servant.

@c    9:15. And thou gavest them bread from heaven in their hunger, and
@c    broughtest forth water for them out of the rock in their thirst, and
@c    thou saidst to them that they should go in, and possess the land, upon
@c    which thou hadst lifted up thy hand to give it them.

@c    9:16. But they and our fathers dealt proudly, and hardened their necks
@c    and hearkened not to thy commandments.

@c    9:17. And they would not hear, and they remembered not thy wonders
@c    which thou hadst done for them.  And they hardened their necks, and gave
@c    the head to return to their bondage, as it were by contention.  But
@c    thou, a forgiving God, gracious, and merciful, longsuffering, and full
@c    of compassion, didst not forsake them.

@c    And gave the head. . .That is, they set their head, or were bent to
@c    return to Egypt.

@c    9:18. Yea when they had made also to themselves a molten calf, and had
@c    said:  This is thy God, that brought thee out of Egypt:  and had
@c    committed great blasphemies:

@c    9:19. Yet thou, in thy many mercies, didst not leave them in the
@c    desert:  the pillar of the cloud departed not from them by day to lead
@c    them in the way, and the pillar of fire by night to shew them the way
@c    by which they should go.

@c    9:20. And thou gavest them thy good Spirit to teach them, and thy manna
@c    thou didst not withhold from their mouth, and thou gavest them water
@c    for their thirst.

@c    9:21. Forty years didst thou feed them in the desert, and nothing was
@c    wanting to them:  their garments did not grow old, and their feet were
@c    not worn.

@c    9:22. And thou gavest them kingdoms, and nations, and didst divide lots
@c    for them:  and they possessed the land of Sehon, and the land of the
@c    king of Hesebon, and the land of Og king of Basan.

@c    9:23. And thou didst multiply their children as the stars of heaven,
@c    and broughtest them to the land concerning which thou hadst said to
@c    their fathers, that they should go in and possess it.

@c    9:24. And the children came and possessed the land, and thou didst
@c    humble before them the inhabitants of the land, the Chanaanites, and
@c    gavest them into their hands, with their kings, and the people of the
@c    land, that they might do with them as it pleased them.

@c    9:25. And they took strong cities and a fat land, and possessed houses
@c    full of all goods:  cisterns made by others, vineyards, and oliveyards,
@c    and fruit trees in abundance:  and they ate, and were filled, and became
@c    fat, and abounded with delight in thy great goodness.

@c    9:26. But they provoked thee to wrath, and departed from thee, and
@c    threw thy law behind their backs:  and they killed thy prophets, who
@c    admonished them earnestly to return to thee:  and they were guilty of
@c    great blasphemies.

@c    9:27. And thou gavest them into the hands of their enemies, and they
@c    afflicted them.  And in the time of their tribulation they cried to
@c    thee, and thou heardest from heaven, and according to the multitude of
@c    thy tender mercies thou gavest them saviours, to save them from the
@c    hands of their enemies.

@c    9:28. But after they had rest, they returned to do evil in thy sight:
@c    and thou leftest them in the hand of their enemies, and they had
@c    dominion over them.  Then they returned, and cried to thee:  and thou
@c    heardest from heaven, and deliveredst them many times in thy mercies.

@c    9:29. And thou didst admonish them to return to thy law.  But they dealt
@c    proudly, and hearkened not to thy commandments, but sinned against thy
@c    judgments, which if a man do, he shall live in them:  and they withdrew
@c    the shoulder, and hardened their neck, and would not hear.

@c    9:30. And thou didst forbear with them for many years, and didst
@c    testify against them by thy spirit by the hand of thy prophets:  and
@c    they heard not, and thou didst deliver them into the hand of the people
@c    of the lands.

@c    9:31. Yet in thy very many mercies thou didst not utterly consume them,
@c    nor forsake them:  because thou art a merciful and gracious God.

@c    9:32. Now therefore our God, great, strong, and terrible, who keepest
@c    covenant and mercy, turn not away from thy face all the labour which
@c    hath come upon us, upon our kings, and our princes, and our priests,
@c    and our prophets, and our fathers, and all the people from the days of
@c    the king of Assur, until this day.

@c    9:33. And thou art just in all things that have come upon us:  because
@c    thou hast done truth, but we have done wickedly.

@c    9:34. Our kings, our princes, our priests, and our fathers have not
@c    kept thy law, and have not minded thy commandments, and thy testimonies
@c    which thou hast testified among them.

@c    9:35. And they have not served thee in their kingdoms, and in thy
@c    manifold goodness, which thou gavest them, and in the large and fat
@c    land, which thou deliveredst before them, nor did they return from
@c    their most wicked devices.

@c    9:36. Behold we ourselves this day are bondmen:  and the land, which
@c    thou gavest our fathers, to eat the bread thereof, and the good things
@c    thereof, and we ourselves are servants in it.

@c    9:37. And the fruits thereof grow up for the kings, whom thou hast set
@c    over us for our sins, and they have dominion over our bodies, and over
@c    our beasts, according to their will, and we are in great tribulation.

@c    9:38. And because of all this we ourselves make a covenant, and write
@c    it, and our princes, our Levites, and our priests sign it.



@c    2 Esdras Chapter 10


@c    The names of the subscribers to the covenant, and the contents of it.

@c    10:1. And the subscribers were Nehemias, Athersatha the son of
@c    Hachelai, and Sedecias,

@c    10:2. Saraias, Azarias, Jeremias,

@c    10:3. Pheshur, Amarias, Melchias,

@c    10:4. Hattus, Sebenia, Melluch,

@c    10:5. Harem, Merimuth, Obdias,

@c    10:6. Daniel, Genthon, Baruch,

@c    10:7. Mosollam, Abia, Miamin,

@c    10:8. Maazia, Belgia, Semeia:  these were priests.

@c    10:9. And the Levites, Josue the son of Azanias, Bennui of the sons of
@c    Henadad, Cedmihel,

@c    10:10. And their brethren, Sebenia, Oduia, Celita, Phalaia, Hanan,

@c    10:11. Micha, Rohob, Hasebia,

@c    10:12. Zachur, Serebia, Sabania,

@c    10:13. Odaia, Bani, Baninu.

@c    10:14. The heads of the people, Pharos, Phahath Moab, Elam, Zethu,
@c    Bani,

@c    10:15. Bonni, Azgad, Bebai,

@c    10:16. Adonia, Begoai, Adin,

@c    10:17. Ater, Hezecia, Azur,

@c    10:18. Odaia, Hasum, Besai,

@c    10:19. Hareph, Anathoth, Nebai,

@c    10:20. Megphias, Mosollam, Hazir,

@c    10:21. Mesizabel, Sadoc, Jeddua,

@c    10:22. Pheltia, Hanan, Anaia,

@c    10:23. Osee, Hanania, Hasub,

@c    10:24. Alohes, Phalea, Sobec,

@c    10:25. Rehum, Hasebna, Maasia,

@c    10:26. Echaia, Hanan, Anan,

@c    10:27. Melluch, Haran, Baana:

@c    10:28. And the rest of the people, priests, Levites, porters, and
@c    singing men, Nathinites, and all that had separated themselves from the
@c    people of the lands to the law of God, their wives, their sons, and
@c    their daughters.

@c    10:29. All that could understand, promising for their brethren, with
@c    their chief men, and they came to promise, and swear that they would
@c    walk in the law of God, which he gave in the hand of Moses the servant
@c    of God, that they would do and keep all the commandments of the Lord
@c    our God, and his judgments and his ceremonies.

@c    10:30. And that we would not give our daughters to the people of the
@c    land, nor take their daughters for our sons.

@c    10:31. And if the people of the land bring in things to sell, or any
@c    things for use, to sell them on the sabbath day, that we would not buy
@c    them on the sabbath, or on the holy day.  And that we would leave the
@c    seventh year, and the exaction of every hand.

@c    10:32. And we made ordinances for ourselves, to give the third part of
@c    a sicle every year for the work of the house of our God,

@c    10:33. For the loaves of proposition, and for the continual sacrifice,
@c    and for a continual holocaust on the sabbaths, on the new moons, on the
@c    set feasts, and for the holy things, and for the sin offering:  that
@c    atonement might be made for Israel, and for every use of the house of
@c    our God.

@c    10:34. And we cast lots among the priests, and the Levites, and the
@c    people for the offering of wood, that it might be brought into the
@c    house of our God by the houses of our fathers at set times, from year
@c    to year:  to burn upon the altar of the Lord our God, as it is written
@c    in the law of Moses:

@c    10:35. And that we would bring the firstfruits of our land, and the
@c    firstfruits of all fruit of every tree, from year to year, in the house
@c    of our Lord.

@c    10:36. And the firstborn of our sons, and of our cattle, as it is
@c    written in the law, and the firstlings of our oxen, and of our sheep,
@c    to be offered in the house of our God, to the priests who minister in
@c    the house of our God.

@c    10:37. And that we would bring the firstfruits of our meats, and of our
@c    libations, and the fruit of every tree, of the vintage also and of oil
@c    to the priests, to the storehouse of our God, and the tithes of our
@c    ground to the Levites.  The Levites also shall receive the tithes of our
@c    works out of all the cities.

@c    10:38. And the priest the son of Aaron shall be with the Levites in the
@c    tithes of the Levites, and the Levites shall offer the tithe of their
@c    tithes in the house of our God, to the storeroom into the treasure
@c    house.

@c    10:39. For the children of Israel and the children of Levi shall carry
@c    to the treasury the firstfruits of corn, of wine, and of oil:  and the
@c    sanctified vessels shall be there, and the priests, and the singing
@c    men, and the porters, and ministers, and we will not forsake the house
@c    of our God.



@c    2 Esdras Chapter 11


@c    Who were the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and the other cities.

@c    11:1. And the princes of the people dwelt at Jerusalem:  but the rest of
@c    the people cast lots, to take one part in ten to dwell in Jerusalem the
@c    holy city, and nine parts in the other cities.

@c    11:2. And the people blessed all the men that willingly offered
@c    themselves to dwell in Jerusalem.

@c    11:3. These therefore are the chief men of the province, who dwelt in
@c    Jerusalem, and in the cities of Juda.  And every one dwelt in his
@c    possession, in their cities:  Israel, the priests, the Levites, the
@c    Nathinites, and the children of the servants of Solomon.

@c    11:4. And in Jerusalem there dwelt some of the children of Juda, and
@c    some of the children of Benjamin:  of the children of Juda, Athaias the
@c    son of Aziam, the son of Zacharias, the son of Amarias, the son of
@c    Saphatias, the son of Malaleel:  of the sons of Phares,

@c    11:5. Maasia the son of Baruch, the son of Cholhoza, the son of Hazia,
@c    the son of Adaia, the son of Joiarib, the son of Zacharias, the son of
@c    the Silonite:

@c    11:6. All these the sons of Phares, who dwelt in Jerusalem, were four
@c    hundred sixty-eight valiant men.

@c    11:7. And these are the children of Benjamin:  Sellum the son of
@c    Mosollam, the son of Joed, the son of Phadaia, the son of Colaia, the
@c    son of Masia, the son of Etheel, the son of Isaia.

@c    11:8. And after him Gebbai, Sellai, nine hundred twenty-eight.

@c    11:9. And Joel the son of Zechri their ruler, and Judas the son of
@c    Senua was second over the city.

@c    11:10. And of the priests Idaia the son of Joarib, Jachin,

@c    11:11. Saraia the son of Helcias, the son of Mosollam, the son of
@c    Sadoc, the son of Meraioth, the son of Achitob the prince of the house
@c    of God,

@c    11:12. And their brethren that do the works of the temple:  eight
@c    hundred twenty-two.  And Adaia the son of Jeroham, the son of Phelelia,
@c    the son of Amsi, the son of Zacharias, the son of Pheshur, the son of
@c    Melchias,

@c    11:13. And his brethren the chiefs of the fathers:  two hundred
@c    forty-two.  And Amassai the son of Azreel, the son of Ahazi, the son of
@c    Mosollamoth, the son of Emmer,

@c    11:14. And their brethren who were very mighty, a hundred twenty-eight:
@c    and their ruler Zabdiel son of the mighty.

@c    11:15. And of the Levites Semeia the son of Hasub, the son of Azaricam,
@c    the son of Hasabia, the son of Boni,

@c    11:16. And Sabathai and Jozabed, who were over all the outward business
@c    of the house of God, of the princes of the Levites,

@c    11:17. And Mathania the son of Micha, the son of Zebedei, the son of
@c    Asaph, was the principal man to praise, and to give glory in prayer,
@c    and Becbecia, the second, one of his brethren, and Abda the son of
@c    Samua, the son of Galal, the son of Idithun.

@c    11:18. All the Levites in the holy city were two hundred eighty-four.

@c    11:19. And the porters, Accub, Telmon, and their brethren, who kept the
@c    doors:  a hundred seventy-two.

@c    11:20. And the rest of Israel, the priests and the Levites were in all
@c    the cities of Juda, every man in his possession.

@c    11:21. And the Nathinites, that dwelt in Ophel, and Siaha, and Gaspha
@c    of the Nathinites.

@c    11:22. And the overseer of the Levites in Jerusalem, was Azzi the son
@c    of Bani, the son of Hasabia, the son of Mathania, the son of Micha.  Of
@c    the sons of Asaph, were the singing men in the ministry of the house of
@c    God.

@c    11:23. For the king's commandment was concerning them, and an order
@c    among the singing men day by day.

@c    11:24. And Phathahia the son of Mesezebel of the children of Zara the
@c    son of Juda was at the hand of the king, in all matters concerning the
@c    people,

@c    11:25. And in the houses through all their countries.  Of the children
@c    of Juda some dwelt at Cariath-Arbe, and in the villages thereof:  and at
@c    Dibon, and in the villages thereof:  and at Cabseel, and in the villages
@c    thereof.

@c    11:26. And at Jesue, and at Molada, and at Bethphaleth,

@c    11:27. And at Hasersuel, and at Bersabee, and in the villages thereof,

@c    11:28. And at Siceleg, and at Mochona, and in the villages thereof,

@c    11:29. And at Remmon, and at Saraa, and at Jerimuth,

@c    11:30. Zanoa, Odollam, and in their villages, at Lachis and its
@c    dependencies, and at Azeca and the villages thereof.  And they dwelt
@c    from Bersabee unto the valley of Ennom.

@c    11:31. And the children of Benjamin, from Geba, at Mechmas, and at Hai,
@c    and at Bethel, and in the villages thereof,

@c    11:32. At Anathoth, Nob, Anania,

@c    11:33. Asor, Rama, Gethaim,

@c    11:34. Hadid, Seboim, and Neballat, Lod,

@c    11:35. And Ono the valley of craftsmen.

@c    11:36. And of the Levites were portions of Juda and Benjamin.



@c    2 Esdras Chapter 12


@c    The priests, and Levites that came up with Zorobabel.  The succession of
@c    high priests:  the solemnity of the dedication of the wall.

@c    12:1. Now these are the priests and the Levites, that went up with
@c    Zorobabel the son of Salathiel, and Josue:  Saraia, Jeremias, Esdras,

@c    12:2. Amaria, Melluch, Hattus,

@c    12:3. Sebenias, Rheum, Merimuth,

@c    12:4. Addo, Genthon, Abia,

@c    12:5. Miamin, Madia, Belga,

@c    12:6. Semeia, and Joiarib, Idaia, Sellum Amoc, Helcias,

@c    12:7. Idaia.  These were the chief of the priests, and of their brethren
@c    in the days of Josue.

@c    12:8. And the Levites, Jesua, Bennui, Cedmihel, Sarebia, Juda,
@c    Mathanias, they and their brethren were over the hymns:

@c    12:9. And Becbecia, and Hanni, and their brethren every one in his
@c    office.

@c    12:10. And Josue begot Joacim, and Joacim begot Eliasib, and Eliasib
@c    begot Joiada,

@c    12:11. And Joiada begot Jonathan and Jonathan begot Jeddoa.

@c    12:12. And in the days of Joacim the priests and heads of the families
@c    were:  Of Saraia, Maraia:  of Jeremias, Hanania:

@c    12:13. Of Esdras, Mosollam:  and of Amaria, Johanan:

@c    12:14. Of Milicho, Jonathan:  of Sebenia, Joseph:

@c    12:15. Of Haram, Edna:  of Maraioth, Helci:

@c    12:16. Of Adaia, Zacharia:  of Genthon, Mosollam:

@c    12:17. Of Abia, Zechri:  of Miamin and Moadia, Phelti:

@c    12:18. Of Belga, Sammua of Semaia, Jonathan:

@c    12:19. Of Joiarib, Mathanai:  of Jodaia, Azzi:

@c    12:20. Of Sellai, Celai:  of Amoc, Heber:

@c    12:21. Of Helcias, Hasebia:  of Idaia, Nathanael.

@c    12:22. The Levites the chiefs of the families in the days of Eliasib,
@c    and Joiada, and Johanan, and Jeddoa, were recorded, and the priests in
@c    the reign of Darius the Persian.

@c    12:23. The sons of Levi, heads of the families were written in the book
@c    of Chronicles, even unto the days of Jonathan the son of Eliasib.

@c    12:24. Now the chief of the Levites were Hasebia, Serebia, and Josue
@c    the son of Cedmihel:  and their brethren by their courses, to praise and
@c    to give thanks according to the commandment of David the man of God,
@c    and to wait equally in order.

@c    12:25. Mathania, and Becbecia, Obedia, and Mosollam, Telmon, Accub,
@c    were keepers of the gates and of the entrances before the gates.

@c    12:26. These were in the days of Joacim the son of Josue, the son of
@c    Josedec, and in the days of Nehemias the governor, and of Esdras the
@c    priest and scribe.

@c    12:27. And at the dedication of the wall of Jerusalem they sought the
@c    Levites out of all their places, to bring them to Jerusalem, and to
@c    keep the dedication, and to rejoice with thanksgiving, and with
@c    singing, and with cymbals, and psalteries and harps.

@c    12:28. And the sons of the singing men were gathered together out of
@c    the plain country about Jerusalem, and out of the villages of
@c    Nethuphati,

@c    12:29. And from the house of Galgal, and from the countries of Geba and
@c    Azmaveth:  for the singing men had built themselves villages round about
@c    Jerusalem.

@c    12:30. And the priests and the Levites were purified, and they purified
@c    the people, and the gates, and the wall.

@c    12:31. And I made the princes of Juda go up upon the wall, and I
@c    appointed two great choirs to give praise.  And they went on the right
@c    hand upon the wall toward the dung gate.

@c    12:32. And after them went Osaias, and half of the princes of Juda,

@c    12:33. And Azarias, Esdras, and Mosollam, Judas, and Benjamin, and
@c    Semeia, and Jeremias.

@c    12:34. And of the sons of the priests with trumpets, Zacharias the son
@c    of Jonathan, the son of Semeia, the son of Mathania, the son of
@c    Michaia, the son of Zechur, the son of Asaph,

@c    12:35. And his brethren Semeia, and Azareel, Malalai, Galalai, Maai,
@c    Nathanael, and Judas, and Hanani, with the musical instruments of David
@c    the man of God:  and Esdras the scribe before them at the fountain gate.

@c    12:36. And they went up over against them by the stairs of the city of
@c    David, at the going up of the wall of the house of David, and to the
@c    water gate eastward:

@c    12:37. And the second choir of them that gave thanks went on the
@c    opposite side, and I after them, and the half of the people upon the
@c    wall, and upon the tower of the furnaces, even to the broad wall,

@c    12:38. And above the gate of Ephraim, and above the old gate, and above
@c    the fish gate and the tower of Hananeel, and the tower of Emath, and
@c    even to the flock gate:  and they stood still in the watch gate.

@c    12:39. And the two choirs of them that gave praise stood still at the
@c    house of God, and I and the half of the magistrates with me.

@c    12:40. And the priests, Eliachim, Maasia, Miamin, Michea, Elioenai,
@c    Zacharia, Hanania with trumpets,

@c    12:41. And Maasia, and Semeia, and Eleazar, and Azzi, and Johanan, and
@c    Melchia, and Elam, and Ezer.  And the singers sung loud, and Jezraia was
@c    their overseer:

@c    12:42. And they sacrificed on that day great sacrifices, and they
@c    rejoiced:  for God had made them joyful with great joy:  their wives also
@c    and their children rejoiced, and the joy of Jerusalem was heard afar
@c    off.

@c    12:43. They appointed also in that day men over the storehouses of the
@c    treasure, for the libations, and for the firstfruits, and for the
@c    tithes, that the rulers of the city might bring them in by them in
@c    honour of thanksgiving, for the priests and Levites:  for Juda was
@c    joyful in the priests and Levites that assisted.

@c    12:44. And they kept the watch of their God, and the observance of
@c    expiation, and the singing men, and the porters, according to the
@c    commandment of David, and of Solomon his son.

@c    12:45. For in the days of David and Asaph from the beginning there were
@c    chief singers appointed, to praise with canticles, and give thanks to
@c    God.

@c    12:46. And all Israel, in the days of Zorobabel, and in the days of
@c    Nehemias gave portions to the singing men, and to the porters, day by
@c    day, and they sanctified the Levites, and the Levites sanctified the
@c    sons of Aaron.

@c    Sanctified. . .That is, they gave them that which by the law was set
@c    aside, and sanctified for their use.



@c    2 Esdras Chapter 13


@c    Divers abuses are reformed.

@c    13:1. And on that day they read in the book of Moses in the hearing of
@c    the people:  and therein was found written, that the Ammonites and the
@c    Moabites should not come in to the church of God for ever:

@c    13:2. Because they met not the children of Israel with bread and water:
@c    and they hired against them Balaam, to curse them, and our God turned
@c    the curse into blessing.

@c    13:3. And it came to pass, when they had heard the law, that they
@c    separated every stranger from Israel.

@c    13:4. And over this thing was Eliasib the priest, who was set over the
@c    treasury of the house of our God, and was near akin to Tobias.

@c    Over this thing, etc. . .Or, he was faulty in this thing, or in this
@c    kind.

@c    13:5. And he made him a great storeroom, where before him they laid up
@c    gifts, and frankincense, and vessels, and the tithes of the corn, of
@c    the wine, and of the oil, the portions of the Levites, and of the
@c    singing men, and of the porters, and the firstfruits of the priests.

@c    13:6. But in all this time I was not in Jerusalem, because in the two
@c    and thirtieth year of Artaxerxes king of Babylon, I went to the king,
@c    and after certain days I asked the king:

@c    13:7. And I came to Jerusalem, and I understood the evil that Eliasib
@c    had done for Tobias, to make him a storehouse in the courts of the
@c    house of God.

@c    13:8. And it seemed to me exceeding evil.  And I cast forth the vessels
@c    of the house of Tobias out of the storehouse.

@c    13:9. And I commanded and they cleansed again the vessels of the house
@c    of God, the sacrifice, and the frankincense.

@c    13:10. And I perceived that the portions of the Levites had not been
@c    given them:  and that the Levites, and the singing men, and they that
@c    ministered were fled away every man to his own country:

@c    13:11. And I pleaded the matter against the magistrates, and said:  Why
@c    have we forsaken the house of God?  And I gathered them together, and I
@c    made them to stand in their places.

@c    13:12. And all Juda brought the tithe of the corn, and the wine, and
@c    the oil into the storehouses.

@c    13:13. And we set over the storehouses Selemias the priest, and Sadoc
@c    the scribe, and of the Levites Phadaia, and next to them Hanan the son
@c    of Zachur, the son of Mathania:  for they were approved as faithful, and
@c    to them were committed the portions of their brethren.

@c    13:14. Remember me, O my God, for this thing, and wipe not out my
@c    kindnesses, which I have done relating to the house of my God and his
@c    ceremonies.

@c    13:15. In those days I saw in Juda some treading the presses on the
@c    sabbath, and carrying sheaves, and lading asses with wine, and grapes,
@c    and figs, and all manner of burthens, and bringing them into Jerusalem
@c    on the sabbath day.  And I charged them that they should sell on a day
@c    on which it was lawful to sell.

@c    13:16. Some Tyrians also dwelt there, who brought fish, and all manner
@c    of wares:  and they sold them on the sabbaths to the children of Juda in
@c    Jerusalem.

@c    13:17. And I rebuked the chief men of Juda, and said to them:  What is
@c    this evil thing that you are doing, profaning the sabbath day:

@c    13:18. Did not our fathers do these things, and our God brought all
@c    this evil upon us, and upon this city?  And you bring more wrath upon
@c    Israel by violating the sabbath.

@c    13:19. And it came to pass, that when the gates of Jerusalem were at
@c    rest on the sabbath day, I spoke:  and they shut the gates, and I
@c    commanded that they should not open them till after the sabbath:  and I
@c    set some of my servants at the gates, that none should bring in
@c    burthens on the sabbath day.

@c    13:20. So the merchants, and they that sold all kinds of wares, stayed
@c    without Jerusalem, once or twice.

@c    13:21. And I charged them, and I said to them:  Why stay you before the
@c    wall?  if you do so another time, I will lay hands on you.  And from that
@c    time they came no more on the sabbath.

@c    13:22. I spoke also to the Levites that they should be purified, and
@c    should come to keep the gates, and to sanctify the sabbath day:  for
@c    this also remember me, O my God, and spare me according to the
@c    multitude of thy tender mercies.

@c    13:23. In those days also I saw Jews that married wives, women of
@c    Azotus, and of Ammon, and of Moab.

@c    13:24. And their children spoke half in the speech of Azotus, and could
@c    not speak the Jews' language, but they spoke according to the language
@c    of this and that people.

@c    13:25. And I chid them, and laid my curse upon them.  And I beat some of
@c    them, and shaved off their hair, and made them swear by God that they
@c    would not give their daughters to their sons, nor take their daughters
@c    for their sons, nor for themselves, saying:

@c    13:26. Did not Solomon king of Israel sin in this kind of thing:  and
@c    surely among many nations, there was not a king like him, and he was
@c    beloved of his God, and God made him king over all Israel:  and yet
@c    women of other countries brought even him to sin.

@c    13:27. And shall we also be disobedient and do all this great evil to
@c    transgress against our God, and marry strange women:

@c    13:28. And one of the sons of Joiada the son of Eliasib the high
@c    priest, was son in law to Sanaballat the Horonite, and I drove him from
@c    me.

@c    13:29. Remember them, O Lord my God, that defile the priesthood, and
@c    the law of priests and Levites.

@c    13:30. So I separated from them all strangers, and I appointed the
@c    courses of the priests and the Levites, every man in his ministry:

@c    13:31. And for the offering of wood at times appointed, and for the
@c    firstfruits:  remember me, O my God, unto good.  Amen.
