@c    THE SECOND BOOK OF MACHABEES



@c    This second book of MACHABEES is not a continuation of the history
@c    contained in the first:  nor does is come down so low as the first does:
@c    but relates many of the same facts more at large, and adds other
@c    remarkable particulars, omitted in the first book, relating to the
@c    state of the Jews, as well before as under the persecution of
@c    ANTIOCHUS.  The author, who is not the same with that of the first book,
@c    has given (as we learn from chap. 2.20, etc.) a short abstract of what
@c    JASON of Cyrene had written in the five volumes, concerning JUDAS and
@c    his brethren.  He wrote in Greek, and begins with two letters, sent by
@c    the Jews of Jerusalem to their brethren in Egypt.



@c    2 Machabees Chapter 1


@c    Letters of the Jews of Jerusalem to them that were in Egypt.  They give
@c    thanks for their delivery from Antiochus:  and exhort their brethren to
@c    keep the feast of the dedication of the altar, and of the miraculous
@c    fire.

@c    1:1. To the brethren, the Jews that are throughout Egypt; the brethren,
@c    the Jews that are in Jerusalem, and in the land of Judea, send health
@c    and good peace.

@c    1:2. May God be gracious to you, and remember his covenant that he made
@c    with Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, his faithful servants:

@c    1:3. And give you all a heart to worship him, and to do his will with a
@c    great heart, and a willing mind.

@c    1:4. May he open your heart in his law, and in his commandments, and
@c    send you peace.

@c    1:5. May he hear your prayers, and be reconciled unto you, and never
@c    forsake you in the evil time.

@c    1:6. And now here we are praying for you.

@c    1:7. When Demetrius reigned, in the year one hundred and sixty-nine, we
@c    Jews wrote to you in the trouble and violence that came upon us in
@c    those years, after Jason withdrew himself from the holy land, and from
@c    the kingdom.

@c    1:8. They burnt the gate, and shed innocent blood:  then we prayed to
@c    the Lord, and were heard, and we offered sacrifices, and fine flour,
@c    and lighted the lamps, and set forth the loaves.

@c    1:9. And now celebrate ye the days of Scenopegia in the month of
@c    Casleu.

@c    Scenopegia. . .Viz., the Encenia, or feast of the dedication of the
@c    altar, called here Scenopegia, or feast of tabernacles, from being
@c    celebrated with the like solemnity.

@c    1:10. In the year one hundred and eighty-eight, the people that is at
@c    Jerusalem, and in Judea, and the senate, and Judas, to Aristobolus, the
@c    preceptor of king Ptolemee, who is of the stock of the anointed
@c    priests, and to the Jews that are in Egypt, health and welfare.

@c    1:11. Having been delivered by God out of great dangers, we give him
@c    great thanks, forasmuch as we have been in war with such a king.

@c    Such a king. . .Viz., Antiochus Sidetes, who began to make war upon the
@c    Jews, whilst Simon was yet alive.  1 Mac. 15.39.  And afterwards besieged
@c    Jerusalem under John Hircanus.  So that the Judas here mentioned, ver.
@c    10, is not Judas Machabeus, who was dead long before the year 188 of
@c    the kingdom of the Greeks, for he died in the year 146 of that epoch,
@c    (see above 1 Mac. chap. 2., ver. 70, also the note on chap. 1, ver. 2,)
@c    but either Judas the eldest son of John Hircanus, or Judas the Essene,
@c    renowned for the gift of prophecy, who flourished about that time.

@c    1:12. For he made numbers of men swarm out of Persia, that have fought
@c    against us, and the holy city.

@c    1:13. For when the leader himself was in Persia, and with him a very
@c    great army, he fell in the temple of Nanea, being deceived by the
@c    counsel of the priests of Nanea.

@c    Nanea. . .A Persian goddess, which some have taken for Diana, others for
@c    Venus.

@c    1:14. For Antiochus, with his friends, came to the place as though he
@c    would marry her, and that he might receive great sums of money under
@c    the title of a dowry.

@c    1:15. And when the priests of Nanea had set it forth, and he with a
@c    small company had entered into the compass of the temple, they shut the
@c    temple,

@c    1:16. When Antiochus was come in:  and opening a secret entrance of the
@c    temple, they cast stones and slew the leader, and them that were with
@c    him, and hewed them in pieces; and cutting off their heads, they threw
@c    them forth.

@c    1:17. Blessed be God in all things, who hath delivered up the wicked.

@c    1:18. Therefore, whereas we purpose to keep the purification of the
@c    temple on the five and twentieth day of the month of Casleu, we thought
@c    it necessary to signify it to you:  that you also may keep the day of
@c    Scenopegia, and the day of the fire, that was given when Nehemias
@c    offered sacrifice, after the temple and the altar was built.

@c    1:19. For when our fathers were led into Persia, the priests that then
@c    were worshippers of God, took privately the fire from the altar, and
@c    hid it in a valley where there was a deep pit without water, and there
@c    they kept it safe, so that the place was unknown to all men.

@c    Persia. . .Babylonia, called here Persia, from being afterwards a part
@c    of the Persian empire.

@c    1:20. But when many years had passed, and it pleased God that Nehemias
@c    should be sent by the king of Persia, he sent some of the posterity of
@c    those priests that had hid it, to seek for the fire:  and as they told
@c    us, they found no fire, but thick water.

@c    1:21. Then he bade them draw it up, and bring it to him:  and the
@c    priest, Nehemias, commanded the sacrifices that were laid on, to be
@c    sprinkled with the same water, both the wood, and the things that were
@c    laid upon it.

@c    1:22. And when this was done, and the time came that the sun shone out,
@c    which before was in a cloud, there was a great fire kindled, so that
@c    all wondered.

@c    1:23. And all the priests made prayer, while the sacrifice was
@c    consuming, Jonathan beginning, and the rest answering.

@c    1:24. And the prayer of Nehemias was after this manner:  O Lord God,
@c    Creator of all things, dreadful and strong, just and merciful, who
@c    alone art the good king,

@c    1:25. Who alone art gracious, who alone art just, and almighty, and
@c    eternal, who deliverest Israel from all evil, who didst choose the
@c    fathers, and didst sanctify them:

@c    1:26. Receive the sacrifice for all thy people Israel, and preserve thy
@c    own portion, and sanctify it.

@c    1:27. Gather together our scattered people, deliver them that are
@c    slaves to the Gentiles, and look upon them that are despised and
@c    abhorred:  that the Gentiles may know that thou art our God

@c    1:28. Punish them that oppress us, and that treat us injuriously with
@c    pride.

@c    1:29. Establish thy people in thy holy place, as Moses hath spoken.

@c    1:30. And the priests sung hymns till the sacrifice was consumed.

@c    1:31. And when the sacrifice was consumed, Nehemias commanded the water
@c    that was left to be poured out upon the great stones.

@c    1:32. Which being done, there was kindled a flame from them:  but it was
@c    consumed by the light that shined from the altar.

@c    1:33. And when this matter became public, it was told to the king of
@c    Persia, that in the place where the priests that were led away, had hid
@c    the fire, there appeared water, with which Nehemias and they that were
@c    with him had purified the sacrifices.

@c    1:34. And the king considering, and diligently examining the matter,
@c    made a temple for it, that he might prove what had happened.

@c    A temple. . .That is, an enclosure, or a wall round about the place
@c    where the fire was hid, to separate it from profane uses, to the end
@c    that it might be respected as a holy place.

@c    1:35. And when he had proved it, he gave the priests many goods, and
@c    divers presents, and he took and distributed them to them with his own
@c    hand.

@c    1:36. And Nehemias called this place Nephthar, which is interpreted
@c    purification.  But many call it Nephi.



@c    2 Machabees Chapter 2


@c    A continuation of the second letter.  Of Jeremias' hiding the ark at the
@c    time of the captivity.  The author's preface.

@c    2:1.Now it is found in the descriptions of Jeremias, the prophet, that
@c    he commanded them that went into captivity, to take the fire, as it
@c    hath been signified, and how he gave charge to them that were carried
@c    away into captivity.

@c    The descriptions. . .That is, the records or memoirs of Jeremias, a work
@c    that is now lost.

@c    2:2. And how he gave them the law, that they should not forget the
@c    commandments of the Lord, and that they should not err in their minds,
@c    seeing the idols of gold, and silver, and the ornaments of them.

@c    2:3. And with other such like speeches, he exhorted them that they
@c    would not remove the law from their heart.

@c    2:4. It was also contained in the same writing, how the prophet, being
@c    warned by God, commanded that the tabernacle and the ark should
@c    accompany him, till he came forth to the mountain where Moses went up,
@c    and saw the inheritance of God.

@c    2:5. And when Jeremias came thither he found a hollow cave:  and he
@c    carried in thither the tabernacle, and the ark, and the altar of
@c    incense, and so stopped the door.

@c    2:6. Then some of them that followed him, came up to mark the place:
@c    but they could not find it.

@c    2:7. And when Jeremias perceived it, he blamed them, saying:  The place
@c    shall be unknown, till God gather together the congregation of the
@c    people, and receive them to mercy.

@c    2:8. And then the Lord will shew these things, and the majesty of the
@c    Lord shall appear, and there shall be a cloud as it was also shewed to
@c    Moses, and he shewed it when Solomon prayed that the place might be
@c    sanctified to the great God.

@c    2:9. For he treated wisdom in a magnificent manner:  and like a wise
@c    man, he offered the sacrifice of the dedication, and of the finishing
@c    of the temple.

@c    2:10. And as Moses prayed to the Lord, and fire came down from heaven,
@c    and consumed the holocaust:  so Solomon also prayed, and fire came down
@c    from heaven and consumed the holocaust.

@c    2:11. And Moses said:  Because the sin offering was not eaten, it was
@c    consumed.

@c    2:12. So Solomon also celebrated the dedication eight days.

@c    2:13. And these same things were set down in the memoirs, and
@c    commentaries of Nehemias:  and how he made a library, and gathered
@c    together out of the countries, the books both of the prophets, and of
@c    David, and the epistles of the kings, and concerning the holy gifts.

@c    2:14. And in like manner Judas also gathered together all such things
@c    as were lost by the war we had, and they are in our possession.

@c    2:15. Wherefore, if you want these things, send some that may fetch
@c    them to you.

@c    2:16. As we are then about to celebrate the purification, we have
@c    written unto you:  and you shall do well, if you keep the same days.

@c    The purification. . .That is, the feast of the purifying or cleansing of
@c    the temple.

@c    2:17. And we hope that God, who hath delivered his people, and hath
@c    rendered to all the inheritance, and the kingdom, and the priesthood,
@c    and the sanctuary,

@c    2:18. As he promised in the law, will shortly have mercy upon us, and
@c    will gather us together from every land under heaven into the holy
@c    place.

@c    2:19. For he hath delivered us out of great perils, and hath cleansed
@c    the place.

@c    2:20. Now as concerning Judas Machabeus, and his brethren, and the
@c    purification of the great temple, and the dedication of the altar:

@c    2:21. As also the wars against Antiochus, the Illustrious, and his son,
@c    Eupator:

@c    2:22. And the manifestations that came from heaven to them, that
@c    behaved themselves manfully on the behalf of the Jews, so that, being
@c    but a few they made themselves masters of the whole country, and put to
@c    flight the barbarous multitude:

@c    2:23. And recovered again the most renowned temple in all the world,
@c    and delivered the city, and restored the laws that were abolished, the
@c    Lord with all clemency shewing mercy to them.

@c    2:24. And all such things as have been comprised in five books by
@c    Jason, of Cyrene, we have attempted to abridge in one book.

@c    2:25. For considering the multitude of books, and the difficulty that
@c    they find that desire to undertake the narrations of histories, because
@c    of the multitude of the matter,

@c    2:26. We have taken care for those indeed that are willing to read,
@c    that it might be a pleasure of mind:  and for the studious, that they
@c    may more easily commit to memory:  and that all that read might receive
@c    profit.

@c    2:27. And as to ourselves indeed, in undertaking this work of
@c    abridging, we have taken in hand no easy task; yea, rather a business
@c    full of watching and sweat.

@c    No easy task, etc. . .The spirit of God, that assists the sacred penmen,
@c    does not exempt them from labour in seeking out the matter which they
@c    are to treat of, and the order and manner in which they are to deliver
@c    it.  So St. Luke writ the gospel having diligently attained to all
@c    things.  Luke 1. ver. 3.

@c    2:28. But as they that prepare a feast, and seek to satisfy the will of
@c    others:  for the sake of many, we willingly undergo the labour.

@c    2:29. Leaving to the authors the exact handling of every particular,
@c    and as for ourselves, according to the plan proposed, studying to be
@c    brief.

@c    2:30. For as the master builder of a new house must have care of the
@c    whole building:  but he that taketh care to paint it, must seek out fit
@c    things for the adorning of it:  so must it be judged of us.

@c    2:31. For to collect all that is to be known, to put the discourse in
@c    order, and curiously to discuss every particular point, is the duty of
@c    the author of a history:

@c    2:32. But to pursue brevity of speech, and to avoid nice declarations
@c    of things, is to be granted to him that maketh an abridgment.

@c    2:33. Here then we will begin the narration:  let this be enough by way
@c    of a preface:  for it is a foolish thing to make a long prologue, and to
@c    be short in the story itself.



@c    2 Machabees Chapter 3


@c    Heliodorus is sent by king Seleucus to take away the treasures
@c    deposited in the temple.  He is struck by God, and healed by the prayers
@c    of the high priest.

@c    3:1. Therefore, when the holy city was inhabited with all peace, and
@c    the laws as yet were very well kept, because of the godliness of Onias,
@c    the high priest and the hatred his soul had of evil,

@c    3:2. It came to pass that even the kings themselves and the princes
@c    esteemed the place worthy of the highest honour, and glorified the
@c    temple with very great gifts:

@c    3:3. So that Seleucus, king of Asia, allowed out of his revenues all
@c    the charges belonging to the ministry of the sacrifices.

@c    Seleucus. . .Son of Antiochus the Great, and elder brother of Antiochus
@c    Epiphanes.

@c    3:4. But one Simon, of the tribe of Benjamin, who was appointed
@c    overseer of the temple, strove in opposition to the high priest, to
@c    bring about some unjust thing in the city.

@c    3:5. And when he could not overcome Onias, he went to Apollonius, the
@c    son of Tharseas, who at that time was governor of Celesyria, and
@c    Phenicia:

@c    3:6. And told him, that the treasury in Jerusalem was full of immense
@c    sums of money, and the common store was infinite, which did not belong
@c    to the account of the sacrifices:  and that it was possible to bring all
@c    into the king's hands.

@c    3:7. Now when Apollonius had given the king notice concerning the money
@c    that he was told of, he called for Heliodorus, who had the charge over
@c    his affairs, and sent him with commission to bring him the foresaid
@c    money.

@c    3:8. So Heliodorus forthwith began his journey, under a colour of
@c    visiting the cities of Celesyria and Phenicia, but indeed to fulfil the
@c    king's purpose.

@c    3:9. And when he was come to Jerusalem, and had been courteously
@c    received in the city by the high priest, he told him what information
@c    had been given concerning the money:  and declared the cause for which
@c    he was come:  and asked if these things were so indeed.

@c    3:10. Then the high priest told him that these were sums deposited, and
@c    provisions for the subsistence of the widows and the fatherless:

@c    3:11. And that some part of that which wicked Simon had given
@c    intelligence of belonged to Hircanus, son of Tobias, a man of great
@c    dignity; and that the whole was four hundred talents of silver, and two
@c    hundred of gold.

@c    3:12. But that to deceive them who had trusted to the place and temple
@c    which is honoured throughout the whole world, for the reverence and
@c    holiness of it, was a thing which could not by any means be done.

@c    3:13. But he, by reason of the orders he had received from the king,
@c    said, that by all means the money must be carried to the king.

@c    3:14. So on the day he had appointed, Heliodorus entered in to order
@c    this matter.  But there was no small terror throughout the whole city.

@c    3:15. And the priests prostrated themselves before the altar in their
@c    priests' vestments, and called upon him from heaven, who made the law
@c    concerning things given to be kept, that he would preserve them safe,
@c    for them that had deposited them.

@c    3:16. Now whosoever saw the countenance of the high priest, was wounded
@c    in heart:  for his face, and the changing of his colour, declared the
@c    inward sorrow of his mind.

@c    3:17. For the man was so compassed with sadness and horror of the body,
@c    that it was manifest to them that beheld him, what sorrow he had in his
@c    heart.

@c    3:18. Others also came flocking together out of their houses, praying
@c    and making public supplication, because the place was like to come into
@c    contempt.

@c    3:19. And the women, girded with haircloth about their breasts, came
@c    together in the streets.  And the virgins also that were shut up, came
@c    forth, some to Onias, and some to the walls, and others looked out of
@c    the windows.

@c    3:20. And all holding up their hands towards heaven made supplication.

@c    3:21. For the expectation of the mixed multitude, and of the high
@c    priest, who was in an agony, would have moved any one to pity.

@c    3:22. And these indeed called upon almighty God, to preserve the things
@c    that had been committed to them safe and sure for those that had
@c    committed them.

@c    3:23. But Heliodorus executed that which he had resolved on, himself
@c    being present in the same place with his guard about the treasury.

@c    3:24. But the spirit of the Almighty God gave a great evidence of his
@c    presence, so that all that had presumed to obey him, falling down by
@c    the power of God, were struck with fainting and dread.

@c    3:25. For there appeared to them a horse, with a terrible rider upon
@c    him, adorned with a very rich covering:  and he ran fiercely and struck
@c    Heliodorus with his fore feet, and he that sat upon him seemed to have
@c    armour of gold.

@c    3:26. Moreover there appeared two other young men, beautiful and
@c    strong, bright and glorious, and in comely apparel:  who stood by him,
@c    on either side, and scourged him without ceasing with many stripes.

@c    3:27. And Heliodorus suddenly fell to the ground, and they took him up,
@c    covered with great darkness, and having put him into a litter, they
@c    carried him out.

@c    3:28. So he that came with many servants, and all his guard, into the
@c    aforesaid treasury, was carried out, no one being able to help him, the
@c    manifest power of God being known.

@c    3:29. And he indeed, by the power of God, lay speechless, and without
@c    all hope of recovery.

@c    3:30. But they praised the Lord, because he had glorified his place:
@c    and the temple, that a little before was full of fear and trouble, when
@c    the Almighty Lord appeared, was filled with joy and gladness.

@c    3:31. Then some of the friends of Heliodorus forthwith begged of Onias,
@c    that he would call upon the Most High to grant him his life, who was
@c    ready to give up the ghost.

@c    3:32. So the high priest, considering that the king might perhaps
@c    suspect that some mischief had been done to Heliodorus by the Jews,
@c    offered a sacrifice of health for the recovery of the man.

@c    3:33. And when the high priest was praying, the same young men in the
@c    same clothing stood by Heliodorus, and said to him:  Give thanks to
@c    Onias the priest:  because for his sake the Lord hath granted thee life.

@c    3:34. And thou having been scourged by God, declare unto all men the
@c    great works and the power of God.  And having spoken thus, they appeared
@c    no more.

@c    3:35. So Heliodorus, after he had offered a sacrifice to God, and made
@c    great vows to him, that had granted him life, and given thanks to
@c    Onias, taking his troops with him, returned to the king.

@c    3:36. And he testified to all men the works of the great God, which he
@c    had seen with his own eyes.

@c    3:37. And when the king asked Heliodorus, who might be a fit man to be
@c    sent yet once more to Jerusalem, he said:

@c    3:38. If thou hast any enemy, or traitor to thy king dom, send him
@c    thither, and thou shalt receive him again scourged, if so be he escape:
@c    for there is undoubtedly in that place a certain power of God.

@c    3:39. For he that hath his dwelling in the heavens, is the visitor and
@c    protector of that place, and he striketh and destroyeth them that come
@c    to do evil to it.

@c    3:40. And the things concerning Heliodorus, and the keeping of the
@c    treasury, fell out in this manner.



@c    2 Machabees Chapter 4


@c    Onias has recourse to the king.  The ambition and wickedness of Jason
@c    and Menelaus.  Onias is treacherously murdered.

@c    4:1. But Simon, of whom we spoke before, who was the betrayer of the
@c    money, and of his country, spoke ill of Onias, as though he had incited
@c    Heliodorus to do these things, and had been the promoter of evils:

@c    4:2. And he presumed to call him a traitor to the kingdom, who provided
@c    for the city, and defended his nation, and was zealous for the law of
@c    God.

@c    4:3. But when the enmities proceeded so far, that murders also were
@c    committed by some of Simon's friends:

@c    4:4. Onias, considering the danger of this contention, and that
@c    Apollonius, who was the governor of Celesyia, and Phenicia, was
@c    outrageous, which increased the malice of Simon, went to the king,

@c    4:5. Not to be an accuser of his countrymen, but with view to the
@c    common good of all the people.

@c    4:6. For he saw that, except the king took care, it was impossible that
@c    matters should be settled in peace, or that Simon would cease from his
@c    folly.

@c    4:7. But after the death of Seleucus, when Antiochus, who was called
@c    the Illustrious, had taken possession of the kingdom, Jason, the
@c    brother of Onias, ambitiously sought the high priesthood:

@c    4:8. And went to the king, promising him three hundred and sixty
@c    talents of silver, and out of other revenues fourscore talents.

@c    4:9. Besides this he promised also a hundred and fifty more, if he
@c    might have license to set him up a place for exercise, and a place for
@c    youth, and to entitle them that were at Jerusalem, Antiochians.

@c    4:10. Which when the king had granted, and he had gotten the rule into
@c    his hands, forthwith he began to bring over his countrymen to the
@c    fashion of the heathens.

@c    4:11. And abolishing those things, which had been decreed of special
@c    favour by the kings in behalf of the Jews, by the means of John, the
@c    father of that Eupolemus, who went ambassador to Rome to make amity and
@c    alliance, he disannulled the lawful ordinances of the citizens, and
@c    brought in fashions that were perverse.

@c    4:12. For he had the boldness to set up, under the very castle, a place
@c    of exercise, and to put all the choicest youths in brothel houses.

@c    4:13. Now this was not the beginning, but an increase, and progress of
@c    heathenish and foreign manners, through the abominable and unheard of
@c    wickedness of Jason, that impious wretch, and no priest.

@c    4:14. Insomuch that the priests were not now occupied about the offices
@c    of the altar, but despising the temple and neglecting the sacrifices,
@c    hastened to be partakers of the games, and of the unlawful allowance
@c    thereof, and of the exercise of the discus.

@c    4:15. And setting nought by the honours of their fathers, they esteemed
@c    the Grecian glories for the best:

@c    4:16. For the sake of which they incurred a dangerous contention, and
@c    followed earnestly their ordinances, and in all things they coveted to
@c    be like them, who were their enemies and murderers.

@c    4:17. For acting wickedly against the laws of God doth not pass
@c    unpunished:  but this the time following will declare.

@c    4:18. Now when the game that was used every fifth year was kept at
@c    Tyre, the king being present,

@c    4:19. The wicked Jason sent from Jerusalem sinful men, to carry three
@c    hundred didrachmas of silver for the sacrifice of Hercules; but the
@c    bearers thereof desired it might not be bestowed on the sacrifices,
@c    because it was not necessary, but might be deputed for other charges.

@c    4:20. So the money was appointed by him that sent it to the sacrifice
@c    of Hercules:  but because of them that carried it was employed for the
@c    making of galleys.

@c    4:21. Now when Apollonius, the son of Mnestheus was sent into Egypt to
@c    treat with the nobles of king Philometor, and Antiochus understood that
@c    he was wholly excluded from the affairs of the kingdom, consulting his
@c    own interest, he departed thence and came to Joppe, and from thence to
@c    Jerusalem.

@c    4:22. Where he was received in a magnificent manner by Jason, and the
@c    city, and came in with torch lights, and with praises, and from thence
@c    he returned with his army into Phenicia.

@c    4:23. Three years afterwards Jason sent Menelaus, brother of the
@c    aforesaid Simon, to carry money to the king, and to bring answers from
@c    him concerning certain necessary affairs.

@c    4:24. But he being recommended to the king, when he had magnified the
@c    appearance of his power, got the high priesthood for himself, by
@c    offering more than Jason by three hundred talents of silver.

@c    4:25. So having received the king's mandate, he returned, bringing
@c    nothing worthy of the high priesthood:  but having the mind of a cruel
@c    tyrant, and the rage of a savage beast.

@c    4:26. Then Jason, who had undermined his own brother, being himself
@c    undermined, was driven out a fugitive into the country of the
@c    Ammonites.

@c    4:27. So Menelaus got the principality:  but as for the money he had
@c    promised to the king, he took no care, when Sostratus, the governor of
@c    the castle, called for it.

@c    4:28. For to him appertained the gathering of the taxes:  wherefore they
@c    were both called before the king.

@c    4:29. And Menelaus was removed from the priesthood, Lysimachus, his
@c    brother, succeeding:  and Sostratus alas made governor of the Cyprians.

@c    4:30. When these things were in doing, it fell out that they of
@c    Tharsus, and Mallos, raised a sedition, because they were given for a
@c    gift to Antiochus, the king's concubine.

@c    4:31. The king, therefore, went in all haste to appease them, leaving
@c    Andronicus, one of his nobles, for his deputy.

@c    4:32. Then Menelaus supposing that he had found a convenient time,
@c    having stolen certain vessels of gold out of the temple, gave them to
@c    Andronicus, and others he had sold at Tyre, and in the neighbouring
@c    cities:

@c    4:33. Which when Onias understood most certainly, he reproved him,
@c    keeping himself in a safe place at Antioch, beside Daphne.

@c    4:34. Whereupon Menelaus coming to Andronicus, desired him to kill
@c    Onias.  And he went to Onias, and gave him his right hand with an oath,
@c    and (though he were suspected by him) persuaded him to come forth out
@c    of the sanctuary, and immediately slew him, without any regard to
@c    justice.

@c    4:35. For which cause not only the Jews, but also the other nations,
@c    conceived indignation, and were much grieved for the unjust murder of
@c    so great a man.

@c    4:36. And when the king was come back from the places of Cilicia, the
@c    Jews that were at Antioch, and also the Greeks, went to him:
@c    complaining of the unjust murder of Onias.

@c    4:37. Antiochus, therefore, was grieved in his mind for Onias, and
@c    being moved to pity, shed tears, remembering the sobriety and modesty
@c    of the deceased.

@c    4:38. And being inflamed to anger, he commanded Andronicus to be
@c    stripped of his purple, and to be led about through all the city:  and
@c    that in the same place wherein he had committed the impiety against
@c    Onias, the sacrilegious wretch should be put to death, the Lord
@c    repaying him his deserved punishment.

@c    4:39. Now when many sacrileges had been committed by Lysimachus in the
@c    temple, by the counsel of Menelaus, and the rumour of it was spread
@c    abroad, the multitude gathered themselves together against Lysimachus,
@c    a great quantity of gold being already carried away.

@c    4:40. Wherefore the multitude making an insurrection, and their minds
@c    being filled with anger, Lysimachus armed about three thousand men, and
@c    began to use violence, one Tyrannus being captain, a man far gone both
@c    in age and in madness.

@c    4:41. But when they perceived the attempt of Lysimachus, some caught up
@c    stones, some strong clubs, and some threw ashes upon Lysimachus.

@c    4:42. And many of them were wounded, and some struck down to the
@c    ground, but all were put to flight:  and as for the sacrilegious fellow
@c    himself, they slew him beside the treasury.

@c    4:43. Now concerning these matters, an accusation was laid against
@c    Menelaus.

@c    4:44. And when the king was come to Tyre, three men were sent from the
@c    ancients to plead the cause before him.

@c    4:45. But Menelaus being convicted, promised Ptolemee to give him much
@c    money to persuade the king to favour him.

@c    Ptolemee. . .The son of Dorymenus, a favourite of the king.

@c    4:46. So Ptolemee went to the king in a certain court where he was, as
@c    it were to cool himself, and brought him to be of another mind:

@c    4:47. So Menelaus, who was guilty of all the evil, was acquitted by him
@c    of the accusations:  and those poor men, who, if they had pleaded their
@c    cause even before Scythians, should have been judged innocent, were
@c    condemned to death.

@c    4:48. Thus they that persecuted the cause for the city, and for the
@c    people, and the sacred vessels, did soon suffer unjust punishment.

@c    4:49. Wherefore even the Tyrians, being moved with indignation, were
@c    very liberal towards their burial.

@c    4:50. And so through the covetousness of them that were in power,
@c    Menelaus continued in authority, increasing in malice to the betraying
@c    of the citizens.



@c    2 Machabees Chapter 5


@c    Wonderful signs are seen in the air.  Jason's wickedness and end.
@c    Antiochus takes Jerusalem, and plunders the temple.

@c    5:1. At the same time Antiochus prepared for a second journey into
@c    Egypt.

@c    5:2. And it came to pass, that through the whole city of Jerusalem, for
@c    the space of forty days, there were seen horsemen running in the air,
@c    in gilded raiment, and armed with spears, like bands of soldiers.

@c    5:3. And horses set in order by ranks, running one against another,
@c    with the shakings of shields, and a multitude of men in helmets, with
@c    drawn swords, and casting of darts, and glittering of golden armour,
@c    and of harnesses of all sorts.

@c    5:4. Wherefore all men prayed that these prodigies might turn to good.

@c    5:5. Now when there was gone forth a false rumour as though Antiochus
@c    had been dead, Jason taking with him no fewer than a thousand men,
@c    suddenly assaulted the city:  and though the citizens ran together to
@c    the wall, the city at length was taken, and Menelaus fled into the
@c    castle.

@c    5:6. But Jason slew his countrymen without mercy, not considering that
@c    prosperity against one's own kindred is a very great evil, thinking
@c    they had been enemies, and not citizens, whom he conquered.

@c    5:7. Yet he did not get the principality, but received confusion at the
@c    end, for the reward of his treachery, and fled again into the country
@c    of the Ammonites.

@c    5:8. At the last, having been shut up by Aretas, the king of the
@c    Arabians, in order for his destruction, flying from city to city, hated
@c    by all men, as a forsaker of the laws and execrable, as an enemy of his
@c    country and countrymen, he was thrust out into Egypt:

@c    5:9. And he that had driven many out of their country perished in a
@c    strange land, going to Lacedemon, as if for kindred sake he should have
@c    refuge there:

@c    5:10. But he that had cast out many unburied, was himself cast forth
@c    both unlamented and unburied, neither having foreign burial, nor being
@c    partaker of the sepulchre of his fathers.

@c    5:11. Now when these things were done, the king suspected that the Jews
@c    would forsake the alliance:  whereupon departing out of Egypt with a
@c    furious mind, he took the city by force of arms,

@c    5:12. And commanded the soldiers to kill, and not to spare any that
@c    came in their way, and to go up into the houses to slay.

@c    5:13. Thus there was a slaughter of young and old, destruction of women
@c    and children, and killing of virgins and infants.

@c    5:14. And there were slain in the space of three whole days fourscore
@c    thousand, forty thousand were made prisoners, and as many sold.

@c    5:15. But this was not enough, he presumed also to enter into the
@c    temple, the most holy in all the world Menelaus, that traitor to the
@c    laws, and to his country, being his guide.

@c    5:16. And taking in his wicked hands the holy vessels, which were given
@c    by other kings and cities, for the ornament and the glory of the place,
@c    he unworthily handled and profaned them.

@c    5:17. Thus Antiochus going astray in mind, did not consider that God
@c    was angry for a while, because of the sins of the inhabitants of the
@c    city:  and therefore this contempt had happened to the place:

@c    5:18. Otherwise had they not been involved in many sins, as Heliodorus,
@c    who was sent by king Seleucus to rob the treasury, so this man also, as
@c    soon as he had come, had been forthwith scourged, and put back from his
@c    presumption.

@c    5:19. But God did not choose the people for the place's sake, but the
@c    place for the people's sake.

@c    5:20. And, therefore, the place also itself was made partaker of the
@c    evils of the people:  but afterwards shall communicate in the good
@c    things thereof, and as it was forsaken in the wrath of Almighty God,
@c    shall be exalted again with great glory, when the great Lord shall be
@c    reconciled.

@c    5:21. So when Antiochus had taken away out of the temple a thousand and
@c    eight hundred talents, he went back in all haste to Antioch, thinking
@c    through pride that he might now make the land navigable, and the sea
@c    passable on foot:  such was the haughtiness of his mind.

@c    5:22. He left also governors to afflict the people:  at Jerusalem,
@c    Philip, a Phrygian by birth, but in manners more barbarous than he that
@c    set him there:

@c    5:23. And in Gazarim, Andronicus and Menelaus, who bore a more heavy
@c    hand upon the citizens than the rest.

@c    5:24. And whereas he was set against the Jews, he sent that hateful
@c    prince, Apollonius, with an army of two and twenty thousand men,
@c    commanding him to kill all that were of perfect age, and to sell the
@c    women and the younger sort.

@c    5:25. Who, when he was come to Jerusalem, pretending peace, rested till
@c    the holy day of the sabbath:  and then the Jews keeping holiday, he
@c    commanded his men to take arms.

@c    5:26. And he slew all that were come forth to flee:  and running through
@c    the city with armed men, he destroyed a very great multitude.

@c    5:27. But Judas Machabeus, who was the tenth, had withdrawn himself
@c    into a desert place, and there lived amongst wild beasts in the
@c    mountains with his company:  and they continued feeding on herbs, that
@c    they might not be partakers of the pollution.

@c    Was the tenth. . .That is, he had nine others in his company.



@c    2 Machabees Chapter 6


@c    Antiochus commands the law to be abolished, sets up an idol in the
@c    temple, and persecutes the faithful.  The martyrdom of Eleazar.

@c    6:1. But not long after the king sent a certain old man of Antioch, to
@c    compel the Jews to depart from the laws of their fathers and of God:

@c    6:2. And to defile the temple that was in Jerusalem, and to call it the
@c    temple of Jupiter Olympius:  and that in Garazim of Jupiter Hospitalis,
@c    according as they were that inhabited the place.

@c    That in Gazarim. . .Viz., the temple of the Samaritans.  And as they were
@c    originally strangers, the name of Hospitalis (which signifies of or
@c    belonging to strangers) was applicable to the idol set up in their
@c    temple.

@c    6:3. And very bad was this invasion of evils, and grievous to all.

@c    6:4. For the temple was full of the riot and revellings of the
@c    Gentiles:  and of men lying with lewd women.  And women thrust themselves
@c    of their accord into the holy places, and brought in things that were
@c    not lawful.

@c    6:5. The altar also was filled with unlawful things, which were
@c    forbidden by the laws.

@c    6:6. And neither were the sabbaths kept, nor the solemn days of the
@c    fathers observed, neither did any man plainly profess himself to be a
@c    Jew.

@c    6:7. But they were led by bitter constraint on the king's birthday to
@c    the sacrifices:  and when the feast of Bacchus was kept, they were
@c    compelled to go about crowned with ivy in honour of Bacchus.

@c    6:8. And there went out a decree into the neighbouring cities of the
@c    Gentiles, by the suggestion of the Ptolemeans, that they also should
@c    act in like manner against the Jews, to oblige them to sacrifice:

@c    6:9. And whosoever would not conform themselves to the ways of the
@c    Gentiles, should be put to death:  then was misery to be seen.

@c    6:10. For two women were accused to have circumcised their children:
@c    whom, when they had openly led about through the city, with the infants
@c    hanging at their breasts, they threw down headlong from the walls.

@c    6:11. And others that had met together in caves that were near, and
@c    were keeping the sabbath day privately, being discovered by Philip,
@c    were burnt with fire, because they made a conscience to help themselves
@c    with their hands, by reason of the religious observance of the day.

@c    Philip. . .The governor of Jerusalem.

@c    6:12. Now I beseech those that shall read this book, that they be not
@c    shocked at these calamities, but that they consider the things that
@c    happened, not as being for the destruction, but for the correction of
@c    our nation.

@c    6:13. For it is a token of great goodness, when sinners are not
@c    suffered to go on in their ways for a long time, but are presently
@c    punished.

@c    6:14. For, not as with other nations, (whom the Lord patiently
@c    expecteth, that when the day of judgment shall come, he may punish them
@c    in the fulness of their sins:)

@c    6:15. Doth he also deal with us, so as to suffer our sins to come to
@c    their height, and then take vengeance on us.

@c    6:16. And therefore he never withdraweth his mercy from us:  but though
@c    he chastise his people with adversity he forsaketh them not.

@c    6:17. But let this suffice in a few words for a warning to the readers.
@c    And now we must come to the narration.

@c    6:18. Eleazar one of the chief of the scribes, a man advanced in years,
@c    and of a comely countenance, was pressed to open his mouth to eat
@c    swine's flesh.

@c    6:19. But he, choosing rather a most glorious death than a hateful
@c    life, went forward voluntarily to the torment.

@c    6:20. And considering in what manner he was to come to it, patiently
@c    bearing, he determined not to do any unlawful things for the love of
@c    life.

@c    6:21. But they that stood by, being moved with wicked pity, for the old
@c    friendship they had with the man, taking him aside, desired that flesh
@c    might be brought which it was lawful for him to eat, that he might make
@c    as if he had eaten, as the king had commanded, of the flesh of the
@c    sacrifice:

@c    Wicked pity. . .Their pity was wicked, inasmuch as it suggested that
@c    wicked proposal of saving his life by dissimulation.

@c    6:22. That by so doing he might be delivered from death; and for the
@c    sake of their old friendship with the man, they did him this courtesy.

@c    6:23. But he began to consider the dignity of his age, and his ancient
@c    years, and the inbred honour of his grey head, and his good life and
@c    conversation from a child; and he answered without delay, according to
@c    the ordinances of the holy law made by God, saying, that he would
@c    rather be sent into the other world.

@c    6:24. For it doth not become our age, said he, to dissemble:  whereby
@c    many young persons might think that Eleazar, at the age of fourscore
@c    and ten years, was gone over to the life of the heathens:

@c    6:25. And so they, through my dissimulation, and for a little time of a
@c    corruptible life, should be deceived, and hereby I should bring a stain
@c    and a curse upon my old age.

@c    6:26. For though, for the present time, I should be delivered from the
@c    punishments of men, yet should I not escape the hand of the Almighty
@c    neither alive nor dead.

@c    6:27. Wherefore, by departing manfully out of this life, I shall shew
@c    myself worthy of my old age:

@c    6:28. And I shall leave an example of fortitude to young men, if with a
@c    ready mind and constancy I suffer an honourable death, for the most
@c    venerable and most holy laws.  And having spoken thus, he was forthwith
@c    carried to execution.

@c    6:29. And they that led him, and had been a little before more mild,
@c    were changed to wrath for the words he had spoken, which they thought
@c    were uttered out of arrogancy.

@c    6:30. But when be was now ready to die with the stripes, he groaned:
@c    and said:  O Lord, who hast the holy knowledge, thou knowest manifestly
@c    that whereas I might be delivered from death, I suffer grievous pains
@c    in body:  but in soul am well content to suffer these things, because I
@c    fear thee.

@c    6:31. Thus did this man die, leaving not only to young men, but also to
@c    the whole nation, the memory of his death, for an example of virtue and
@c    fortitude.



@c    2 Machabees Chapter 7


@c    The glorious martyrdom of the seven brethren and their mother.

@c    7:1. It came to pass also, that seven brethren, together with their
@c    mother, were apprehended, and compelled by the king to eat swine's
@c    flesh against the law, for which end they were tormented with whips and
@c    scourges.

@c    7:2. But one of them, who was the eldest, said thus:  What wouldst thou
@c    ask, or learn of us?  we are ready to die, rather than to transgress the
@c    laws of God, received from our fathers.

@c    7:3. Then the king being angry, commanded fryingpans and brazen
@c    caldrons to be made hot:  which forthwith being heated,

@c    7:4. He commanded to cut out the tongue of him that had spoken first:
@c    and the skin of his head being drawn off, to chop off also the
@c    extremities of his hands and feet, the rest of his brethren and his
@c    mother looking on.

@c    7:6. And when he was now maimed in all parts, he commanded him, being
@c    yet alive, to be brought to the fire, and to be fried in the fryingpan:
@c    and while he was suffering therein long torments, the rest, together
@c    with the mother, exhorted one another to die manfully,

@c    7:6. Saying:  The Lord God will look upon the truth, and will take
@c    pleasure in us, as Moses declared in the profession of the canticle;
@c    And in his servants he will take pleasure.

@c    7:7. So when the first was dead after this manner, they brought the
@c    next to make him a mocking stock:  and when they had pulled off the skin
@c    of his head with the hair, they asked him if he would eat, before he
@c    were punished throughout the whole body in every limb.

@c    7:8. But he answered in his own language, and said:  I will not do it.
@c    Wherefore he also, in the next place, received the torments of the first:

@c    7:9. And when he was at the last gasp, he said thus:  Thou indeed, O
@c    most wicked man, destroyest us out of this present life:  but the King
@c    of the world will raise us up, who die for his laws, in the
@c    resurrection of eternal life.

@c    7:10. After him the third was made a mocking-stock, and when he was
@c    required, he quickly put forth his tongue, and courageously stretched
@c    out his hands:

@c    7:11. And said with confidence:  These I have from heaven, but for the
@c    laws of God I now despise them, because I hope to receive them again
@c    from him.

@c    7:12. So that the king, and they that were with him, wondered at the
@c    young man's courage, because he esteemed the torments as nothing.

@c    7:13. And after he was thus dead, they tormented the fourth in the like
@c    manner.

@c    7:14. And when he was now ready to die, he spoke thus:  It is better,
@c    being put to death by men, to look for hope from God, to be raised up
@c    again by him; for, as to thee, thou shalt have no resurrection unto
@c    life.

@c    7:15. And when they had brought the fifth, they tormented him.  But he,
@c    looking upon the king,

@c    7:16. Said:  Whereas thou hast power among men though thou art
@c    corruptible, thou dost what thou wilt but think not that our nation is
@c    forsaken by God.

@c    7:17. But stay patiently a while, and thou shalt see his great power,
@c    in what manner he will torment thee and thy seed.

@c    7:18. After him they brought the sixth, and he being ready to die,
@c    spoke thus:  Be not deceived without cause:  for we suffer these things
@c    for ourselves, having sinned against our God, and things worthy of
@c    admiration are done to us:

@c    7:19. But do not think that thou shalt escape unpunished, for that thou
@c    hast attempted to fight against God.

@c    7:20. Now the mother was to be admired above measure, and worthy to be
@c    remembered by good men, who beheld her seven sons slain in the space of
@c    one day, and bore it with a good courage, for the hope that she had in
@c    God:

@c    7:21. And she bravely exhorted every one of them in her own language,
@c    being filled with wisdom; and joining a man's heart to a woman's
@c    thought,

@c    7:22. She said to them:  I know not how you were formed in my womb; for
@c    I neither gave you breath, nor soul, nor life, neither did I frame the
@c    limbs of every one of you.

@c    7:23. But the Creator of the world, that formed the nativity of man,
@c    and that found out the origin of all, he will restore to you again, in
@c    his mercy, both breath and life, as now you despise yourselves for the
@c    sake of his laws.

@c    7:24. Now Antiochus, thinking himself despised, and withal despising
@c    the voice of the upbraider, when the youngest was yet alive, did not
@c    only exhort him by words, but also assured him with an oath, that he
@c    would make him a rich and a happy man, and, if he would turn from the
@c    laws of his fathers, would take him for a friend, and furnish him with
@c    things necessary.

@c    7:25. But when the young man was not moved with these things, the king
@c    called the mother, and counselled her to deal with the young man to
@c    save his life.

@c    7:26. And when he had exhorted her with many words she promised that
@c    she would counsel her son.

@c    7:27. So bending herself towards him, mocking the cruel tyrant, she
@c    said in her own language:  My son have pity upon me, that bore thee nine
@c    months in my womb, and gave thee suck three years, and nourished thee,
@c    and brought thee up unto this age.

@c    7:28. I beseech thee, my son, look upon heaven and earth, and all that
@c    is in them, and consider that God made them out of nothing, and mankind
@c    also:

@c    7:29. So thou shalt not fear this tormentor, but being made a worthy
@c    partner with thy brethren, receive death, that in that mercy I may
@c    receive thee again with thy brethren.

@c    7:30. While she was yet speaking these words, the young man said:  For
@c    whom do you stay?  I will not obey the commandment of the king, but the
@c    commandment of the law which was given us by Moses.

@c    7:31. But thou that hast been the author of all mischief against the
@c    Hebrews, shalt not escape the hand of God.

@c    7:32. For we suffer thus for our sins.

@c    7:33. And though the Lord, our God, is angry with us a little while,
@c    for our chastisement and correction, yet he will be reconciled again to
@c    his servants.

@c    7:34. But thou, O wicked, and of all men most flagitious, be not lifted
@c    up without cause with vain hopes, whilst thou art raging against his
@c    servants.

@c    7:35. For thou hast not yet escaped the judgment of the Almighty God,
@c    who beholdeth all things.

@c    7:36. For my brethren having now undergone a short pain, are under the
@c    covenant of eternal life:  but thou, by the judgment of God, shalt
@c    receive just punishment for thy pride.

@c    7:37. But I, like my brethren, offer up my life and my body for the
@c    laws of our fathers:  calling upon God to be speedily merciful to our
@c    nation, and that thou by torments and stripes mayst confess that he
@c    alone is God.

@c    7:38. But in me, and in my brethren, the wrath of the Almighty, which
@c    hath justly been brought upon all our nation, shall cease.

@c    7:39. Then the king being incensed with anger, raged against him more
@c    cruelly than all the rest, taking it grievously that he was mocked.

@c    7:40. So this man also died undefiled, wholly trusting in the Lord.

@c    7:41. And last of all, after the sons, the mother also was consumed.

@c    7:42. But now there is enough said of the sacrifices and of the
@c    excessive cruelties.



@c    2 Machabees Chapter 8


@c    Judas Machabeus gathering an army gains divers victories.

@c    8:1. But Judas Machabeus, and they that were with him, went privately
@c    into the towns:  and calling together their kinsmen and friends, and
@c    taking unto them such as continued in the Jews' religion, they
@c    assembled six thousand men.

@c    8:2. And they called upon the Lord, that he would look upon his people
@c    that was trodden down by all and would have pity on the temple, that
@c    was defiled by the wicked:

@c    8:3. That he would have pity also upon the city that was destroyed,
@c    that was ready to be made even with the ground, and would hear the
@c    voice of the blood that cried to him:

@c    8:4. That he would remember also the most unjust deaths of innocent
@c    children, and the blasphemies offered to his name, and would shew his
@c    indignation on this occasion.

@c    8:5. Now when Machabeus had gathered a multitude, he could not be
@c    withstood by the heathens:  for the wrath of the Lord was turned into
@c    mercy.

@c    8:6. So coming unawares upon the towns and cities, he set them on fire,
@c    and taking possession of the most commodious places, he made no small
@c    slaughter of the enemies:

@c    8:7. And especially in the nights he went upon these expeditions, and
@c    the fame of his valour was spread abroad every where.

@c    8:8. Then Philip seeing that the man gained ground by little and
@c    little, and that things for the most part succeeded prosperously with
@c    him, wrote to Ptolemee, the governor of Celesyria and Phenicia, to send
@c    aid to the king's affairs.

@c    Philip seeing, etc. . .The governor of Jerusalem found himself unable to
@c    contend with Judas, especially after the victories he had obtained over
@c    Apollonius and Seron.  1 Mac. 3.

@c    8:9. And he with all speed sent Nicanor, the son of Patroclus, one of
@c    his special friends, giving him no fewer than twenty thousand armed men
@c    of different nations, to root out the whole race of the Jews, joining
@c    also with him Gorgias, a good soldier, and of great experience in
@c    matters of war.

@c    Twenty thousand. . .The whole number of the forces sent at that time
@c    into Judea, was 40,000 footmen, and 7000 horsemen, 1 Mac. 3.30.  But
@c    only 20,000 are here taken notice of, because there were no more with
@c    Nicanor at the time of the battle.

@c    8:10. And Nicanor purposed to raise for the king the tribute of two
@c    thousand talents, that was to be given to the Romans, by making so much
@c    money of the captive Jews:

@c    8:11. Wherefore he sent immediately to the cities upon the sea coast,
@c    to invite men together to buy up the Jewish slaves, promising that they
@c    should have ninety slaves for one talent, not reflecting on the
@c    vengeance which was to follow him from the Almighty.

@c    8:12. Now when Judas found that Nicanor was coming, he imparted to the
@c    Jews that were with him, that the enemy was at hand.

@c    8:13. And some of them being afraid, and distrusting the justice of
@c    God, fled away.

@c    8:14. Others sold all that they had left, and withal besought the Lord,
@c    that he would deliver them from the wicked Nicanor, who had sold them
@c    before he came near them:

@c    8:15. And if not for their sakes, yet for the covenant that he had made
@c    with their fathers, and for the sake of his holy and glorious name that
@c    was invoked upon them.

@c    8:16. But Machabeus calling together seven thousand that were with him,
@c    exhorted them not to be reconciled to the enemies, nor to fear the
@c    multitude of the enemies who came wrongfully against them, but to fight
@c    manfully:

@c    Seven thousand. . .In the Greek it is six thousand.  But then three
@c    thousand of them had no arms.  1 Mac. 4.6.

@c    8:17. Setting before their eyes the injury they had unjustly done the
@c    holy place, and also the injury they had done to the city, which had
@c    been shamefully abused, besides their destroying the ordinances of the
@c    fathers.

@c    8:18. For, said he, they trust in their weapons, and in their boldness:
@c    but we trust in the Almighty Lord, who at a beck can utterly destroy
@c    both them that come against us, and the whole world.

@c    8:19. Moreover, he put them in mind also of the helps their fathers had
@c    received from God:  and how, under Sennacherib, a hundred and
@c    eighty-five thousand had been destroyed.

@c    8:20. And of the battle that they had fought against the Galatians, in
@c    Babylonia; how they, being in all but six thousand, when it came to the
@c    point, and the Macedonians, their companions, were at a stand, slew a
@c    hundred and twenty thousand, because of the help they had from heaven,
@c    and for this they received many favours.

@c    Galatians. . .That is, the Gauls, who having ravaged Italy and Greece,
@c    poured themselves in upon Asia, in immense multitudes, where also they
@c    founded the kingdom of Galatia or Gallo Graecia.

@c    8:21. With these words they were greatly encouraged and disposed even
@c    to die for the laws and their country.

@c    8:22. So he appointed his brethren captains over each division of his
@c    army; Simon, and Joseph, and Jonathan, giving to each one fifteen
@c    hundred men.

@c    8:23. And after the holy book had been read to them by Esdras, and he
@c    had given them for a watchword, The help of God:  himself leading the
@c    first band, he joined battle with Nicanor:

@c    8:24. And the Almighty being their helper, they slew above nine
@c    thousand men:  and having wounded and disabled the greater part of
@c    Nicanor's army, they obliged them to fly.

@c    Above nine thousand. . .Viz., including the three thousand slain in the
@c    pursuit.

@c    8:25. And they took the money of them that came to buy them, and they
@c    pursued them on every side.

@c    8:26. But they came back for want of time:  for it was the day before
@c    the sabbath:  and therefore they did not continue the pursuit.

@c    8:27. But when they had gathered together their arms and their spoils,
@c    they kept the sabbath:  blessing the Lord who had delivered them that
@c    day, distilling the beginning of mercy upon them.

@c    8:28. Then after the sabbath they divided the spoils to the feeble and
@c    the orphans, and the widows, and the rest they took for themselves and
@c    their servants.

@c    8:29. When this was done, and they had all made a common supplication,
@c    they besought the merciful Lord, to be reconciled to his servants unto
@c    the end.

@c    8:30. Moreover, they slew above twenty thousand of them that were with
@c    Timotheus and Bacchides, who fought against them, and they made
@c    themselves masters of the high strong holds:  and they divided amongst
@c    them many spoils, giving equal portions to the feeble, the fatherless,
@c    and the widows; yea, and the aged also

@c    8:31. And when they had carefully gathered together their arms, they
@c    laid them all up in convenient places, and the residue of their spoils
@c    they carried to Jerusalem:

@c    8:32. They slew also Philarches, who was with Timotheus, a wicked man,
@c    who had many ways afflicted the Jews.

@c    8:33. And when they kept the feast of the victory at Jerusalem, they
@c    burnt Callisthenes, that had set fire to the holy gates, who had taken
@c    refuge in a certain house, rendering to him a worthy reward for his
@c    impieties:

@c    8:34. But as for that most wicked man, Nicanor, who had brought a
@c    thousand merchants to the sale of the Jews,

@c    8:35. Being, through the help of the Lord, brought down by them, of
@c    whom he had made no account, laying aside his garment of glory, fleeing
@c    through the midland country, he came alone to Antioch, being rendered
@c    very unhappy by the destruction of his army.

@c    Laying aside his garment of glory. . .That is, his splendid apparel,
@c    which he wore through ostentation; he now throws it off, lest he should
@c    be known on his flight.

@c    8:36. And he that had promised to levy the tribute for the Romans, by
@c    the means of the captives of Jerusalem, now professed that the Jews had
@c    God for their protector, and therefore they could not be hurt, because
@c    they followed the laws appointed by him.



@c    2 Machabees Chapter 9


@c    The wretched end, and fruitless repentance of king Antiochus.

@c    9:1. At that time Antiochus returned with dishonour out of Persia.

@c    9:2. For he had entered into the city called Persepolis, and attempted
@c    to rob the temple, and to oppress the city, but the multitude running
@c    together to arms, put them to flight:  and so it fell out that Antiochus
@c    being put to flight, returned with disgrace.

@c    Persepolis. . .Otherwise called Elymais.

@c    9:3. Now when he was come about Ecbatana, he received the news of what
@c    had happened to Nicanor and Timotheus.

@c    9:4. And swelling with anger, he thought to revenge upon the Jews the
@c    injury done by them that had put him to flight.  And therefore he
@c    commanded his chariot to be driven, without stopping in his journey,
@c    the judgment of heaven urging him forward, because he had spoken so
@c    proudly, that he would come to Jerusalem, and make it a common burying
@c    place of the Jews.

@c    9:5. But the Lord, the God of Israel, that seeth all things, struck him
@c    with an incurable and an invisible plague.  For as soon as he had ended
@c    these words, a dreadful pain in his bowels came upon him, and bitter
@c    torments of the inner parts.

@c    9:6. And indeed very justly, seeing he had tormented the bowels of
@c    others with many and new torments, albeit he by no means ceased from
@c    his malice.

@c    9:7. Moreover, being filled with pride, breathing out fire in his rage
@c    against the Jews, and commanding the matter to be hastened, it happened
@c    as he was going with violence, that he fell from the chariot, so that
@c    his limbs were much pained by a grievous bruising of the body.

@c    9:8. Thus he that seemed to himself to command even the waves of the
@c    sea, being proud above the condition of man, and to weigh the heights
@c    of the mountains in a balance, now being cast down to the ground, was
@c    carried in a litter, bearing witness to the manifest power of God in
@c    himself:

@c    9:9. So that worms swarmed out of the body of this man, and whilst he
@c    lived in sorrow and pain, his flesh fell off, and the filthiness of his
@c    smell was noisome to the army.

@c    9:10. And the man that thought a little before he could reach to the
@c    stars of heaven, no man could endure to carry, for the intolerable
@c    stench.

@c    9:11. And by this means, being brought from his great pride, he began
@c    to come to the knowledge of himself, being admonished by the scourge of
@c    God, his pains increasing every moment.

@c    9:12. And when he himself could not now abide his own stench, he spoke
@c    thus:  It is just to be subject to God, and that a mortal man should not
@c    equal himself to God.

@c    9:13. Then this wicked man prayed to the Lord, of whom he was not like
@c    to obtain mercy.

@c    Of whom he was not like to obtain mercy. . .Because his repentance was
@c    not for the offence committed against God:  but barely on account of his
@c    present sufferings.

@c    9:14. And the city, to which he was going in haste to lay it even with
@c    the ground, and to make it a common burying place, he now desireth to
@c    make free:

@c    9:15. And the Jews, whom he said he would not account worthy to be so
@c    much as buried, but would give them up to be devoured by the birds and
@c    wild beasts, and would utterly destroy them with their children, he now
@c    promiseth to make equal with the Athenians.

@c    9:16. The holy temple also, which before he had spoiled, he promised to
@c    adorn with goodly gifts, and to multiply the holy vessels, and to allow
@c    out of his revenues the charges pertaining to the sacrifices.

@c    9:17. Yea also, that he would become a Jew himself, and would go
@c    through every place of the earth, and declare the power of God.

@c    9:18. But his pains not ceasing, (for the just judgment of God was come
@c    upon him) despairing of life, he wrote to the Jews, in the manner of a
@c    supplication, a letter in these words:

@c    9:19. To his very good subjects the Jews, Antiochus, king and ruler,
@c    wisheth much health, and welfare, and happiness.

@c    9:20. If you and your children are well, and if all matters go with you
@c    to your mind, we give very great thanks.

@c    9:21. As for me, being infirm, but yet kindly remembering you,
@c    returning out of the places of Persia, and being taken with a grievous
@c    disease, I thought it necessary to take care for the common good:

@c    9:22. Not distrusting my life, but having great hope to escape the
@c    sickness.

@c    9:23. But considering that my father also, at what time he led an army
@c    into the higher countries, appointed who should reign after him:

@c    9:24. To the end that if any thing contrary to expectation should fall
@c    out, or any bad tidings should be brought, they that were in the
@c    countries, knowing to whom the whole government was left, might not be
@c    troubled.

@c    9:25. Moreover, considering that neighbouring princes, and borderers,
@c    wait for opportunities, and expect what shall be the event, I have
@c    appointed my son, Antiochus, king, whom I often recommended to many of
@c    you, when I went into the higher provinces:  and I have written to him
@c    what I have joined here below.

@c    9:26. I pray you, therefore, and request of you, that, remembering
@c    favours both public and private, you will every man of you continue to
@c    be faithful to me and to my son.

@c    9:27. For I trust that he will behave with moderation and humanity, and
@c    following my intentions, will be gracious unto you.

@c    9:28. Thus the murderer and blasphemer being grievously struck, as
@c    himself had treated others, died a miserable death in a strange
@c    country, among the mountains.

@c    9:29. But Philip, that was brought up with him, carried away his body:
@c    and out of fear of the son of Antiochus, went into Egypt to Ptolemee
@c    Philometor.



@c    2 Machabees Chapter 10


@c    The purification of the temple and city.  Other exploits of Judas.  His
@c    victory over Timotheus.

@c    10:1. But Machabeus, and they that were with him, by the protection of
@c    the Lord, recovered the temple and the city again.

@c    10:2. But he threw down the altars which the heathens had set up in the
@c    streets, as also the temples of the idols.

@c    10:3. And having purified the temple, they made another altar:  and
@c    taking fire out of the fiery stones, they offered sacrifices after two
@c    years, and set forth incense, and lamps, and the loaves of proposition.

@c    10:4. And when they had done these things, they besought the Lord,
@c    lying prostrate on the ground, that they might no more fall into such
@c    evils; but if they should at any time sin, that they might be chastised
@c    by him more gently, and not be delivered up to barbarians and
@c    blasphemous men.

@c    10:5. Now upon the same day that the temple had been polluted by the
@c    strangers on the very same day it was cleansed again; to wit, on the
@c    five and twentieth day of the month of Casleu.

@c    10:6. And they kept eight days with joy, after the manner of the feast
@c    of the tabernacles, remembering that not long before they had kept the
@c    feast of the tabernacles when they were in the mountains, and in dens
@c    like wild beasts.

@c    10:7. Therefore they now carried boughs and green branches and palms,
@c    for him that had given them good success in cleansing his place.

@c    10:8. And they ordained by a common statute, and decree, that all the
@c    nation of the Jews should keep those days every year.

@c    10:9. And this was the end of Antiochus, that was called the
@c    Illustrious.

@c    10:10. But now we will repeat the acts of Eupator, the son of that
@c    wicked Antiochus, abridging the account of the evils that happened in
@c    the wars.

@c    10:11. For when he was come to the crown, he appointed over the affairs
@c    of his realm one Lysias, general of the army of Phenicia and Syria.

@c    10:12. For Ptolemee, that was called Macer, was determined to be
@c    strictly just to the Jews and especially by reason of the wrong that
@c    had been done them, and to deal peaceably with them.

@c    10:13. But being accused for this to Eupator by his friends, and being
@c    oftentimes called traitor, because he had left Cyprus, which Philometor
@c    had committed to him, and coming over to Antiochus the Illustrious, had
@c    revolted also from him, he put an end to his life by poison.

@c    10:14. But Gorgias, who was governor of the holds, taking with him the
@c    strangers, often fought against the Jews.

@c    10:15. And the Jews that occupied the most commodious holds, received
@c    those that were driven out of Jerusalem, and attempted to make war.

@c    The Jews, etc. . .He speaks of them that had fallen from their religion,
@c    and were enemies of their country, who joining with the Idumeans or
@c    Edomites, kept possession of the strong holds, and from thence annoyed
@c    their countrymen.

@c    10:16. Then they that were with Machabeus, beseeching the Lord by
@c    prayers to be their helper, made a strong attack upon the strong holds
@c    of the Idumeans:

@c    10:17. And assaulting them with great force, won the holds, killed them
@c    that came in the way, and slew altogether no fewer than twenty
@c    thousand.

@c    10:18. And whereas some were fled into very strong towers, having all
@c    manner of provision to sustain a siege,

@c    10:19. Machabeus left Simon and Joseph, and Zacheus, and them that were
@c    with them, in sufficient number to besiege them, and departed to those
@c    expeditions which urged more.

@c    10:20. Now they that were with Simon, being led with covetousness, were
@c    persuaded for the sake of money by some that were in the towers:  and
@c    taking seventy thousand didrachmas, let some of them escape.

@c    10:21. But when it was told Machabeus what was done, he assembled the
@c    rulers of the people, and accused those men that they had sold their
@c    brethren for money, having let their adversaries escape.

@c    10:22. So he put these traitors to death, and forthwith took the two
@c    towers.

@c    10:23. And having good success in arms, and all things he took in hand,
@c    he slew more than twenty thousand in the two holds.

@c    10:24. But Timotheus, who before had been overcome by the Jews, having
@c    called together a multitude of foreign troops, and assembled horsemen
@c    out of Asia, came as though he would take Judea by force of arms.

@c    10:26. But Machabeus, and they that were with him, when he drew near,
@c    prayed to the Lord, sprinkling earth upon their heads, and girding
@c    their loins with haircloth,

@c    10:26. And lying prostrate at the foot of the altar, besought him to be
@c    merciful to them, and to be an enemy to their enemies, and an adversary
@c    to their adversaries, as the law saith.

@c    10:27. And so after prayer taking their arms, they went forth further
@c    from the city, and when they were come very near the enemies they
@c    rested.

@c    10:28. But as soon as the sun was risen both sides joined battle:  the
@c    one part having, with their valour, the Lord for a surety of victory,
@c    and success:  but the other side making their rage their leader in
@c    battle.

@c    10:29. But when they were in the heat of the engagement, there appeared
@c    to the enemies from heaven five men upon horses, comely, with golden
@c    bridles, conducting the Jews:

@c    10:30. Two of them took Machabeus between them, and covered him on
@c    every side with their arms, and kept him safe; but cast darts and
@c    fireballs against the enemy, so that they fell down, being both
@c    confounded with blindness, and filled with trouble.

@c    10:31. And there were slain twenty thousand five hundred, and six
@c    hundred horsemen.

@c    10:32. But Timotheus fled into Gazara, a strong hold where Chereas was
@c    governor.

@c    10:33. Then Machabeus, and they that were with him cheerfully laid
@c    siege to the fortress four days.

@c    10:34. But they that were within, trusting to the strength of the
@c    place, blasphemed exceedingly, and cast forth abominable words.

@c    10:35. But when the fifth day appeared, twenty young men of them that
@c    were with Machabeus, inflamed in their minds, because of the blasphemy,
@c    approached manfully to the wall, and pushing forward with fierce
@c    courage, got up upon it:

@c    10:36. Moreover, others also getting up after them, went to set fire to
@c    the towers and the gates, and to burn the blasphemers alive.

@c    10:37. And having for two days together pillaged and sacked the
@c    fortress, they killed Timotheus, who was found hid in a certain place:
@c    they slew also his brother Chereas, and Apollophanes.

@c    Timotheus. . .This man, who was killed at the taking of Gazara, is
@c    different from that Timotheus who is mentioned in the fifth chapter of
@c    the first book of Machabees, and of whom there is mention in the
@c    following chapter.

@c    10:38. And when this was done, they blessed the Lord with hymns and
@c    thanksgiving, who had done great things in Israel, and given them the
@c    victory.



@c    2 Machabees Chapter 11


@c    Lysias is overthrown by Judas.  He sues for peace.

@c    11:1. A short time after this Lysias, the king's lieutenant, and
@c    cousin, and who had chief charge over all the affairs, being greatly
@c    displeased with what had happened,

@c    11:2. Gathered together fourscore thousand men, and all the horsemen,
@c    and came against the Jews, thinking to take the city, and make it a
@c    habitation of the Gentiles:

@c    11:3. And to make a gain of the temple, as of the other temples of the
@c    Gentiles and to set the high priesthood to sale every year:

@c    11:4. Never considering the power of God, but puffed up in mind, and
@c    trusting in the multitude of his foot soldiers, and the thousands of
@c    his horsemen, and his fourscore elephants.

@c    11:5. So he came into Judea, and approaching to Bethsura, which was in
@c    a narrow place, the space of five furlongs from Jerusalem, he laid
@c    siege to that fortress.

@c    11:6. But when Machabeus, and they that were with him, understood that
@c    the strong holds were besieged, they and all the people besought the
@c    Lord with lamentations and tears, that he would send a good angel to
@c    save Israel.

@c    11:7. Then Machabeus himself first taking his arms, exhorted the rest
@c    to expose themselves together with him, to the danger, and to succour
@c    their brethren.

@c    11:8. And when they were going forth together with a willing mind,
@c    there appeared at Jerusalem a horseman going before them in white
@c    clothing, with golden armour, shaking a spear.

@c    11:9. Then they all together blessed the merciful Lord, and took great
@c    courage:  being ready to break through not only men, but also the
@c    fiercest beasts, and walls of iron.

@c    11:10. So they went on courageously, having a helper from heaven, and
@c    the Lord, who shewed mercy to them.

@c    11:11. And rushing violently upon the enemy, like lions, they slew of
@c    them eleven thousand footmen, and one thousand six hundred horsemen:

@c    11:12. And put all the rest to flight; and many of them being wounded,
@c    escaped naked:  Yea, and Lysias himself fled away shamefully, and
@c    escaped.

@c    11:13. And as he was a man of understanding, considering with himself
@c    the loss he had suffered, and perceiving that the Hebrews could not be
@c    overcome, because they relied upon the help of the Almighty God, he
@c    sent to them:

@c    11:14. And promised that he would agree to all things that are just,
@c    and that he would persuade the king to be their friend.

@c    11:15. Then Machabeus consented to the request of Lysias, providing for
@c    the common good in all things; and whatsoever Machabeus wrote to
@c    Lysias, concerning the Jews, the king allowed of.

@c    11:16. For there were letters written to the Jews from Lysias, to this
@c    effect:  Lysias, to the people of the Jews, greeting.

@c    11:17. John, and Abesalom, who were sent from you, delivering your
@c    writings, requested that I would accomplish those things which were
@c    signified by them.

@c    11:18. Therefore whatsoever things could be reported to the king,
@c    I have represented to him:  and he hath granted as much as the matter
@c    permitted.

@c    11:19. If, therefore, you will keep yourselves loyal in affairs,
@c    hereafter also I will endeavour to be a means of your good.

@c    11:20. But as concerning other particulars, I have given orders by word
@c    both to these, and to them that are sent by me, to commune with you.

@c    11:21. Fare ye well.  In the year one hundred and forty-eight, the four
@c    and twentieth day of the month of Dioscorus.

@c    In the year 148. . .Viz., according to the computation followed by the
@c    Greeks; which was different from that of the Hebrews, followed by the
@c    writer of the first book of Machabees.  However, by this date, as well
@c    as by other circumstances, it appears that the expedition of Lysias,
@c    mentioned in this chapter, is different from that which is recorded,
@c    1 Mac. 6.

@c    11:22. But the king's letter contained these words King Antiochus to
@c    Lysias, his brother, greeting.

@c    11:23. Our father being translated amongst the gods we are desirous
@c    that they that are in our realm should live quietly, and apply
@c    themselves diligently to their own concerns.

@c    11:24. And we have heard that the Jews would not consent to my father
@c    to turn to the rites of the Greeks but that they would keep to their
@c    own manner of living and therefore that they request us to allow them
@c    to live after their own laws.

@c    11:25. Wherefore being desirous that this nation also should be at
@c    rest, we have ordained and decreed, that the temple should be restored
@c    to them, and that they may live according to the custom of their
@c    ancestors.

@c    11:26. Thou shalt do well, therefore, to send to them, and grant them
@c    peace, that our pleasure being known, they may be of good comfort, and
@c    look to their own affairs.

@c    11:27. But the king's letter to the Jews was in this manner:  King
@c    Antiochus to the senate of the Jews, and to the rest of the Jews,
@c    greeting.

@c    11:28. If you are well, you are as we desire:  we ourselves also are
@c    well.

@c    11:29. Menelaus came to us, saying that you desired to come down to
@c    your countrymen, that are with us.

@c    11:30. We grant, therefore, a safe conduct to all that come and go,
@c    until the thirtieth day of the month of Xanthicus,

@c    11:31. That the Jews may use their own kind of meats, and their own
@c    laws, as before:  and that none of them any manner of ways be molested
@c    for things which have been done by ignorance.

@c    11:32. And we have sent also Menelaus to speak to you.

@c    11:33. Fare ye well.  In the year one hundred and forty-eight, the
@c    fifteenth day of the month of Xanthicus.

@c    11:34. The Romans also sent them a letter, to this effect:  Quintus
@c    Memmius, and Titus Manilius, ambassadors of the Romans, to the people
@c    of the Jews, greeting.

@c    11:35. Whatsoever Lysias, the king's cousin, hath granted to you, we
@c    also have granted.

@c    11:36. But touching such things as he thought should be referred to the
@c    king, after you have diligently conferred among yourselves, send some
@c    one forthwith, that we may decree as it is convenient for you:  for we
@c    are going to Antioch.

@c    11:37. And therefore make haste to write back, that we may know of what
@c    mind you are.

@c    11:38. Fare ye well.  In the year one hundred and forty-eight, the
@c    fifteenth day of the month of Xanthicus.



@c    2 Machabees Chapter 12


@c    The Jews are still molested by their neighbours.  Judas gains divers
@c    victories over them.  He orders sacrifice and prayers for the dead.

@c    12:1. When these covenants were made, Lysias went to the king, and the
@c    Jews gave themselves to husbandry.

@c    12:2. But they that were behind, viz.  Timotheus, and Apollonius, the
@c    son of Genneus, also Hieronymus, and Demophon, and besides them
@c    Nicanor, the governor of Cyprus, would not suffer them to live in
@c    peace, and to be quiet.

@c    12:3. The men of Joppe also were guilty of this kind of wickedness:
@c    they desired the Jews, who dwelt among them, to go with their wives and
@c    children into the boats, which they had prepared, as though they had no
@c    enmity to them.

@c    12:4. Which when they had consented to, according to the common decree
@c    of the city, suspecting nothing, because of the peace:  when they were
@c    gone forth into the deep, they drowned no fewer than two hundred of
@c    them.

@c    12:5. But as soon as Judas heard of this cruelty done to his
@c    countrymen, he commanded the men that were with him:  and after having
@c    called upon God, the just judge,

@c    12:6. He came against those murderers of his brethren, and set the
@c    haven on fire in the night, burnt the boats, and slew with the sword
@c    them that escaped from the fire.

@c    12:7. And when he had done these things in this manner, he departed as
@c    if he would return again, and root out all the Joppites.

@c    12:8. But when he understood that the men of Jamnia also designed to do
@c    in like manner to the Jews that dwelt among them,

@c    12:9. He came upon the Jamnites also by night, and set the haven on
@c    fire, with the ships, so that the light of the fire was seen at
@c    Jerusalem, two hundred and forty furlongs off.

@c    12:10. And when they were now gone from thence nine furlongs, and were
@c    marching towards Timotheus, five thousand footmen, and five hundred
@c    horsemen of the Arabians, set upon them.

@c    12:11. And after a hard fight, in which, by the help of God, they got
@c    the victory, the rest of the Arabians being overcome, besought Judas
@c    for peace, promising to give him pastures, and to assist him in other
@c    things.

@c    12:12. And Judas thinking that they might be profitable indeed in many
@c    things, promised them peace, and after having joined hands, they
@c    departed to their tents.

@c    12:13. He also laid siege to a certain strong city, encompassed with
@c    bridges and walls, and inhabited by multitudes of different nations,
@c    the name of which is Casphin.

@c    12:14. But they that were within it, trusting in the strength of the
@c    walls, and the provision of victuals, behaved in a more negligent
@c    manner, and provoked Judas with railing and blaspheming, and uttering
@c    such words as were not to be spoken.

@c    12:15. But Machabeus calling upon the great Lord of the world, who
@c    without any rams or engines of war threw down the walls of Jericho, in
@c    the time of Josue, fiercely assaulted the walls.

@c    Rams. . .That is, engines for battering walls, etc., which were used in
@c    sieges in those times.

@c    12:16. And having taken the city by the will of the Lord, he made an
@c    unspeakable slaughter, so that a pool adjoining, of two furlongs broad,
@c    seemed to run with the blood of the slain.

@c    12:17. From thence they departed seven hundred and fifty furlongs, and
@c    came to Characa, to the Jews that are called Tubianites.

@c    12:18. But as for Timotheus, they found him not in those places, for
@c    before he had dispatched any thing he went back, having left a very
@c    strong garrison in a certain hold:

@c    12:19. But Dositheus, and Sosipater, who were captains with Machabeus,
@c    slew them that were left by Timotheus in the hold, to the number of ten
@c    thousand men.

@c    12:20. And Machabeus having set in order about him six thousand men,
@c    and divided them by bands, went forth against Timotheus, who had with
@c    him a hundred and twenty thousand footmen, and two thousand five
@c    hundred horsemen.

@c    12:21. Now when Timotheus had knowledge of the coming of Judas, he sent
@c    the women and children, and the other baggage, before him into a
@c    fortress, called Carnion:  for it was impregnable, and hard to come at,
@c    by reason of the straitness of the places.

@c    12:22. But when the first band of Judas came in sight, the enemies were
@c    struck with fear, by the presence of God, who seeth all things, and
@c    they were put to flight one from another, so that they were often
@c    thrown down by their own companions, and wounded with the strokes of
@c    their own swords.

@c    12:23. But Judas pursued them close, punishing the profane, of whom he
@c    slew thirty thousand men.

@c    12:24. And Timotheus himself fell into the hands of the band of
@c    Dositheus and Sosipater, and with many prayers he besought them to let
@c    him go with his life, because he had the parents and brethren of many
@c    of the Jews, who, by his death, might happen to be deceived.

@c    12:25. And when he had given his faith that he would restore them
@c    according to the agreement, they let him go without hurt, for the
@c    saving of their brethren.

@c    12:26. Then Judas went away to Carnion, where he slew five and twenty
@c    thousand persons.

@c    12:27. And after he had put to flight and destroyed these, he removed
@c    his army to Ephron, a strong city, wherein there dwelt a multitude of
@c    divers nations:  and stout young men standing upon the walls, made a
@c    vigorous resistance:  and in this place there were many engines of war,
@c    and a provision of darts.

@c    12:28. But when they had invocated the Almighty, who with his power
@c    breaketh the strength of the enemies, they took the city:  and slew five
@c    and twenty thousand of them that were within.

@c    12:29. From thence they departed to Scythopolis, which lieth six
@c    hundred furlongs from Jerusalem.

@c    Scythopolis. . .Formerly called Bethsan.

@c    12:30. But the Jews that were among the Scythopolitans testifying that
@c    they were used kindly by them, and that even in the times of their
@c    adversity they had treated them with humanity:

@c    12:31. They gave them thanks, exhorting them to be still friendly to
@c    their nation, and so they came to Jerusalem, the feast of the weeks
@c    being at hand.

@c    12:32. And after Pentecost they marched against Gorgias, the governor
@c    of Idumea.

@c    12:33. And he came out with three thousand footmen and four hundred
@c    horsemen.

@c    12:34. And when they had joined battle, it happened that a few of the
@c    Jews were slain.

@c    12:35. But Dositheus, a horseman, one of Bacenor's band, a valiant man,
@c    took hold of Gorgias:  and when he would have taken him alive, a certain
@c    horseman of the Thracians came upon him, and cut off his shoulder:  and
@c    so Gorgias escaped to Maresa.

@c    12:36. But when they that were with Esdrin had fought long, and were
@c    weary, Judas called upon the Lord to be their helper, and leader of the
@c    battle:

@c    12:37. Then beginning in his own language, and singing hymns with a
@c    loud voice, he put Gorgias's soldiers to flight.

@c    12:38. So Judas having gathered together his army, came into the city
@c    Odollam:  and when the seventh day came, they purified themselves
@c    according to the custom, and kept the sabbath in the same place.

@c    12:39. And the day following Judas came with his company, to take away
@c    the bodies of them that were slain, and to bury them with their
@c    kinsmen, in the sepulchres of their fathers.

@c    12:40. And they found under the coats of the slain, some of the
@c    donaries of the idols of Jamnia, which the law forbiddeth to the Jews:
@c    so that all plainly saw, that for this cause they were slain.

@c    Of the donaries, etc. . .That is, of the votive offerings, which had
@c    been hung up in the temples of the idols, which they had taken away
@c    when they burnt the port of Jamnia, ver. 9., contrary to the
@c    prohibition of the law, Deut. 7.25.

@c    12:41. Then they all blessed the just judgment of the Lord, who had
@c    discovered the things that were hidden.

@c    12:42. And so betaking themselves to prayers, they besought him, that
@c    the sin which had been committed might be forgotten.  But the most
@c    valiant Judas exhorted the people to keep themselves from sin,
@c    forasmuch as they saw before their eyes what had happened, because of
@c    the sins of those that were slain.

@c    12:43. And making a gathering, he sent twelve thousand drachms of
@c    silver to Jerusalem for sacrifice to be offered for the sins of the
@c    dead, thinking well and religiously concerning the resurrection.

@c    12:44. (For if he had not hoped that they that were slain should rise
@c    again, it would have seemed superfluous and vain to pray for the dead,)

@c    12:45. And because he considered that they who had fallen asleep with
@c    godliness, had great grace laid up for them.

@c    With godliness. . .Judas hoped that these men who died fighting for the
@c    cause of God and religion, might find mercy:  either because they might
@c    be excused from mortal sin by ignorance; or might have repented of
@c    their sin, at least at their death.

@c    12:46. It is therefore a holy and wholesome thought to pray for the
@c    dead, that they may be loosed from sins.

@c    It is therefore a holy and wholesome thought to pray for the
@c    dead. . .Here is an evident and undeniable proof of the practice of
@c    praying for the dead under the old law, which was then strictly observed
@c    by the Jews, and consequently could not be introduced at that time by
@c    Judas, their chief and high priest, if it had not been always their
@c    custom.



@c    2 Machabees Chapter 13


@c    Antiochus and Lysias again invade Judea.  Menelaus is put to death.  The
@c    king's great army is worsted twice.  The peace is renewed.

@c    13:1. In the year one hundred and forty-nine, Judas understood that
@c    Antiochus Eupator was coming with a multitude against Judea,

@c    13:2. And with him Lysias, the regent, who had charge over the affairs
@c    of the realm, having with him a hundred and ten thousand footmen, five
@c    thousand horsemen, twenty-two elephants, and three hundred chariots.

@c    A hundred and ten thousand, etc. . .The difference between the numbers
@c    here set down, and those recorded, 1 Mac. 4, is easily accounted for;
@c    if we consider that such armies as these are liable to be at one time
@c    more numerous than at another; either by sending away large
@c    detachments, or being diminished by sickness; or increased by receiving
@c    fresh supplies of troops, according to different exigencies or
@c    occurrences.

@c    13:3. Menelaus also joined himself with them:  and with great
@c    deceitfulness besought Antiochus, not for the welfare of his country,
@c    but in hopes that he should be appointed chief ruler.

@c    13:4. But the King of kings stirred up the mind of Antiochus against
@c    the sinner, and upon Lysias suggesting that he was the cause of all the
@c    evils, he commanded (as the custom is with them) that he should be
@c    apprehended and put to death in the same place.

@c    13:5. Now there was in that place a tower fifty cubits high, having a
@c    heap of ashes on every side:  this had a prospect steep down.

@c    13:6. From thence he commanded the sacrilegious wretch to be thrown
@c    down into the ashes, all men thrusting him forward unto death.

@c    13:7. And by such a law it happened that Menelaus the transgressor of
@c    the law, was put to death:  not having so much as burial in the earth.

@c    13:8. And indeed very justly, for insomuch as he had committed many
@c    sins against the altar of God, the fire and ashes of which were holy:
@c    he was condemned to die in ashes.

@c    13:9. But the king, with his mind full of rage, came on to shew himself
@c    worse to the Jews than his father was.

@c    13:10. Which when Judas understood, he commanded the people to call
@c    upon the Lord day and night, that as he had always done, so now also he
@c    would help them:

@c    13:11. Because they were afraid to be deprived of the law, and of their
@c    country, and of the holy temple:  and that he would not suffer the
@c    people, that had of late taken breath for a little while, to be again
@c    in subjection to blasphemous nations.

@c    13:12. So when they had all done this together, and had craved mercy of
@c    the Lord with weeping and fasting, lying prostrate on the ground for
@c    three days continually, Judas exhorted them to make themselves ready.

@c    13:13. But he, with the ancients, determined before the king should
@c    bring his army into Judea, and make himself master of the city, to go
@c    out, and to commit the event of the thing to the judgment of the Lord.

@c    13:14. So committing all to God, the Creator of the world, and having
@c    exhorted his people to fight manfully, and to stand up even to death
@c    for the laws, the temple, the city, their country, and citizens:  he
@c    placed his army about Modin.

@c    13:15. And having given his company for a watchword, The victory of
@c    God, with most valiant chosen young men, he set upon the king's quarter
@c    by night, and slew four thousand men in the camp, and the greatest of
@c    the elephants, with them that had been upon him,

@c    13:16. And having filled the camp of the enemies with exceeding great
@c    fear and tumult, they went off with good success.

@c    13:17. Now this was done at the break of day, by the protection and
@c    help of the Lord.

@c    13:18. But the king having taken a taste of the hardiness of the Jews,
@c    attempted to take the strong places by policy:

@c    13:19. And he marched with his army to Bethsura, which was a strong
@c    hold of the Jews:  but he was repulsed, he failed, he lost his men.

@c    13:20. Now Judas sent necessaries to them that were within

@c    13:21. But Rhodocus, one of the Jews' army, disclosed the secrets to
@c    the enemies, so he was sought out, and taken up, and put in prison.

@c    13:22. Again the king treated with them that were in Bethsura:  gave his
@c    right hand:  took theirs:  and went away.

@c    13:23. He fought with Judas:  and was overcome.  And when he understood
@c    that Philip, who had been left over the affairs, had rebelled at
@c    Antioch, he was in a consternation of mind, and entreating the Jews,
@c    and yielding to them, he swore to all things that seemed reasonable,
@c    and, being reconciled, offered sacrifice, honoured the temple, and left
@c    gifts.

@c    13:24. He embraced Machabeus, and made him governor and prince from
@c    Ptolemais unto the Gerrenians.

@c    13:25. But when he was come to Ptolemais, the men of that city were
@c    much displeased with the conditions of the peace, being angry for fear
@c    they should break the covenant.

@c    13:26. Then Lysias went up to the judgment seat, and set forth the
@c    reason, and appeased the people, and returned to Antioch:  and thus
@c    matters went with regard to the king's coming and his return.



@c    2 Machabees Chapter 14


@c    Demetrius challenges the kingdom.  Alcimus applies to him to be made
@c    high priest:  Nicanor is sent into Judea:  his dealings with Judas:  his
@c    threats.  The history of Razias.

@c    14:1. But after the space of three years Judas, and they that were with
@c    him, understood that Demetrius, the son of Seleucus, was come up with a
@c    great power, and a navy by the haven of Tripolis, to places proper for
@c    his purpose,

@c    14:2. And had made himself master of the countries against Antiochus,
@c    and his general, Lysias.

@c    14:3. Now one Alcimus, who had been chief priest, but had wilfully
@c    defiled himself in the time of mingling with the heathens, seeing that
@c    there was no safety for him, nor access to the altar,

@c    Now Alcimus, who had been chief priest. . .This Alcimus was of the stock
@c    of Aaron, but for his apostasy here mentioned was incapable of the high
@c    priesthood, but king Antiochus Eupator appointed him in place of the
@c    high priest, (see above, 1 Mac. chap. 7., ver. 9,) as Menelaus had been
@c    before him, set up by Antiochus (above chap. 4.), yet neither of them
@c    were truly high priests; for the true high priesthood was amongst the
@c    Machabees, who were also of the stock of Aaron, and had strictly held
@c    their religion, and were ordained according to the rites commanded in
@c    the law of Moses.--Ibid.  Mingling. . .with the heathens; that is, in
@c    their idolatrous worship.

@c    14:4. Came to king Demetrius in the year one hundred and fifty,
@c    presenting unto him a crown of gold, and a palm, and besides these,
@c    some boughs that seemed to belong to the temple.  And that day indeed he
@c    held his peace.

@c    14:5. But having gotten a convenient time to further his madness, being
@c    called to counsel by Demetrius, and asked what the Jews relied upon,
@c    and what were their counsels,

@c    14:6. He answered thereunto:  They among the Jews that are called
@c    Assideans, of whom Judas Machabeus is captain, nourish wars, and raise
@c    seditions, and will not suffer the realm to be in peace.

@c    14:7. For I also being deprived of my ancestor's glory (I mean of the
@c    high priesthood) am now come hither:

@c    14:8. Principally indeed out of fidelity to the king's interests, but
@c    in the next place also to provide for the good of my countrymen:  for
@c    all our nation suffereth much from the evil proceedings of these men.

@c    14:9. Wherefore, O king, seeing thou knowest all these things, take
@c    care, I beseech thee, both of the country, and of our nation, according
@c    to thy humanity which is known to all men.

@c    14:10. For as long as Judas liveth it is not possible that the state
@c    should be quiet.

@c    14:11. Now when this man had spoken to this effect the rest also of the
@c    king's friends, who were enemies of Judas, incensed Demetrius against
@c    him.

@c    14:12. And forthwith he sent Nicanor, the commander over the elephants,
@c    governor into Judea:

@c    14:13. Giving him in charge, to take Judas himself:  and disperse all
@c    them that were with him, and to make Alcimus the high priest of the
@c    great temple.

@c    14:14. Then the Gentiles who had fled out of Judea, from Judas, came to
@c    Nicanor by flocks, thinking the miseries and calamities of the Jews to
@c    be the welfare of their affairs.

@c    14:15. Now when the Jews heard of Nicanor's coming, and that the
@c    nations were assembled against them, they cast earth upon their heads,
@c    and made supplication to him who chose his people to keep them for
@c    ever, and who protected his portion by evident signs.

@c    14:16. Then at the commandment of their captain, they forthwith removed
@c    from the place where they were, and went to the town of Dessau, to meet
@c    them.

@c    14:17. Now Simon, the brother of Judas, had joined battle with Nicanor:
@c    but was frightened with the sudden coming of the adversaries.

@c    14:18. Nevertheless Nicanor hearing of the valour of Judas's
@c    companions, and the greatness of courage, with which they fought for
@c    their country, was afraid to try the matter by the sword.

@c    14:19. Wherefore he sent Posidonius, and Theodotius and Matthias before
@c    to present and receive the right hands.

@c    14:20. And when there had been a consultation thereupon, and the
@c    captain had acquainted the multitude with it, they were all of one mind
@c    to consent to covenants.

@c    14:21. So they appointed a day upon which they might come together by
@c    themselves:  and seats were brought out, and set for each one.

@c    14:22. But Judas ordered armed men to be ready in convenient places,
@c    lest some mischief might be suddenly practised by the enemies:  so they
@c    made an agreeable conference.

@c    14:23. And Nicanor abode in Jerusalem, and did no wrong, but sent away
@c    the flocks of the multitudes that had been gathered together.

@c    14:24. And Judas was always dear to him from the heart, and he was well
@c    affected to the man.

@c    14:25. And he desired him to marry a wife, and to have children.  So he
@c    married:  he lived quietly, and they lived in common.

@c    14:26. But Alcimus seeing the love they had one to another, and the
@c    covenants, came to Demetrius, and told him that Nicanor had assented to
@c    the foreign interest, for that he meant to make Judas, who was a
@c    traitor to the kingdom, his successor.

@c    14:27. Then the king, being in a rage, and provoked with this man's
@c    wicked accusation, wrote to Nicanor, signifying that he was greatly
@c    displeased with the covenant of friendship:  and that he commanded him
@c    nevertheless to send Machabeus prisoner in all haste to Antioch.

@c    14:28. When this was known, Nicanor was in a consternation, and took it
@c    grievously that he should make void the articles that were agreed upon,
@c    having received no injury from the man.

@c    14:29. But because he could not oppose the king, he watched an
@c    opportunity to comply with the orders

@c    14:30. But when Machabeus perceived that Nicanor was more stern to him,
@c    and that when they met together as usual he behaved himself in a rough
@c    manner; and was sensible that this rough behaviour came not of good, he
@c    gathered together a few of his men, and hid himself from Nicanor.

@c    14:31. But he finding himself notably prevented by the man, came to the
@c    great and holy temple:  and commanded the priests that were offering the
@c    accustomed sacrifices, to deliver him the man.

@c    14:32. And when they swore unto him, that they knew not where the man
@c    was whom he sought, he stretched out his hand to the temple,

@c    14:33. And swore, saying:  Unless you deliver Judas prisoner to me, I
@c    will lay this temple of God even with the ground, and will beat down
@c    the altar, and I will dedicate this temple to Bacchus.

@c    14:34. And when he had spoken thus, he departed.  But the priests
@c    stretching forth their hands to heaven, called upon him that was ever
@c    the defender of their nation, saying in this manner:

@c    14:35. Thou, O Lord of all things, who wantest nothing, wast pleased
@c    that the temple of thy habitation should be amongst us.

@c    14:36. Therefore now, O Lord, the holy of all holies, keep this house
@c    for ever undefiled, which was lately cleansed.

@c    14:37. Now Razias, one of the ancients of Jerusalem, was accused to
@c    Nicanor, a man that was a lover of the city, and of good report, who
@c    for his kindness was called the father of the Jews.

@c    14:38. This man, for a long time, had held fast his purpose of keeping
@c    himself pure in the Jews' religion, and was ready to expose his body
@c    and life, that he might persevere therein.

@c    14:39. So Nicanor being willing to declare the hatred that he bore the
@c    Jews, sent five hundred soldiers to take him.

@c    14:40. For he thought by ensnaring him to hurt the Jews very much.

@c    14:41. Now as the multitude sought to rush into his house, and to break
@c    open the door, and to set fire to it, when he was ready to be taken, he
@c    struck himself with his sword:

@c    He struck himself, etc. . .St. Augustine, (Epist. 61, ad Dulcitium, et
@c    lib. 2, cap. 23, ad Epist. 2, Gaud.) discussing this fact of Razias,
@c    says, that the holy scripture relates it, but doth not praise it, as to
@c    be admired or imitated, and that either it was not well done by him, or
@c    at least not proper in this time of grace.

@c    14:42. Choosing to die nobly rather than to fall into the hands of the
@c    wicked, and to suffer abuses unbecoming his noble birth.

@c    14:43. But whereas through haste he missed of giving a sure wound, and
@c    the crowd was breaking into the doors, he ran boldly to the wall, and
@c    manfully threw himself down to the crowd:

@c    14:44. But they quickly making room for his fall, he came upon the
@c    midst of the neck.

@c    He came upon the midst of the neck. . .Venit per mediam cervicem.  In the
@c    Greek it is keneona, which signifies a void place, where there is no
@c    building.

@c    14:45. And as he had yet breath in him, being inflamed in mind, he
@c    arose:  and while his blood ran down with a great stream, and he was
@c    grievously wounded, he ran through the crowd:

@c    14:46. And standing upon a steep rock, when he was now almost without
@c    blood, grasping his bowels, with both hands he cast them upon the
@c    throng, calling upon the Lord of life and spirit, to restore these to
@c    him again:  and so he departed this life.



@c    2 Machabees Chapter 15


@c    Judas encouraged by a vision gains a glorious victory over Nicanor.  The
@c    conclusion.

@c    15:1. But when Nicanor understood that Judas was in the places of
@c    Samaria, he purposed to set upon him with all violence, on the sabbath
@c    day.

@c    15:2. And when the Jews that were constrained to follow him, said:  Do
@c    not act so fiercely and barbarously, but give honour to the day that is
@c    sanctified:  and reverence him that beholdeth all things:

@c    15:3. That unhappy man asked, if there were a mighty One in heaven,
@c    that had commanded the sabbath day to be kept.

@c    15:4. And when they answered:  There is the living Lord himself in
@c    heaven, the mighty One, that commanded the seventh day to be kept.

@c    15:5. Then he said:  And I am mighty upon the earth, and I command to
@c    take arms, and to do the king's business.  Nevertheless he prevailed not
@c    to accomplish his design.

@c    15:6. So Nicanor being puffed up with exceeding great pride, thought to
@c    set up a public monument of his victory over Judas.

@c    15:7. But Machabeus ever trusted with all hope that God would help
@c    them.

@c    15:8. And he exhorted his people not to fear the coming of the nations,
@c    but to remember the help they had before received from heaven, and now
@c    to hope for victory from the Almighty.

@c    15:9. And speaking to them out of the law, and the prophets, and withal
@c    putting them in mind of the battles they had fought before, he made
@c    them more cheerful:

@c    15:10. Then after he had encouraged them, he shewed withal the
@c    falsehood of the Gentiles, and their breach of oaths.

@c    15:11. So he armed every one of them, not with defence of shield and
@c    spear, but with very good speeches, and exhortations, and told them a
@c    dream worthy to be believed, whereby he rejoiced them all.

@c    15:12. Now the vision was in this manner.  Onias, who had been high
@c    priest, a good and virtuous man, modest in his looks, gentle in his
@c    manners, and graceful in speech, and who from a child was exercised in
@c    virtues holding up his hands, prayed for all the people of the Jews:

@c    15:13. After this there appeared also another man, admirable for age,
@c    and glory, and environed with great beauty and majesty:

@c    15:14. Then Onias answering, said:  This is a lover of his brethren, and
@c    of the people of Israel:  this is he that prayeth much for the people,
@c    and for all the holy city, Jeremias, the prophet of God.

@c    15:15. Whereupon Jeremias stretched forth his right hand, and gave to
@c    Judas a sword of gold, saying:

@c    15:16. Take this holy sword, a gift from God, wherewith thou shalt
@c    overthrow the adversaries of my people Israel.

@c    15:17. Thus being exhorted with the words of Judas, which were very
@c    good, and proper to stir up the courage, and strengthen the hearts of
@c    the young men, they resolved to fight, and to set upon them manfully:
@c    that valour might decide the matter, because the holy city, and the
@c    temple were in danger.

@c    15:18. For their concern was less for their wives, and children, and
@c    for their brethren, and kinsfolks:  but their greatest and principal
@c    fear was for the holiness of the temple.

@c    15:19. And they also that were in the city, had no little concern for
@c    them that were to be engaged in battle.

@c    15:20. And now when all expected what judgment would be given, and the
@c    enemies were at hand, and the army was set in array, the beasts and the
@c    horsemen ranged in convenient places,

@c    15:21. Machabeus considering the coming of the multitude, and the
@c    divers preparations of armour, and the fierceness of the beasts,
@c    stretching out his hands to heaven, called upon the Lord, that worketh
@c    wonders, who giveth victory to them that are worthy, not according to
@c    the power of their arms, but according as it seemeth good to him.

@c    15:22. And in his prayer he said after this manner:  Thou, O Lord, who
@c    didst send thy angel in the time of Ezechias, king of Juda, and didst
@c    kill a hundred and eighty-five thousand of the army of Sennacherib:

@c    15:23. Send now also, O Lord of heaven, thy good angel before us, for
@c    the fear and dread of the greatness of thy arm,

@c    15:24. That they may be afraid, who come with blasphemy against thy
@c    holy people.  And thus he concluded his prayer.

@c    15:25. But Nicanor, and they that were with him came forward, with
@c    trumpets and songs.

@c    15:26. But Judas, and they that were with him, encountered them,
@c    calling upon God by prayers:

@c    15:27. So fighting with their hands, but praying to the Lord with their
@c    hearts, they slew no less than five and thirty thousand, being greatly
@c    cheered with the presence of God.

@c    15:28. And when the battle was over, and they were returning with joy,
@c    they understood that Nicanor was slain in his armour.

@c    15:29. Then making a shout, and a great noise, they blessed the
@c    Almighty Lord in their own language.

@c    15:30. And Judas, who was altogether ready, in body and mind, to die
@c    for his countrymen, commanded that Nicanor's head, and his hand, with
@c    the shoulder, should be cut off, and carried to Jerusalem.

@c    15:31. And when he was come thither, having called together his
@c    countrymen, and the priests to the altar, he sent also for them that
@c    were in the castle,

@c    15:32. And shewing them the head of Nicanor, and the wicked hand, which
@c    he had stretched out, with proud boasts, against the holy house of the
@c    Almighty God,

@c    15:33. He commanded also, that the tongue of the wicked Nicanor should
@c    be cut out, and given by pieces to birds, and the hand of the furious
@c    man to be hanged up over against the temple.

@c    15:34. Then all blessed the Lord of heaven, saying:  Blessed be he that
@c    hath kept his own place undefiled.

@c    15:35. And he hung up Nicanor's head in the top of the castle, that it
@c    might be an evident and manifest sign of the help of God.

@c    15:36. And they all ordained by a common decree, by no means to let
@c    this day pass without solemnity:

@c    15:37. But to celebrate the thirteenth day of the month of Adar, called
@c    in the Syrian language, the day before Mardochias' day.

@c    15:38. So these things being done with relation to Nicanor, and from
@c    that time the city being possessed by the Hebrews, I also will here
@c    make an end of my narration.

@c    15:39. Which if I have done well, and as it becometh the history, it is
@c    what I desired:  but if not so perfectly, it must be pardoned me.

@c    If not so perfectly, etc. . .This is not said with regard to the truth
@c    of the narration; but with regard to the style and manner of writing:
@c    which in the sacred penmen is not always the most accurate.  See St.
@c    Paul, 2 Cor. 11.6.

@c    15:40. For as it is hurtful to drink always wine, or always water, but
@c    pleasant to use sometimes the one, and sometimes the other:  so if the
@c    speech be always nicely framed, it will not be grateful to the readers.
@c    But here it shall be ended.
