@c    THE THIRD BOOK OF KINGS



@c    This and the following Book are called by the holy fathers the third
@c    and fourth book of Kings; but by the Hebrews, the first and second.
@c    They contain the history of the kingdoms of Israel and Juda, from the
@c    beginning of the reign of Solomon, to the captivity.  As to the writer
@c    of these books, it seems most probable they were not written by one
@c    man; nor at one time; but as there was all along a succession of
@c    prophets in Israel, who recorded, by divine inspiration, the most
@c    remarkable things that happened in their days, these books seem to have
@c    been written by these prophets.  See 2 Paralip. alias 2 Chron. 9.29;
@c    12.15; 13.22; 20.34; 26.22; 32.32.



@c    3 Kings Chapter 1


@c    King David growing old, Abisag a Sunamitess is brought to him.  Adonias
@c    pretending to reign, Nathan and Bethsabee obtain that Solomon should be
@c    declared and anointed king.

@c    1:1. Now king David was old, and advanced in years:  and when he was
@c    covered with clothes he was not warm.

@c    1:2. His servants therefore, said to him:  Let us seek for our Lord the
@c    king, a young virgin, and let her stand before the king, and cherish
@c    him, and sleep in his bosom and warm our lord the king.

@c    1:3. So they sought a beautiful young woman, in all the coasts of
@c    Israel and they found Abisag, a Sunamitess, and brought her to the
@c    king.

@c    1:4. And the damsel was exceedingly beautiful, and she slept with the
@c    king, and served him, but the king did not know her.

@c    1:5. And Adonias, the son of Haggith, exalted himself, saying:  I will
@c    be king.  And he made himself chariots and horsemen, and fifty men to
@c    run before him.

@c    1:6. Neither did his father rebuke him at any time, saying:  Why hast
@c    thou done this?  And he also was very beautiful, the next in birth after
@c    Absalom.

@c    1:7. And he conferred with Joab, the son of Sarvia, and with Abiathar,
@c    the priest, who furthered Adonias's side.

@c    1:8. But Sadoc, the priest, and Banaias, the son of Joiada, and Nathan,
@c    the prophet, and Semei, and Rei, and the strength of David's army, was
@c    not with Adonias.

@c    1:9. And Adonias having slain rams and calves, and all fat cattle, by
@c    the stone of Zoheleth, which was near the fountain Rogel, invited all
@c    his brethren, the king's sons, and all the men of Juda, the king's
@c    servants:

@c    1:10. But Nathan, the prophet, and Banaias, and all the valiant men,
@c    and Solomon, his brother, he invited not.

@c    1:11. And Nathan said to Bethsabee, the mother of Solomon:  Hast thou
@c    not heard that Adonias, the son of Haggith, reigneth, and our lord
@c    David knoweth it not?

@c    1:12. Now then, come, take my counsel, and save thy life, and the life
@c    of thy son Solomon.

@c    1:13. Go, and get thee in to king David, and say to him:  Didst not
@c    thou, my lord, O king, swear to me, thy handmaid, saying:  Solomon, thy
@c    son, shall reign after me, and he shall sit on my throne?  why then doth
@c    Adonias reign?

@c    1:14. And while thou art yet speaking there with the king, I will come
@c    in after thee, and will fill up thy words.

@c    1:15. So Bethsabee went in to the king into the chamber.  Now the king
@c    was very old, and Abisag, the Sunamitess, ministered to him.

@c    1:16. Bethsabee bowed herself, and worshipped the king.  And the king
@c    said to her:  What is thy will?

@c    1:17. She answered, and said:  My lord, thou didst swear to thy
@c    handmaid, by the Lord thy God, saying:  Solomon, thy son, shall reign
@c    after me, and he shall sit on my throne.

@c    1:18. And behold, now Adonias reigneth, and thou, my lord the king,
@c    knowest nothing of it.

@c    1:19. He hath killed oxen, and all fat cattle, and many rams, and
@c    invited all the king's sons, and Abiathar, the priest, and Joab, the
@c    general of the army:  but Solomon, thy servant, he invited not.

@c    1:20. And now, my lord, O king, the eyes of all Israel are upon thee,
@c    that thou shouldst tell them, who shall sit on thy throne, my lord the
@c    king, after thee.

@c    1:21. Otherwise it shall come to pass, when my lord the king sleepeth
@c    with his fathers, that I, and my son, Solomon, shall be accounted
@c    offenders.

@c    1:22. As she was yet speaking with the king, Nathan, the prophet, came.

@c    1:23. And they told the king, saying:  Nathan, the prophet, is here.  And
@c    when he was come in before the king, and had worshipped, bowing down to
@c    the ground,

@c    1:24. Nathan said:  My lord, O king, hast thou said:  Let Adonias reign
@c    after me, and let him sit upon my throne?

@c    1:25. Because he is gone down to day, and hath killed oxen, and
@c    fatlings, and many rams, and invited all the king's sons, and the
@c    captains of the army, and Abiathar the priest:  and they are eating and
@c    drinking before him, and saying:  God save king Adonias:

@c    1:26. But me, thy servant, and Sadoc, the priest, and Banaias, the son
@c    of Joiada, and Solomon, thy servant, he hath not invited.

@c    1:27. Is this word come out from my lord the king, and hast thou not
@c    told me, thy servant, who should sit on the throne of my lord the king
@c    after him?

@c    1:28. And king David answered, and said:  Call to me Bethsabee.  And when
@c    she was come in to the king, and stood before him,

@c    1:29. The king swore, and said:  As the Lord liveth, who hath delivered
@c    my soul out of all distress,

@c    1:30. Even as I swore to thee, by the Lord, the God of Israel, saying:
@c    Solomon thy son, shall reign after me, and he shall sit upon my throne
@c    in my stead, so will I do this day.

@c    1:31. And Bethsabee, bowing with her face to the earth, worshipped the
@c    king, saying:  May my lord David live for ever.

@c    1:32. King David also said:  Call me Sadoc, the priest, and Nathan, the
@c    prophet, and Banaias, the son of Joiada.  And when they were come in
@c    before the king,

@c    1:33. He said to them:  Take with you the servants of your lord, and set
@c    my son Solomon upon my mule:  and bring him to Gihon:

@c    1:34. And let Sadoc, the priest, and Nathan, the prophet, anoint him
@c    there king over Israel:  and you shall sound the trumpet, and shall say:
@c    God save king Solomon.

@c    1:35. And you shall come up after him, and he shall come, and shall sit
@c    upon my throne, and he shall reign in my stead:  and I will appoint him
@c    to be ruler over Israel, and over Juda.

@c    1:36. And Banaias, the son of Joiada, answered the king, saying:  Amen:
@c    so say the Lord, the God of my lord the king.

@c    1:37. As the Lord hath been with my lord the king, so be he with
@c    Solomon, and make his throne higher than the throne of my lord king
@c    David.

@c    1:38. So Sadoc, the priest, and Nathan, the prophet, went down, and
@c    Banaias, the son of Joiada, and the Cerethi, and Phelethi:  and they set
@c    Solomon upon the mule of king David, and brought him to Gihon.

@c    1:39. And Sadoc, the priest, took a horn of oil out of the tabernacle,
@c    and anointed Solomon:  and they sounded the trumpet, and all the people
@c    said:  God save king Solomon.

@c    1:40. And all the multitude went up after him, and the people played
@c    with pipes, and rejoiced with a great joy, and the earth rang with the
@c    noise of their cry.

@c    1:41. And Adonias, and all that were invited by him, heard it, and now
@c    the feast was at an end.  Joab also, hearing the sound of the trumpet,
@c    said:  What meaneth this noise of the city in an uproar?

@c    1:42. While he yet spoke, Jonathan, the son of Abiathar, the priest,
@c    came:  and Adonias said to him:  Come in, because thou art a valiant man,
@c    and bringest good news.

@c    1:43. And Jonathan answered Adonias:  Not so:  for our lord, king David,
@c    hath appointed Solomon king;

@c    1:44. And hath sent with him Sadoc, the priest, and Nathan, the
@c    prophet, and Banaias, the son of Joiada, and the Cerethi, and the
@c    Phelethi, and they have set him upon the king's mule:

@c    1:45. And Sadoc, the priest, and Nathan, the prophet, have anointed him
@c    king, in Gihon:  and they are gone up from thence rejoicing, so that the
@c    city rang again:  this is the noise that you have heard.

@c    1:46. Moreover, Solomon sitteth upon the throne of the kingdom.

@c    1:47. And the king's servants going in, have blessed our lord king
@c    David, saying:  May God make the name of Solomon greater than thy name,
@c    and make his throne greater than thy throne.  And the king adored in his
@c    bed:

@c    1:48. And he said:  Blessed be the Lord, the God of Israel, who hath
@c    given this day one to sit on my throne, my eyes seeing it.

@c    1:49. Then all the guests of Adonias were afraid, and they all arose,
@c    and every man went his way.

@c    1:50. And Adonias fearing Solomon, arose and went, and took hold of the
@c    horn of the altar.

@c    1:51. And they told Solomon, saying:  Behold Adonias fearing king
@c    Solomon, hath taken hold of the horn of the altar, saying:  Let king
@c    Solomon swear to me this day, that he will not kill his servant with
@c    the sword.

@c    1:52. And Solomon said:  If he be a good man, there shall not so much as
@c    one hair of his head fall to the ground:  but if evil be found in him,
@c    he shall die.

@c    1:53. Then king Solomon sent, and brought him out from the altar:  and
@c    going in, he worshipped king Solomon:  and Solomon said to him:  Go to
@c    thy house.



@c    3 Kings Chapter 2


@c    David, after giving his last charge to Solomon, dieth.  Adonias is put
@c    to death:  Abiathar is banished:  Joab and Semei are slain.

@c    1:1. And the days of David drew nigh that he should die, and he charged
@c    his son Solomon, saying:

@c    2:2. I am going the way of all flesh:  take thou courage and shew
@c    thyself a man.

@c    2:3. And keep the charge of the Lord thy God, to walk in his ways, and
@c    observe his ceremonies, and his precepts, and judgments, and
@c    testimonies, as it is written in the law of Moses:  that thou mayst
@c    understand all thou dost, and whithersoever thou shalt turn thyself:

@c    2:4. That the Lord may confirm his words, which he hath spoken of me,
@c    saying:  If thy children shall take heed to their ways, and shall walk
@c    before me in truth, with all their heart, and with all their soul,
@c    there shall not be taken away from thee a man on the throne of Israel.

@c    2:5. Thou knowest also what Joab, the son of Sarvia, hath done to me,
@c    what he did to the two captains of the army of Israel, to Abner, the
@c    son of Ner, and to Amasa, the son of Jether:  whom he slew, and shed the
@c    blood of war in peace, and put the blood of war on his girdle that was
@c    about his loins, and in his shoes that were on his feet.

@c    Joab. . .These instructions given by David to his son, with relation to
@c    Joab and Semei, proceeded not from any rancour of heart, or private
@c    pique; but from a zeal for justice, that crimes so public and heinous
@c    might not pass unpunished.

@c    2:6. Do, therefore, according to thy wisdom, and let not his hoary head
@c    go down to hell in peace.

@c    To hell. . .This word hell doth not here signify the place or state of
@c    damnation; but the place and state of the dead.

@c    2:7. But shew kindness to the sons of Berzellai, the Galaadite, and let
@c    them eat at thy table:  for they met me when I fled from the face of
@c    Absalom, thy brother.

@c    2:8. Thou hast also with thee Semei, the son of Gera, the son of
@c    Jemini, of Bahurim, who cursed me with a grievous curse, when I went to
@c    the camp:  but because he came down to meet me when I passed over the
@c    Jordan, and I swore to him by the Lord, saying:  I will not kill thee
@c    with the sword:

@c    2:9. Do not thou hold him guiltless.  But thou art a wise man, and
@c    knowest what to do with him, and thou shalt bring down his grey hairs
@c    with blood to the grave.

@c    2:10. So David slept with his fathers, and was buried in the city of
@c    David.

@c    2:11. And the days that David reigned in Israel, were forty years:  in
@c    Hebron he reigned seven years, in Jerusalem thirty-three.

@c    2:12. And Solomon sat upon the throne of his father David, and his
@c    kingdom was strengthened exceedingly.

@c    2:13. And Adonias, the son of Haggith, came to Bethsabee the mother of
@c    Solomon.  And she said to him:  Is thy coming peaceable?  He answered:
@c    It is peaceable.

@c    2:14. And he added:  I have a word to speak with thee.  She said to him:
@c    Speak.  And he said:

@c    2:15. Thou knowest that the kingdom was mine, and all Israel had
@c    preferred me to be their king:  but the kingdom is transferred, and is
@c    become my brother's:  for it was appointed him by the Lord.

@c    2:16. Now therefore, I ask one petition of thee; turn not away my face.
@c    And she said to him:  Say on.

@c    2:17. And he said I pray thee speak to king Solomon (for he cannot deny
@c    thee any thing) to give me Abisag, the Sunamitess, to wife.

@c    2:18. And Bethsabee said:  Well, I will speak for thee to the king.

@c    2:19. Then Bethsabee came to king Solomon, to speak to him for Adonias:
@c    and the king arose to meet her, and bowed to her, and sat down upon his
@c    throne:  and a throne was set for the king's mother, and she sat on his
@c    right hand.

@c    2:20. And she said to him:  I desire one small petition of thee; do not
@c    put me to confusion.  And the king said to her:  My mother ask, for I
@c    must not turn away thy face.

@c    2:21. And she said:  Let Abisag, the Sunamitess, be given to Adonias,
@c    thy brother, to wife.

@c    2:22. And king Solomon answered, and said to his mother:  Why dost thou
@c    ask Abisag, the Sunamitess, for Adonias?  ask for him also the kingdom;
@c    for he is my elder brother, and hath Abiathar, the priest, and Joab,
@c    the son of Sarvia.

@c    2:23. Then king Solomon swore by the Lord, saying:  So and so may God do
@c    to me, and add more, if Adonias hath not spoken this word against his
@c    own life.

@c    2:24. And now, as the Lord liveth, who hath established me, and placed
@c    me upon the throne of David, my father, and who hath made me a house,
@c    as he promised, Adonias shall be put to death this day.

@c    2:25. And king Solomon sent by the hand of Banaias, the son of Joiada,
@c    who slew him, and he died.

@c    2:26. And the king said also to Abiathar, the priest:  Go to Anathoth,
@c    to thy lands, for indeed thou art worthy of death:  but I will not at
@c    this time put thee to death, because thou didst carry the ark of the
@c    Lord God before David, my father, and hast endured trouble in all the
@c    troubles my father endured.

@c    2:27. So Solomon cast out Abiathar from being the priest of the Lord,
@c    that the word of the Lord might be fulfilled, which he spoke concerning
@c    the house of Heli in Silo.

@c    2:28. And the news came to Joab, because Joab had turned after Adonias,
@c    and had not turned after Solomon:  and Joab fled into the tabernacle of
@c    the Lord, and took hold on the horn of the altar.

@c    2:29. And it was told king Solomon, that Joab was fled into the
@c    tabernacle of the Lord, and was by the altar:  and Solomon sent Banaias,
@c    the son of Joiada, saying.  Go, kill him.

@c    2:30. And Banaias came to the tabernacle of the Lord, and said to him:
@c    Thus saith the king:  Come forth.  And he said:  I will not come forth,
@c    but here I will die.  Banaias brought word back to the king, saying:
@c    Thus saith Joab, and thus he answered me.

@c    2:31. And the king said to him:  Do as he hath said; and kill him, and
@c    bury him, and thou shalt remove the innocent blood which hath been shed
@c    by Joab, from me, and from the house of my father:

@c    2:32. And the Lord shall return his blood upon his own head; because he
@c    murdered two men, just and better than himself:  and slew them with the
@c    sword, my father, David, not knowing it; Abner, the son of Ner, general
@c    of the army of Israel, and Amasa, the son of Jether general of the army
@c    of Juda;

@c    2:33. And their blood shall return upon the head of Joab, and upon the
@c    head of his seed for ever.  But to David and his seed, and his house,
@c    and to his throne, be peace for ever from the Lord.

@c    2:34. So Banaias, the son of Joiada, went up, and setting upon him slew
@c    him, and he was buried in his house in the desert.

@c    2:35. And the king appointed Banaias, the son of Joiada in his room
@c    over the army; and Sadoc, the priest, he put in the place of Abiathar.

@c    2:36. The king also sent, and called for Semei, and said to him:  Build
@c    thee a house in Jerusalem, and dwell there:  and go not out from thence
@c    any where.

@c    2:37. For on what day soever thou shalt go out, and shalt pass over the
@c    brook Cedron, know that thou shalt be put to death:  thy blood shall be
@c    upon thy own head.

@c    2:38. And Semei said to the king:  The saying is good:  as my lord the
@c    king hath said, so will thy servant do.  And Semei dwelt in Jerusalem
@c    many days.

@c    2:39. And it came to pass after three years, that the servants of Semei
@c    ran away to Achis, the son of Maacha, the king of Geth:  and it was told
@c    Semei that his servants were gone to Geth.

@c    2:40. And Semei arose, and saddled his ass, and went to Achis, to Geth,
@c    to seek his servants, and he brought them out of Geth.

@c    2:41. And it was told Solomon, that Semei had gone from Jerusalem to
@c    Geth, and was come back.

@c    2:42. And sending he called for him, and said to him:  Did I not protest
@c    to thee by the Lord, and tell thee before:  On what day soever thou
@c    shalt go out and walk abroad any where, know that thou shalt die?  And
@c    thou answeredst me:  The word that I have heard is good.

@c    2:43. Why then hast thou not kept the oath of the Lord, and the
@c    commandment that I laid upon thee?

@c    2:44. And the king said to Semei:  Thou knowest all the evil, of which
@c    thy heart is conscious, which thou didst to David, my father:  the Lord
@c    hath returned thy wickedness upon thy own head.

@c    2:45. And king Solomon shall be blessed, and the throne of David shall
@c    be established before the Lord for ever.

@c    2:46. So the king commanded Banaias, the son of Joiada:  and he went out
@c    and struck him; and he died.



@c    3 Kings Chapter 3


@c    Solomon marrieth Pharao's daughter.  He sacrificeth in Gabaon:  in the
@c    choice which God gave him he preferreth wisdom.  His wise judgment
@c    between the two harlots.

@c    3:1. And the kingdom was established in the hand of Solomon, and he
@c    made affinity with Pharao, the king of Egypt:  for he took his daughter,
@c    and brought her into the city of David:  until he had made an end of
@c    building his own house, and the house of the Lord, and the wall of
@c    Jerusalem round about.

@c    3:2. But yet the people sacrificed in the high places:  for there was no
@c    temple built to the name of the Lord until that day.

@c    High places. . .That is, altars where they worshipped the Lord, but not
@c    according to the ordinance of the law; which allowed of no other places
@c    for sacrifice but the temple of God.  Among these high places that of
@c    Gabaon was the chiefest, because there was the tabernacle of the
@c    testimony, which had been removed from Silo to Nobe and from Nobe to
@c    Gabaon.

@c    3:3. And Solomon loved the Lord, walking in the precepts of David, his
@c    father; only he sacrificed in the high places, and burnt incense.

@c    3:4. He went therefore to Gabaon, to sacrifice there:  for that was the
@c    great high place:  a thousand victims for holocausts, did Solomon offer
@c    upon that altar, in Gabaon.

@c    3:5. And the Lord appeared to Solomon in a dream by night, saying:  Ask
@c    what thou wilt that I should give thee.

@c    3:6. And Solomon said:  Thou hast shewed great mercy to thy servant
@c    David, my father, even as he walked before thee in truth, and justice,
@c    and an upright heart with thee:  and thou hast kept thy great mercy for
@c    him, and hast given him a son to sit on his throne, as it is this day.

@c    3:7. And now, O Lord God, thou hast made thy servant king instead of
@c    David, my father:  and I am but a child, and know not how to go out and
@c    come in;

@c    3:8. And thy servant is in the midst of the people which thou hast
@c    chosen, an immense people, which cannot be numbered nor counted for
@c    multitude.

@c    3:9. Give therefore to thy servant an understanding heart, to judge thy
@c    people, and discern between good and evil.  For who shall be able to
@c    judge this people, thy people, which is so numerous?

@c    3:10. And the word was pleasing to the Lord, that Solomon had asked
@c    such a thing.

@c    3:11. And the Lord said to Solomon:  Because thou hast asked this thing,
@c    and hast not asked for thyself long life nor riches, nor the lives of
@c    thy enemies, but hast asked for thyself wisdom to discern judgment;

@c    3:12. Behold I have done for thee according to thy words, and have
@c    given thee a wise and understanding heart, in so much that there hath
@c    been no one like thee before thee, nor shall arise after thee.

@c    3:13. Yea, and the things also which thou didst not ask, I have given
@c    thee; to wit, riches and glory:  so that no one hath been like thee
@c    among the kings in all days heretofore.

@c    3:14. And if thou wilt walk in my ways, and keep my precepts and my
@c    commandments, as thy father walked, I will lengthen thy days.

@c    3:15. And Solomon awaked, and perceived that it was a dream:  and when
@c    he was come to Jerusalem, he stood before the ark of the covenant of
@c    the Lord, and offered holocausts, and sacrificed victims of peace
@c    offerings, and made a great feast for all his servants.

@c    3:16. Then there came two women that were harlots, to the king, and
@c    stood before him.

@c    3:17. And one of them said:  I beseech thee, my lord, I and this woman
@c    dwelt in one house, and I was delivered of a child with her in the
@c    chamber.

@c    3:18. And the third day after I was delivered, she also was delivered;
@c    and we were together, and no other person with us in the house; only we
@c    two.

@c    3:19. And this woman's child died in the night:  for in her sleep she
@c    overlaid him.

@c    3:20. And rising in the dead time of the night, she took my child from
@c    my side, while I, thy handmaid, was asleep, and laid it in her bosom:
@c    and laid her dead child in my bosom.

@c    3:21. And when I arose in the morning, to give my child suck, behold it
@c    was dead:  but considering him more diligently, when it was clear day, I
@c    found that it was not mine which I bore.

@c    3:22. And the other woman answered:  It is not so as thou sayest, but
@c    thy child is dead, and mine is alive.  On the contrary, she said; Thou
@c    liest:  for my child liveth, and thy child is dead.  And in this manner
@c    they strove before the king.

@c    3:23. Then said the king:  The one saith, My child is alive, and thy
@c    child is dead.  And the other answereth:  Nay; but thy child is dead, and
@c    mine liveth.

@c    3:24. The king therefore said:  Bring me a sword.  And when they had
@c    brought a sword before the king,

@c    3:25. Divide, said he, the living child in two, and give half to the
@c    one and half to the other.

@c    3:26. But the woman, whose child was alive, said to the king; (for her
@c    bowels were moved upon her child) I beseech thee, my lord, give her the
@c    child alive, and do not kill it.  But the other said:  Let it be neither
@c    mine nor thine; but divide it.

@c    3:27. The king answered, and said:  Give the living child to this woman,
@c    and let it not be killed; for she is the mother thereof.

@c    3:28. And all Israel heard the judgment which the king had judged, and
@c    they feared the king, seeing that the wisdom of God was in him to do
@c    judgment.



@c    3 Kings Chapter 4


@c    Solomon's chief officers.  His riches and wisdom.

@c    4:1. And king Solomon reigned over all Israel:

@c    4:2. And these were the princes which he had:  Azarias, the son of
@c    Sadoc, the priest:

@c    4:3. Elihoreph, and Ahia, the sons of Sisa, scribes:  Josaphat, the son
@c    of Ahilud, recorder:

@c    4:4. Banaias, the son of Joiada, over the army:  and Sadoc, and
@c    Abiathar, priests.

@c    Abiathar. . .By this it appears that Abiathar was not altogether deposed
@c    from the high priesthood; but only banished to his country house, and
@c    by that means excluded from the exercise of his functions.

@c    4:5. Azarias, the son of Nathan, over them that were about the king:
@c    Zabud, the son of Nathan, the priest, the king's friend:

@c    4:6. And Ahisar, governor of the house:  and Adoniram, the son of Abda,
@c    over the tribute.

@c    4:7. And Solomon had twelve governors over all Israel, who provided
@c    victuals for the king and for his house hold:  for every one provided
@c    necessaries, each man his month in the year.

@c    4:8. And these are their names:  Benhur, in mount Ephraim.

@c    4:9. Bendecar, in Macces, and in Salebim, and in Bethsames, and in
@c    Elon, and in Bethanan.

@c    4:10. Benhesed, in Aruboth:  his was Socho, and all the land of Epher.

@c    4:11. Benabinadab, to whom belonged all Nephath-Dor:  he had Tapheth,
@c    the daughter of Solomon, to wife.

@c    4:12. Bana, the son of Ahilud, who governed Thanac, and Mageddo, and
@c    all Bethsan, which is by Sarthana, beneath Jezrael, from Bethsan unto
@c    Abelmehula, over against Jecmaan.

@c    4:13. Bengaber, in Ramoth Galaad:  he had the town of Jair, the son of
@c    Manasses, in Galaad:  he was chief in all the country of Argob, which is
@c    in Basan, threescore great cities with walls, and brazen bolts.

@c    4:14. Ahinadab, the son of Addo, was chief in Manaim.

@c    4:15. Achimaas, in Nephthali:  he also had Basemath, the daughter of
@c    Solomon, to wife.

@c    4:16. Baana, the son of Husi, in Aser, and in Baloth.

@c    4:17. Josaphat, the son of Pharue, in Issachar.

@c    4:18. Semei, the son of Ela, in Benjamin.

@c    4:19. Gaber, the son of Uri, in the land of Galaad, in the land of
@c    Sehon, the king of the Amorrhites, and of Og, the king of Basan, over
@c    all that were in that land.

@c    4:20. Juda and Israel were innumerable, as the sand of the sea in
@c    multitude; eating and drinking, and rejoicing.

@c    4:21. And Solomon had under him all the kingdoms, from the river to the
@c    land of the Philistines, even to the border of Egypt:  and they brought
@c    him presents, and served him all the days of his life.

@c    The river. . .Euphrates.

@c    4:22. And the provision of Solomon, for each day, was thirty measures
@c    of fine flour, and threescore measures of meal;

@c    4:23. Ten fat oxen, and twenty out of the pastures, and a hundred rams;
@c    besides venison of harts, roes, and buffles, and fatted fowls.

@c    4:24. For he had all the country which was beyond the river, from
@c    Thaphsa to Gazan, and all the kings of those countries:  and he had
@c    peace on every side round about.

@c    4:25. And Juda, and Israel, dwelt without any fear, every one under his
@c    vine, and under his fig tree, from Dan to Bersabee, all the days of
@c    Solomon.

@c    4:26. And Solomon had forty thousand stalls of chariot horses, and
@c    twelve thousand for the saddle.

@c    4:27. And the foresaid governors of the king fed them; and they
@c    furnished the necessaries also for king Solomon's table, with great
@c    care, in their time.

@c    4:28. They brought barley also, and straw for the horses and beasts, to
@c    the place where the king was, according as it was appointed them.

@c    4:29. And God gave to Solomon wisdom, and understanding exceeding much,
@c    and largeness of heart, as the sand that is on the sea shore.

@c    4:30. And the wisdom of Solomon surpassed the wisdom of all the
@c    Orientals, and of the Egyptians;

@c    4:31. And he was wiser than all men:  wiser than Ethan, the Ezrahite,
@c    and Heman, and Chalcol, and Dorda, the sons of Mahol, and he was
@c    renowned in all nations round about.

@c    4:32. Solomon also spoke three thousand parables:  and his poems were a
@c    thousand and five.

@c    Three thousand parables, etc. . .These works are all lost, excepting
@c    some part of the parables extant in the book of Proverbs; and his chief
@c    poem called the Canticle of Canticles.

@c    4:33. And he treated about trees, from the cedar that is in Libanus,
@c    unto the hyssop that cometh out of the wall:  and he discoursed of
@c    beasts, and of fowls, and of creeping things, and of fishes.

@c    4:34. And they came from all nations to hear the wisdom of Solomon, and
@c    from all the kings of the earth, who heard of his wisdom.



@c    3 Kings Chapter 5


@c    Hiram king of Tyre agreeth to furnish timber and workmen for building
@c    the temple:  the number of workmen and overseers.

@c    5:1. And Hiram, king of Tyre, sent his servants to Solomon:  for he
@c    heard that they had anointed him king in the room of his father:  for
@c    Hiram had always been David's friend.

@c    5:2. Solomon sent to Hiram, saying:

@c    5:3. Thou knowest the will of David, my father, and that he could not
@c    build a house to the name of the Lord his God, because of the wars that
@c    were round about him, until the Lord put them under the soles of his
@c    feet.

@c    5:4. But now the Lord my God hath given me rest round about; and there
@c    is no adversary nor evil occurrence.

@c    5:5. Wherefore I purpose to build a temple to the name of the Lord my
@c    God, as the Lord spoke to David my father, saying:  Thy son, whom I will
@c    set upon the throne, in thy place, he shall build a house to my name.

@c    5:6. Give orders, therefore, that thy servants cut me down cedar trees,
@c    out of Libanus, and let my servants be with thy servants:  and I will
@c    give thee the hire of thy servants whatsoever thou wilt ask:  for thou
@c    knowest how there is not among my people a man that has skill to hew
@c    wood like to the Sidonians.

@c    5:7. Now when Hiram had heard the words of Solomon, he rejoiced
@c    exceedingly, and said:  Blessed be the Lord God this day, who hath given
@c    to David a very wise son over this numerous people.

@c    5:8. And Hiram sent to Solomon, saying:  I have heard all thou hast
@c    desired of me; and I will do all thy desire concerning cedar trees, and
@c    fir trees.

@c    5:9. My servants shall bring them down from Libanus to the sea:  and I
@c    will put them together in floats, on the sea, and convey them to the
@c    place, which thou shalt signify to me, and will land them there, and
@c    thou shalt receive them:  and thou shalt allow me necessaries to furnish
@c    food for my household.

@c    5:10. So Hiram gave Solomon cedar trees, and fir trees, according to
@c    all his desire.

@c    5:11. And Solomon allowed Hiram twenty thousand measures of wheat, for
@c    provision for his house, and twenty measures of the purest oil:  thus
@c    gave Solomon to Hiram every year.

@c    5:12. And the Lord gave wisdom to Solomon, as he promised him:  and
@c    there was peace between Hiram and Solomon, and they two made a league
@c    together.

@c    5:13. And king Solomon chose workmen out of all Israel, and the levy
@c    was of thirty thousand men.

@c    5:14. And he sent them to Libanus, ten thousand every month, by turns,
@c    so that two months they were at home:  and Adoniram was over this levy.

@c    5:15. And Solomon had seventy thousand to carry burdens, and eighty
@c    thousand to hew stones in the mountain:

@c    5:16. Besides the overseers who were over every work, in number three
@c    thousand and three hundred, that ruled over the people, and them that
@c    did the work.

@c    5:17. And the king commanded that they should bring great stones,
@c    costly stones, for the foundation of the temple, and should square
@c    them:

@c    5:18. And the masons of Solomon, and the masons of Hiram, hewed them:
@c    and the Giblians prepared timber and stones to build the house.



@c    3 Kings Chapter 6


@c    The building of Solomon's temple.

@c    6:1. And it came to pass in the four hundred and eightieth year after
@c    the children of Israel came out of the land of Egypt, in the fourth
@c    year of the reign of Solomon over Israel, in the month Zio, (the same
@c    is the second month) he began to build a house to the Lord.

@c    6:2. And the house, which king Solomon built to the Lord, was
@c    threescore cubits in length, and twenty cubits in breadth, and thirty
@c    cubits in height.

@c    6:3. And there was a porch before the temple, of twenty cubits in
@c    length, according to the measure of the breadth of the temple:  and it
@c    was ten cubits in breadth, before the face of the temple.

@c    6:4. And he made in the temple oblique windows.

@c    6:5. And upon the wall of the temple, he built floors round about, in
@c    the walls of the house, round about the temple and the oracle, and he
@c    made chambers in the sides round about.

@c    Upon the wall, i. e., joining to the wall.--Ibid.  He built floors round
@c    about. . .Chambers or cells adjoining to the temple, for the use of the
@c    temple and of the priests, so contrived as to be between the inward and
@c    outward wall of the temple, in three stories, one above another.--Ibid.
@c    The oracle. . .The inner temple or holy of holies, where God gave his
@c    oracles.

@c    6:6. The floor that was underneath was five cubits in breadth, and the
@c    middle floor was six cubits in breadth, and the third floor was seven
@c    cubits in breadth.  And he put beams in the house round about on the
@c    outside, that they might not be fastened in the walls of the temple.

@c    6:7. And the house, when it was in building, was built of stones, hewed
@c    and made ready:  so that there was neither hammer nor axe, nor any tool
@c    of iron heard in the house when it was in building.

@c    Made ready, etc. . .So the stones for the building of God's eternal
@c    temple in the heavenly Jerusalem, (who are the faithful,) must first be
@c    hewn and polished here by many trials and sufferings, before they can
@c    be admitted to have a place in that celestial structure.

@c    6:8. The door, for the middle side, was on the right hand of the house:
@c    and by winding stairs they went up to the middle room, and from the
@c    middle to the third.

@c    6:9. So he built the house, and finished it:  and he covered the house
@c    with roofs of cedar.

@c    6:10. And he built a floor over all the house, five cubits in height,
@c    and he covered the house with timber of cedar.

@c    6:11. And the word of the Lord came to Solomon,

@c    6:12. As for this house, which thou art building, if thou wilt walk in
@c    my statutes, and execute my judgments, and keep all my commandments,
@c    walking in them, I will fulfil my word to thee, which I spoke to David
@c    thy father.

@c    6:13. And I will dwell in the midst of the children of Israel, and I
@c    will not forsake my people Israel.

@c    6:14. So Solomon built the house, and finished it.

@c    6:15. And he built the walls of the house on the inside, with boards of
@c    cedar, from the floor of the house to the top of the walls, and to the
@c    roofs, he covered it with boards of cedar on the inside:  and he covered
@c    the floor of the house with planks of fir.

@c    6:16. And he built up twenty cubits with boards of cedar at the hinder
@c    part of the temple, from the floor to the top:  and made the inner house
@c    of the oracle to be the holy of holies.

@c    6:17. And the temple itself, before the doors of the oracle, was forty
@c    cubits long.

@c    6:18. And all the house was covered within with cedar, having the
@c    turnings, and the joints thereof artfully wrought, and carvings
@c    projecting out:  all was covered with boards of cedar:  and no stone
@c    could be seen in the wall at all.

@c    6:19. And he made the oracle in the midst of the house, in the inner
@c    part, to set there the ark of the covenant of the Lord.

@c    6:20. Now the oracle was twenty cubits in length, and twenty cubits in
@c    breadth, and twenty cubits in height.  And he covered it, and overlaid
@c    it with most pure gold.  And the altar also he covered with cedar.

@c    6:21. And the house before the oracle he overlaid with most pure gold,
@c    and fastened on the plates with nails of gold.

@c    6:22. And there was nothing in the temple that was not covered with
@c    gold:  the whole altar of the oracle he covered also with gold.

@c    6:23. And he made in the oracle two cherubims of olive tree, of ten
@c    cubits in height.

@c    6:24. One wing of the cherub was five cubits, and the other wing of the
@c    cherub was five cubits:  that is, in all ten cubits, from the extremity
@c    of one wing to the extremity of the other wing.

@c    6:25. The second cherub also was ten cubits:  and the measure, and the
@c    work was the same in both the cherubims:

@c    6:26. That is to say, one cherub was ten cubits high, and in like
@c    manner the other cherub.

@c    6:27. And he set the cherubims in the midst of the inner temple:  and
@c    the cherubims stretched forth their wings, and the wing of the one
@c    touched one wall, and the wing of the other cherub touched the other
@c    wall:  and the other wings in the midst of the temple touched one
@c    another.

@c    6:28. And he overlaid the cherubims with gold.

@c    6:29. And all the walls of the temple round about he carved with divers
@c    figures and carvings:  and he made in them cherubims and palm trees, and
@c    divers representations, as it were standing out, and coming forth from
@c    the wall.

@c    6:30. And the floor of the house he also overlaid with gold within and
@c    without.

@c    6:31. And in the entrance of the oracle, he made little doors of olive
@c    tree, and posts of five corners,

@c    6:32. And two doors of olive tree:  and he carved upon them figures of
@c    cherubims, and figures of palm trees, and carvings very much
@c    projecting; and he overlaid them with gold:  and he covered both the
@c    cherubims and the palm trees, and the other things, with gold.

@c    6:33. And he made in the entrance of the temple posts of olive tree
@c    foursquare:

@c    6:34. And two doors of fir tree, one of each side:  and each door was
@c    double, and so opened with folding leaves.

@c    6:35. And he carved cherubims, and palm trees, and carved work standing
@c    very much out:  and he overlaid all with golden plates in square work by
@c    rule.

@c    6:36. And he built the inner court with three rows of polished stones,
@c    and one row of beams of cedar.

@c    6:37. In the fourth year was the house of the Lord founded, in the
@c    month Zio:

@c    6:38. And in the eleventh year, in the month Bul.  (which is the eighth
@c    month) the house was finished in all the works thereof, and in all the
@c    appurtenances thereof:  and he was seven years in building it.



@c    3 Kings Chapter 7


@c    Solomon's palace, his house in the forest, and the queen's house:  the
@c    work of the two pillars:  the sea (or laver) and other vessels.

@c    7:1. And Solomon built his own house in thirteen years, and brought it
@c    to perfection.

@c    7:2. He built also the house of the forest of Libanus; the length of it
@c    was a hundred cubits, and the breadth fifty cubits, and the height
@c    thirty cubits:  and four galleries between pillars of cedar:  for he had
@c    cut cedar trees into pillars.

@c    7:3. And he covered the whole vault with boards of cedar, and it was
@c    held up with five and forty pillars.  And one row had fifteen pillars,

@c    7:4. Set one against another,

@c    7:5. And looking one upon another, with equal space between the
@c    pillars, and over the pillars were square beams in all things equal.

@c    7:6. And he made a porch of pillars of fifty cubits in length, and
@c    thirty cubits in breadth:  and another porch before the greater porch,
@c    and pillars, and chapiters upon the pillars.

@c    7:7. He made also the porch of the throne wherein is the seat of
@c    judgment; and covered it with cedar wood from the floor to the top.

@c    7:8. And in the midst of the porch, was a small house, where he sat in
@c    judgment of the like work.  He made also a house for the daughter of
@c    Pharao (whom Solomon had taken to wife) of the same work, as this
@c    porch;

@c    7:9. All of costly stones, which were sawed by a certain rule and
@c    measure, both within and without:  from the foundation to the top of the
@c    walls, and without, unto the great court.

@c    7:10. And the foundations were of costly stones, great stones of ten
@c    cubits or eight cubits.

@c    7:11. And above there were costly stones of equal measure hewed, and in
@c    like manner planks of cedar.

@c    7:12. And the great court was made round with three rows of hewed
@c    stones, and one row of planks of cedar, which also was observed in the
@c    inner court of the house of the Lord, and in the porch of the house.

@c    7:13. And king Solomon sent, and brought Hiram from Tyre,

@c    7:14. The son of a widow woman, of the tribe of Nephthali, whose father
@c    was a Tyrian, an artificer in brass, and full of wisdom, and
@c    understanding, and skill to work all work in brass.  And when he was
@c    come to king Solomon, he wrought all his work.

@c    7:15. And he cast two pillars in brass, each pillar was eighteen cubits
@c    high:  and a line of twelve cubits compassed both the pillars.

@c    7:16. He made also two chapiters of molten brass, to be set upon the
@c    tops of the pillars:  the height of one chapiter was five cubits, and
@c    the height of the other chapiter was five cubits:

@c    7:17. And a kind of network, and chain work wreathed together with
@c    wonderful art.  Both the chapiters of the pillars were cast:  seven rows
@c    of nets were on one chapiter, and seven nets on the other chapiter.

@c    7:18. And he made the pillars, and two rows round about each network to
@c    cover the chapiters, that were upon the top, with pomegranates:  and in
@c    like manner did he to the other chapiter.

@c    7:19. And the chapiters that were upon the top of the pillars, were of
@c    lily work, in the porch of four cubits.

@c    7:20. And again there were other chapiters on the top of the pillars
@c    above, according to the measure of the pillar over against the network:
@c    and of pomegranates there were two hundred, in rows round about the
@c    other chapiter.

@c    7:21. And he set up the two pillars in the porch of the temple:  and
@c    when he had set up the pillar on the right hand, he called the name
@c    thereof Jachin:  in like manner he set up the second pillar, and called
@c    the name thereof Booz.

@c    Jachin. . .That is, firmly established.--Ibid.  Booz. . .That is, in its
@c    strength.  By recording these names in holy writ, the spirit of God
@c    would have us understand the invincible firmness and strength of the
@c    pillars on which the true temple of God, which is the church, is
@c    established.

@c    7:22. And upon the tops of the pillars he made lily work:  so the work
@c    of the pillars was finished.

@c    7:23. He made also a molten sea, of ten cubits, from brim to brim,
@c    round all about; the height of it was five cubits, and a line of thirty
@c    cubits compassed it round about.

@c    7:24. And a graven work, under the brim of it, compassed it for ten
@c    cubits going about the sea:  there were two rows cast of chamfered
@c    sculptures.

@c    7:25. And it stood upon twelve oxen, of which three looked towards the
@c    north, and three towards the west, and three towards the south, and
@c    three towards the east:  and the sea was above upon them, and their
@c    hinder parts were all hid within.

@c    7:26. And the laver was a hand breadth thick:  and the brim thereof was
@c    like the brim of a cup, or the leaf of a crisped lily:  it contained two
@c    thousand bates.

@c    Two thousand bates. . .That is, about ten thousand gallons.  This was the
@c    quantity of water which was usually put into it:  but it was capable, if
@c    brimful, of holding three thousand.  See 2 Par. 4.5.

@c    7:27. And he made ten bases of brass, every base was four cubits in
@c    length, and four cubits in breadth, and three cubits high.

@c    7:28. And the work itself of the bases, was intergraven:  and there were
@c    gravings between the joinings.

@c    7:29. And between the little crowns and the ledges, were lions, and
@c    oxen, and cherubims; and in the joinings likewise above:  and under the
@c    lions and oxen, as it were bands of brass hanging down.

@c    7:30. And every base had four wheels, and axletrees of brass:  and at
@c    the four sides were undersetters, under the laver molten, looking one
@c    against another.

@c    7:31. The mouth also of the laver within, was in the top of the
@c    chapiter:  and that which appeared without, was of one cubit all round,
@c    and together it was one cubit and a half:  and in the corners of the
@c    pillars were divers engravings:  and the spaces between the pillars were
@c    square, not round.

@c    7:32. And the four wheels, which were at the four corners of the base,
@c    were joined one to another under the base:  the height of a wheel was a
@c    cubit and a half.

@c    7:33. And they were such wheels as are used to be made in a chariot:
@c    and their axletrees, and spokes, and strakes, and naves, were all cast.

@c    7:34. And the four undersetters, that were at every corner of each
@c    base, were of the base itself, cast and joined together.

@c    7:35. And on the top of the base, there was a round compass of half a
@c    cubit, so wrought that the laver might be set thereon, having its
@c    gravings, and divers sculptures of itself.

@c    7:36. He engraved also in those plates, which were of brass, and in the
@c    corners, cherubims, and lions, and palm trees, in likeness of a man
@c    standing, so that they seemed not to be engraven, but added round
@c    about.

@c    7:37. After this manner, he made ten bases, of one casting and measure,
@c    and the like graving.

@c    7:38. He made also ten lavers of brass:  one laver contained four bates,
@c    and was of four cubits:  and upon every base, in all ten, he put as many
@c    lavers.

@c    7:39. And he set the ten bases, five on the right side of the temple,
@c    and five on the left:  and the sea he put on the right side of the
@c    temple, over against the east southward.

@c    7:40. And Hiram made cauldrons, and shovels, and basins, and finished
@c    all the work of king Solomon in the temple of the Lord.

@c    7:41. The two pillars and the two cords of the chapiters, upon the
@c    chapiters of the pillars:  and the two networks, to cover the two cords,
@c    that were upon the top of the pillars.

@c    7:42. And four hundred pomegranates for the two networks:  two rows of
@c    pomegranates for each network, to cover the cords of the chapiters,
@c    which were upon the tops of the pillars.

@c    7:43. And the ten bases, and the ten lavers on the bases.

@c    7:44. And one sea, and twelve oxen under the sea.

@c    7:45. And the cauldrons, and the shovels, and the basins.  All the
@c    vessels that Hiram made for king Solomon, for the house of the Lord,
@c    were of fine brass.

@c    7:46. In the plains of the Jordan, did the king cast them in a clay
@c    ground, between Socoth and Sartham.

@c    7:47. And Solomon placed all the vessels:  but for its exceeding great
@c    multitude the brass could not be weighed.

@c    7:48. And Solomon made all the vessels for the house of the Lord:  the
@c    altar of gold, and the table of gold, upon which the loaves of
@c    proposition should be set:

@c    7:49. And the golden candlesticks, five on the right hand, and five on
@c    the left, over against the oracle, of pure gold:  and the flowers like
@c    lilies, and the lamps over them of gold:  and golden snuffers,

@c    7:50. And pots, and fleshhooks, and bowls, and mortars, and censers, of
@c    most pure gold:  and the hinges for the doors of the inner house of the
@c    holy of holies, and for the doors of the house of the temple, were of
@c    gold.

@c    7:51. And Solomon finished all the work that he made in the house of
@c    the Lord, and brought in the things that David, his father, had
@c    dedicated, the silver and the gold, and the vessels, and laid them up
@c    in the treasures of the house of the Lord.



@c    3 Kings Chapter 8


@c    The dedication of the temple:  Solomon's prayer and sacrifices.

@c    8:1. Then all the ancients of Israel, with the princes of the tribes,
@c    and the heads of the families of the children of Israel, were assembled
@c    to king Solomon, in Jerusalem:  that they might carry the ark of the
@c    covenant of the Lord, out of the city of David, that is, out of Sion.

@c    8:2. And all Israel assembled themselves to king Solomon, on the
@c    festival day, in the month of Ethanim, the same is the seventh month.

@c    8:3. And all the ancients of Israel came, and the priests took up the
@c    ark,

@c    8:4. And carried the ark of the Lord, and the tabernacle of the
@c    covenant, and all the vessels of the sanctuary, that were in the
@c    tabernacle:  and the priests and the Levites carried them.

@c    8:5. And king Solomon, and all the multitude of Israel, that were
@c    assembled unto him, went with him before the ark, and they sacrificed
@c    sheep and oxen, that could not be counted or numbered.

@c    8:6. And the priests brought in the ark of the covenant of the Lord
@c    into its place, into the oracle of the temple, into the holy of holies,
@c    under the wings of the cherubims.

@c    8:7. For the cherubims spread forth their wings over the place of the
@c    ark, and covered the ark, and the staves thereof above.

@c    8:8. And whereas the staves stood out, the ends of them were seen
@c    without, in the sanctuary before the oracle, but were not seen farther
@c    out, and there they have been unto this day.

@c    8:9. Now in the ark there was nothing else but the two tables of stone,
@c    which Moses put there at Horeb, when the Lord made a covenant with the
@c    children of Israel, when they came out of the land of Egypt.

@c    Nothing else, etc. . .There was nothing else but the tables of the law
@c    within the ark:  but on the outside of the ark, or near the ark were
@c    also the rod of Aaron, and a golden urn with manna, Heb. 9.4.

@c    8:10. And it came to pass, when the priests were come out of the
@c    sanctuary, that a cloud filled the house of the Lord,

@c    8:11. And the priests could not stand to minister because of the cloud:
@c    for the glory of the Lord had filled the house of the Lord.

@c    8:12. Then Solomon said:  The Lord said that he would dwell in a cloud.

@c    8:13. Building, I have built a house for thy dwelling, to be thy most
@c    firm throne for ever.

@c    8:14. And the king turned his face, and blessed all the assembly of
@c    Israel:  for all the assembly of Israel stood.

@c    8:15. And Solomon said:  Blessed be the Lord the God of Israel, who
@c    spoke with his mouth to David, my father, and with his own hands hath
@c    accomplished it, saying:

@c    8:16. Since the day that I brought my people Israel, out of Egypt, I
@c    chose no city out of all the tribes of Israel, for a house to be built,
@c    that my name might be there:  but I chose David to be over my people
@c    Israel.

@c    8:17. And David, my father, would have built a house to the name of the
@c    Lord, the God of Israel:

@c    8:18. And the Lord said to David, my father:  Whereas, thou hast thought
@c    in thy heart to build a house to my name, thou hast done well in having
@c    this same thing in thy mind.

@c    8:19. Nevertheless, thou shalt not build me a house, but thy son, that
@c    shall come forth out of thy loins, he shall build a house to my name.

@c    8:20. The Lord hath performed his word which he spoke.  And I stand in
@c    the room of David, my father, and sit upon the throne of Israel, as the
@c    Lord promised:  and have built a house to the name of the Lord, the God
@c    of Israel.

@c    8:21. And I have set there a place for the ark, wherein is the covenant
@c    of the Lord, which he made with our fathers, when they came out of the
@c    land of Egypt.

@c    8:22. And Solomon stood before the altar of the Lord, in the sight of
@c    the assembly of Israel, and spread forth his hands towards heaven,

@c    8:23. And said:  Lord God of Israel, there is no God like thee, in
@c    heaven above, or on the earth beneath:  who keepest covenant and mercy
@c    with thy servants, that have walked before thee with all their heart:

@c    8:24. Who hast kept with thy servant David, my father, what thou hast
@c    promised him:  with thy mouth thou didst speak, and with thy hands thou
@c    hast performed, as this day proveth.

@c    8:25. Now, therefore, O Lord God of Israel, keep with thy servant
@c    David, my father, what thou hast spoken to him, saying:  There shall not
@c    be taken away of thee a man in my sight, to sit on the throne of
@c    Israel:  yet so that thy children take heed to their way, that they walk
@c    before me as thou hast walked in my sight.

@c    8:26. And now, Lord God of Israel, let thy words be established, which
@c    thou hast spoken to thy servant David, my father.

@c    8:27. Is it then to be thought that God should indeed dwell upon earth?
@c    for if heaven, and the heavens of heavens, cannot contain thee, how
@c    much less this house which I have built?

@c    8:28. But have regard to the prayer of thy servant, and to his
@c    supplications, O Lord, my God:  hear the hymn and the prayer, which thy
@c    servant prayeth before thee this day:

@c    8:29. That thy eyes may be open upon this house, night and day:  upon
@c    the house of which thou hast said:  My name shall be there:  that thou
@c    mayst hearken to the prayer which thy servant prayeth, in this place to
@c    thee:

@c    8:30. That thou mayst hearken to the supplication of thy servant, and
@c    of thy people Israel, whatsoever they shall pray for in this place, and
@c    hear them in the place of thy dwelling in heaven; and when thou
@c    hearest, shew them mercy.

@c    8:31. If any man trespass against his neighbour, and have an oath upon
@c    him, wherewith he is bound, and come, because of the oath, before thy
@c    altar, to thy house,

@c    8:32. Then hear thou in heaven:  and do and judge thy servants,
@c    condemning the wicked, and bringing his way upon his own head, and
@c    justifying the just, and rewarding him according to his justice.

@c    8:33. If thy people Israel shall fly before their enemies (because they
@c    will sin against thee) and doing penance, and confessing to thy name,
@c    shall come and pray, and make supplications to thee in this house:

@c    8:34. Then hear thou in heaven, and forgive the sin of thy people
@c    Israel, and bring them back to the land which thou gavest to their
@c    fathers.

@c    8:35. If heaven shall be shut up, and there shall be no rain, because
@c    of their sins, and they, praying in this place, shall do penance to thy
@c    name, and shall be converted from their sins, by occasion of their
@c    afflictions:

@c    8:36. Then hear thou them in heaven, and forgive the sins of thy
@c    servants, and of thy people Israel:  and shew them the good way wherein
@c    they should walk, and give rain upon thy land, which thou hast given to
@c    thy people in possession.

@c    8:37. If a famine arise in the land, or a pestilence, or corrupt air,
@c    or blasting, or locust, or mildew; if their enemy afflict them,
@c    besieging the gates, whatsoever plague, whatsoever infirmity,

@c    8:38. Whatsoever curse or imprecation shall happen to any man of thy
@c    people Israel:  when a man shall know the wound of his own heart, and
@c    shall spread forth his hands in this house;

@c    8:39. Then hear thou in heaven, in the place of thy dwelling, and
@c    forgive, and do so as to give to every one according to his ways, as
@c    thou shalt see his heart (for thou only knowest the heart of all the
@c    children of men)

@c    8:40. That they may fear thee all the days that they live upon the face
@c    of the land, which thou hast given to our fathers.

@c    8:41. Moreover also the stranger, who is not of thy people Israel, when
@c    he shall come out of a far country for thy name's sake, (for they shall
@c    hear every where of thy great name, and thy mighty hand,

@c    8:42. And thy stretched out arm) so when he shall come, and shall pray
@c    in this place,

@c    8:43. Then hear thou in heaven, in the firmament of thy dwelling place,
@c    and do all those things, for which that stranger shall call upon thee:
@c    that all the people of the earth may learn to fear thy name, as do thy
@c    people Israel, and may prove that thy name is called upon on this
@c    house, which I have built.

@c    8:44. If thy people go out to war against their enemies, by what way
@c    soever thou shalt send them, they shall pray to thee towards the way of
@c    the city, which thou hast chosen, and towards the house, which I have
@c    built to thy name:

@c    8:45. And then hear thou in heaven their prayers, and their
@c    supplications, and do judgment for them.

@c    8:46. But if they sin against thee, (for there is no man who sinneth
@c    not) and thou being angry, deliver them up to their enemies, so that
@c    they be led away captives into the land of their enemies, far or near;

@c    8:47. Then if they do penance in their heart, in the place of
@c    captivity, and being converted, make supplication to thee in their
@c    captivity, saying:  We have sinned, we have done unjustly, we have
@c    committed wickedness:

@c    8:48. And return to thee with all their heart, and all their soul, in
@c    the land of their enemies, to which they have been led captives:  and
@c    pray to thee towards the way of their land, which thou gavest to their
@c    fathers, and of the city which thou hast chosen, and of the temple
@c    which I have built to thy name:

@c    8:49. Then hear thou in heaven, in the firmament of thy throne, their
@c    prayers, and their supplications, and do judgment for them:

@c    8:50. And forgive thy people, that have sinned against thee, and all
@c    their iniquities, by which they have transgressed against thee:  and
@c    give them mercy before them that have made them captives, that they may
@c    have compassion on them.

@c    8:51. For they are thy people, and thy inheritance, whom thou hast
@c    brought out of the land of Egypt, from the midst of the furnace of
@c    iron.

@c    8:52. That thy eyes may be open to the supplication of thy servant, and
@c    of thy people Israel, to hear them in all things for which they shall
@c    call upon thee.

@c    8:53. For thou hast separated them to thyself for an inheritance, from
@c    amongst all the people of the earth, as thou hast spoken by Moses, thy
@c    servant, when thou broughtest our fathers out of Egypt, O Lord God.

@c    8:54. And it came to pass, when Solomon had made an end of praying all
@c    this prayer and supplication to the Lord, that he rose from before the
@c    altar of the Lord:  for he had fixed both knees on the ground, and had
@c    spread his hands towards heaven.

@c    8:55. And he stood, and blessed all the assembly of Israel with a loud
@c    voice, saying:

@c    8:56. Blessed be the Lord, who hath given rest to his people Israel,
@c    according to all that he promised:  there hath not failed so much as one
@c    word of all the good things that he promised by his servant Moses.

@c    8:57. The Lord our God be with us, as he was with our fathers, and not
@c    leave us, nor cast us off:

@c    8:58. But may he incline our hearts to himself, that we may walk in all
@c    his ways, and keep his commandments, and his ceremonies, and all his
@c    judgments, which he commanded our fathers.

@c    8:59. And let these my words, wherewith I have prayed before the Lord,
@c    be nigh unto the Lord our God day and night, that he may do judgment
@c    for his servant, and for his people Israel, day by day:

@c    8:60. That all the people of the earth may know, that the Lord he is
@c    God, and there is no other besides him.

@c    8:61. Let our hearts also be perfect with the Lord our God, that we may
@c    walk in his statutes, and keep his commandments, as at this day.

@c    8:62. And the king, and all Israel with him, offered victims before the
@c    Lord.

@c    8:63. And Solomon slew victims of peace offerings, which he sacrificed
@c    to the Lord, two and twenty thousand oxen, and a hundred and twenty
@c    thousand sheep so the king, and all the children of Israel, dedicated
@c    the temple of the Lord.

@c    8:64. In that day the king sanctified the middle of the court, that was
@c    before the house of the Lord for there he offered the holocaust, and
@c    sacrifice, and the fat of the peace offerings:  because the brazen altar
@c    that was before the Lord, was too little to receive the holocaust, and
@c    sacrifice, and the fat of the peace offerings.

@c    8:65. And Solomon made at the same time a solemn feast, and all Israel
@c    with him, a great multitude, from the entrance of Emath to the river of
@c    Egypt, before the Lord our God, seven days and seven days, that is,
@c    fourteen days.

@c    8:66. And on the eighth day, he sent away the people:  and they blessed
@c    the king, and went to their dwellings, rejoicing, and glad in heart,
@c    for all the good things that the Lord had done for David, his servant,
@c    and for Israel, his people.



@c    3 Kings Chapter 9


@c    The Lord appeareth again to Solomon:  he buildeth cities:  he sendeth a
@c    fleet to Ophir.

@c    9:1. And it came to pass when Solomon had finished the building of the
@c    house of the Lord, and the king's house, and all that he desired and
@c    was pleased to do,

@c    9:2. That the Lord appeared to him the second time, as he had appeared
@c    to him in Gabaon.

@c    9:3. And the Lord said to him:  I have heard thy prayer and thy
@c    supplication, which thou hast made before me:  I have sanctified this
@c    house, which thou hast built, to put my name there for ever; and my
@c    eyes, and my heart, shall be there always.

@c    9:4. And if thou wilt walk before me, as thy father walked, in
@c    simplicity of heart, and in uprightness:  and wilt do all that I have
@c    commanded thee, and wilt keep my ordinances, and my judgments,

@c    As thy father walked, in simplicity of heart. . .That is, in the
@c    sincerity and integrity of a single heart, as opposite to all double
@c    dealing and deceit.

@c    9:5. I will establish the throne of thy kingdom over Israel for ever,
@c    as I promised David, thy father, saying:  There shall not fail a man of
@c    thy race upon the throne of Israel.

@c    9:6. But if you and your children, revolting, shall turn away from
@c    following me, and will not keep my commandments, and my ceremonies,
@c    which I have set before you, but will go and worship strange gods, and
@c    adore them:

@c    9:7. I will take away Israel from the face of the land which I have
@c    given them; and the temple which I have sanctified to my name, I will
@c    cast out of my sight; and Israel shall be a proverb, and a byword among
@c    all people.

@c    9:8. And this house shall be made an example of:  every one that shall
@c    pass by it, shall be astonished, and shall hiss, and say:  Why hath the
@c    Lord done thus to this land, and to this house?

@c    9:9. And they shall answer:  Because they forsook the Lord their God,
@c    who brought their fathers out of the land of Egypt, and followed
@c    strange gods, and adored them, and worshipped them:  therefore hath the
@c    Lord brought upon them all this evil.

@c    9:10. And when twenty years were ended, after Solomon had built the two
@c    houses; that is, the house of the Lord, and the house of the king,

@c    9:11. (Hiram, the king of Tyre, furnishing Solomon with cedar trees,
@c    and fir trees, and gold, according to all he had need of) then Solomon
@c    gave Hiram twenty cities in the land of Galilee.

@c    9:12. And Hiram came out of Tyre, to see the towns which Solomon had
@c    given him, and they pleased him not;

@c    9:13. And he said:  Are these the cities which thou hast given me,
@c    brother?  And he called them the land of Chabul, unto this day.

@c    Chabul. . .That is, dirty or displeasing.

@c    9:14. And Hiram sent to king Solomon a hundred and twenty talents of
@c    gold.

@c    9:15. This is the sum of the expenses, which king Solomon offered to
@c    build the house of the Lord, and his own house, and Mello, and the wall
@c    of Jerusalem, and Heser, and Mageddo, and Gazer.

@c    9:16. Pharao, the king of Egypt, came up and took Gazer, and burnt it
@c    with fire:  and slew the Chanaanite that dwelt in the city, and gave it
@c    for a dowry to his daughter, Solomon's wife.

@c    9:17. So Solomon built Gazer, and Bethhoron the nether,

@c    9:18. And Baalath, and Palmira, in the land of the wilderness.

@c    9:19. And all the towns that belonged to himself, and were not walled,
@c    he fortified; the cities also of the chariots, and the cities of the
@c    horsemen, and whatsoever he had a mind to build in Jerusalem, and in
@c    Libanus, and in all the land of his dominion.

@c    9:20. All the people that were left of the Amorrhites, and Hethites,
@c    and Pherezites, and Hevites, and Jebusites, that are not of the
@c    children of Israel:

@c    9:21. Their children, that were left in the land; to wit, such as the
@c    children of Israel had not been able to destroy, Solomon made tributary
@c    unto this day.

@c    9:22. But of the children of Israel, Solomon made not any to be
@c    bondmen, but they were warriors, and his servants, and his princes, and
@c    captains, and overseers of the chariots and horses.

@c    9:23. And there were five hundred and fifty chief officers set over all
@c    the works of Solomon, and they had people under them, and had charge
@c    over the appointed works.

@c    9:24. And the daughter of Pharao came up out of the city of David to
@c    her house, which Solomon had built for her:  then did he build Mello.

@c    9:25. Solomon also offered three times every year holocausts, and
@c    victims of peace offerings, upon the altar which he had built to the
@c    Lord, and he burnt incense before the Lord:  and the temple was
@c    finished.

@c    9:26. And king Solomon made a fleet in Asiongaber, which is by Ailath,
@c    on the shore of the Red Sea, in the land of Edom.

@c    9:27. And Hiram sent his servants in the fleet, sailors that had
@c    knowledge of the sea, with the servants of Solomon.

@c    9:28. And they came to Ophir; and they brought from thence to king
@c    Solomon four hundred and twenty talents of gold.



@c    3 Kings Chapter 10


@c    The queen of Saba cometh to king Solomon:  his riches and glory.

@c    10:1. And the queen of Saba having heard of the fame of Solomon in the
@c    name of the Lord, came to try him with hard questions.

@c    10:2. And entering into Jerusalem with a great train, and riches, and
@c    camels that carried spices, and an immense quantity of gold, and
@c    precious stones, she came to king Solomon, and spoke to him all that
@c    she had in her heart.

@c    10:3. And Solomon informed her of all the things she proposed to him:
@c    there was not any word the king was ignorant of, and which he could not
@c    answer her.

@c    10:4. And when the queen of Saba saw all the wisdom of Solomon, and the
@c    house which he had built,

@c    10:5. And the meat of his table, and the apartments of his servants,
@c    and the order of his ministers, and their apparel, and the cupbearers,
@c    and the holocausts, which he offered in the house of the Lord, she had
@c    no longer any spirit in her;

@c    10:6. And she said to the king:  The report is true, which I heard in my
@c    own country,

@c    10:7. Concerning thy words, and concerning thy wisdom.  And I did not
@c    believe them that told me, till I came myself, and saw with my own
@c    eyes, and have found that the half hath not been told me:  thy wisdom
@c    and thy works exceed the fame which I heard.

@c    10:8. Blessed are thy men, and blessed are thy servants, who stand
@c    before thee always, and hear thy wisdom.

@c    10:9. Blessed be the Lord thy God, whom thou hast pleased, and who hath
@c    set thee upon the throne of Israel, because the Lord hath loved Israel
@c    for ever, and hath appointed thee king, to do judgment and justice.

@c    10:10. And she gave the king a hundred and twenty talents of gold, and
@c    of spices a very great store, and precious stones:  there was brought no
@c    more such abundance of spices as these which the queen of Saba gave to
@c    king Solomon.

@c    10:11. (The navy also of Hiram, which brought gold from Ophir, brought
@c    from Ophir great plenty of thyine trees, and precious stones.

@c    10:12. And the king made of the thyine trees the rails of the house of
@c    the Lord, and of the king's house:  and citterns and harps for singers:
@c    there were no such thyine trees as these brought nor seen unto this
@c    day.)

@c    10:13. And king Solomon gave the queen of Saba all that she desired,
@c    and asked of him:  besides what he offered her of himself of his royal
@c    bounty.  And she returned, and went to her own country, with her
@c    servants.

@c    10:14. And the weight of the gold that was brought to Solomon every
@c    year, was six hundred and sixty-six talents of gold:

@c    10:15. Besides that which the men brought him that were over the
@c    tributes, and the merchants, and they that sold by retail, and all the
@c    kings of Arabia, and the governors of the country.

@c    10:16. And Solomon made two hundred shields of the purest gold:  he
@c    allowed six hundred sicles of gold for the plates of one shield.

@c    10:17. And three hundred targets of fine gold:  three hundred pounds of
@c    gold covered one target:  and the king put them in the house of the
@c    forest of Libanus.

@c    10:18. King Solomon also made a great throne of ivory:  and overlaid it
@c    with the finest gold.

@c    10:19. It had six steps:  and the top of the throne was round behind:
@c    and there were two hands on either side holding the seat:  and two lions
@c    stood, one at each hand,

@c    10:20. And twelve little lions stood upon the six steps, on the one
@c    side and on the other:  there was no such work made in any kingdom.

@c    10:21. Moreover, all the vessels out of which king Solomon drank, were
@c    of gold:  and all the furniture of the house of the forest of Libanus
@c    was of most pure gold:  there was no silver, nor was any account made of
@c    it in the days of Solomon:

@c    10:22. For the king's navy, once in three years, went with the navy of
@c    Hiram by sea to Tharsis, and brought from thence gold, and silver, and
@c    elephants' teeth, and apes, and peacocks.

@c    10:23. And king Solomon exceeded all the kings of the earth in riches
@c    and wisdom.

@c    10:24. And all the earth desired to see Solomon's face, to hear his
@c    wisdom, which God had given in his heart.

@c    10:25. And every one brought him presents, vessels of silver and of
@c    gold, garments, and armour, and spices, and horses, and mules, every
@c    year.

@c    10:26. And Solomon gathered together chariots and horsemen, and he had
@c    a thousand four hundred chariots, and twelve thousand horsemen:  and he
@c    bestowed them in fenced cities, and with the king in Jerusalem.

@c    10:27. And he made silver to be as plentiful in Jerusalem as stones:
@c    and cedars to be as common as sycamores which grow in the plains.

@c    10:28. And horses were brought for Solomon out of Egypt, and Coa:  for
@c    the king's merchants bought them out of Coa, and brought them at a set
@c    price.

@c    10:29. And a chariot of four horses came out of Egypt, for six hundred
@c    sicles of silver, and a horse for a hundred and fifty.  And after this
@c    manner did all the kings of the Hethites, and of Syria, sell horses.



@c    3 Kings Chapter 11


@c    Solomon by means of his wives falleth into idolatry:  God raiseth him
@c    adversaries, Adad, Razon, and Jeroboam:  Solomon dieth.

@c    11:1. And king Solomon loved many strange women, besides the daughter
@c    of Pharao, and women of Moab, and of Ammon, and of Edom, and of Sidon,
@c    and of the Hethites:

@c    11:2. Of the nations concerning which the Lord said to the children of
@c    Israel:  You shall not go in unto them, neither shall any of them come
@c    into yours:  for they will most certainly turn away your hearts to
@c    follow their gods.  And to these was Solomon joined with a most ardent
@c    love.

@c    11:3. And he had seven hundred wives as queens, and three hundred
@c    concubines:  and the women turned away his heart.

@c    11:4. And when he was now old, his heart was turned away by women to
@c    follow strange gods:  and his heart was not perfect with the Lord his
@c    God, as was the heart of David, his father.

@c    11:5. But Solomon worshipped Astarthe, the goddess of the Sidonians,
@c    and Moloch, the idol of the Ammonites.

@c    11:6. And Solomon did that which was not pleasing before the Lord, and
@c    did not fully follow the Lord, as David, his father.

@c    11:7. Then Solomon built a temple for Chamos, the idol of Moab, on the
@c    hill that is over against Jerusalem, and for Moloch, the idol of the
@c    children of Ammon.

@c    11:8. And he did in this manner for all his wives that were strangers,
@c    who burnt incense, and offered sacrifice to their gods.

@c    11:9. And the Lord was angry with Solomon, because his mind was turned
@c    away from the Lord, the God of Israel, who had appeared to him twice;

@c    11:10. And had commanded him concerning this thing, that he should not
@c    follow strange gods:  but he kept not the things which the Lord
@c    commanded him.

@c    11:11. The Lord therefore said to Solomon:  Because thou hast done this,
@c    and hast not kept my covenant, and my precepts, which I have commanded
@c    thee, I will divide and rend thy kingdom, and will give it to thy
@c    servant.

@c    11:12. Nevertheless, in thy days I will not do it, for David thy
@c    father's sake:  but I will rend it out of the hand of thy son.

@c    11:13. Neither will I take away the whole kingdom; but I will give one
@c    tribe to thy son, for the sake of David, my servant, and Jerusalem,
@c    which I have chosen.

@c    One tribe. . .Besides that of Juda, his own native tribe.

@c    11:14. And the Lord raised up an adversary to Solomon, Adad, the
@c    Edomite, of the king's seed, in Edom.

@c    11:15. For when David was in Edom, and Joab, the general of the army,
@c    was gone up to bury them that were slain, and had killed every male in
@c    Edom,

@c    11:16. (For Joab remained there six months with all Israel, till he had
@c    slain every male in Edom,)

@c    11:17. Then Adad fled, he and certain Edomites of his father's
@c    servants, with him, to go into Egypt:  and Adad was then a little boy.

@c    11:18. And they arose out of Madian, and came into Pharan, and they
@c    took men with them from Pharan, and went into Egypt, to Pharao, the
@c    king of Egypt:  who gave him a house, and appointed him victuals, and
@c    assigned him land.

@c    11:19. And Adad found great favour before Pharao, insomuch that he gave
@c    him to wife the own sister of his wife, Taphnes, the queen.

@c    11:20. And the sister of Taphnes bore him his son, Genubath; and
@c    Taphnes brought him up in the house of Pharao:  and Genubath dwelt with
@c    Pharao among his children.

@c    11:21. And when Adad heard in Egypt that David slept with his fathers,
@c    and that Joab, the general of the army, was dead, he said to Pharao:
@c    Let me depart, that I may go to my own country.

@c    11:22. And Pharao said to him:  Why, what is wanting to thee with me,
@c    that thou seekest to go to thy own country?  But he answered:  Nothing;
@c    yet I beseech thee to let me go.

@c    11:23. God also raised up against him an adversary, Razon, the son of
@c    Eliada, who had fled from his master, Adarezer, the king of Soba.

@c    11:24. And he gathered men against him, and he became a captain of
@c    robbers, when David slew them of Soba:  and they went to Damascus, and
@c    dwelt there, and they made him king in Damascus.

@c    11:25. And he was an adversary to Israel all the days of Solomon:  and
@c    this is the evil of Adad, and his hatred against Israel; and he reigned
@c    in Syria.

@c    11:26. Jeroboam also, the son of Nabat, an Ephrathite, of Sareda, a
@c    servant of Solomon, whose mother was named Sarua, a widow woman, lifted
@c    up his hand against the king.

@c    11:27. And this is the cause of his rebellion against him; for Solomon
@c    built Mello, and filled up the breach of the city of David, his father.

@c    11:28. And Jeroboam was a valiant and mighty man:  and Solomon seeing
@c    him a young man ingenious and industrious, made him chief over the
@c    tributes of all the house of Joseph.

@c    11:29. So it came to pass at that time, that Jeroboam went out of
@c    Jerusalem, and the prophet Ahias, the Silonite, clad with a new
@c    garment, found him in the way:  and they two were alone in the field.

@c    11:30. And Ahias taking his new garment, wherewith he was clad, divided
@c    it into twelve parts:

@c    11:31. And he said to Jeroboam:  Take to thee ten pieces:  for thus saith
@c    the Lord, the God of Israel:  Behold, I will rend the kingdom out of the
@c    hand of Solomon, and will give thee ten tribes.

@c    11:32. But one tribe shall remain to him for the sake of my servant,
@c    David, and Jerusalem, the city which I have chosen out of all the
@c    tribes of Israel:

@c    11:33. Because he hath forsaken me, and hath adored Astarthe, the
@c    goddess of the Sidonians, and Chamos, the god of Moab, and Moloch, the
@c    god of the children of Ammon:  and hath not walked in my ways, to do
@c    justice before me, and to keep my precepts, and judgments, as did
@c    David, his father.

@c    11:34. Yet I will not take away all the kingdom out of his hand, but I
@c    will make him prince all the days of his life, for David my servant's
@c    sake, whom I chose, who kept my commandments, and my precepts.

@c    11:35. But I will take away the kingdom out of his son's hand, and will
@c    give thee ten tribes:

@c    11:36. And to his son I will give one tribe, that there may remain a
@c    lamp for my servant, David, before me always in Jerusalem, the city
@c    which I have chosen, that my name might be there.

@c    11:37. And I will take thee, and thou shalt reign over all that thy
@c    soul desireth, and thou shalt be king over Israel.

@c    11:38. If then thou wilt hearken to all that I shall command thee, and
@c    wilt walk in my ways, and do what is right before me, keeping my
@c    commandments and my precepts, as David, my servant, did:  I will be with
@c    thee, and will build thee up a faithful house, as I built a house for
@c    David, and I will deliver Israel to thee:

@c    11:39. And I will for this afflict the seed of David, but yet not for
@c    ever.

@c    11:40. Solomon, therefore, sought to kill Jeroboam:  but he arose, and
@c    fled into Egypt, to Sesac, the king of Egypt, and was in Egypt till the
@c    death of Solomon.

@c    11:41. And the rest of the words of Solomon, and all that he did and
@c    his wisdom:  behold they are all written in the book of the words of the
@c    days of Solomon.

@c    The book of the words, etc. . .This book is lost, with divers others
@c    mentioned in holy writ.

@c    11:42. And the days that Solomon reigned in Jerusalem, over all Israel,
@c    were forty years.

@c    11:43. And Solomon slept with his fathers, and was buried in the city
@c    of David, his father; and Roboam, his son, reigned in his stead.

@c    Solomon slept, etc. . .That is, died.  He was then about fifty-eight
@c    years of age, having reigned forty years.



@c    3 Kings Chapter 12


@c    Roboam, following the counsel of young men alienateth from him the
@c    minds of the people.  They make Jeroboam king over ten tribes:  he
@c    setteth up idolatry.

@c    12:1. And Roboam went to Sichem:  for thither were all Israel come
@c    together to make him king.

@c    12:2. But Jeroboam, the son of Nabat, who was yet in Egypt, a fugitive
@c    from the face of king Solomon, hearing of his death, returned out of
@c    Egypt.

@c    12:3. And they sent and called him:  and Jeroboam came, and all the
@c    multitude of Israel, and they spoke to Roboam, saying:

@c    12:4. Thy father laid a grievous yoke upon us:  now, therefore, do thou
@c    take off a little of the grievous service of thy father, and of his
@c    most heavy yoke, which he put upon us, and we will serve thee.

@c    12:5. And he said to them:  Go till the third day, and come to me again.
@c    And when the people was gone,

@c    12:6. King Roboam took counsel with the old men, that stood before
@c    Solomon, his father, while he yet lived, and he said:  What counsel do
@c    you give me, that I may answer this people?

@c    12:7. They said to him:  If thou wilt yield to this people to day, and
@c    condescend to them, and grant their petition, and wilt speak gentle
@c    words to them, they will be thy servants always.

@c    12:8. But he left the counsel of the old men, which they had given him,
@c    and consulted with the young men that had been brought up with him, and
@c    stood before him.

@c    12:9. And he said to them:  What counsel do you give me, that I may
@c    answer this people, who have said to me:  Make the yoke, which thy
@c    father put upon us, lighter?

@c    12:10. And the young men that had been brought up with him, said:  Thus
@c    shalt thou speak to this people, who have spoken to thee, saying:  Thy
@c    father made our yoke heavy, do thou ease us.  Thou shalt say to them:  My
@c    little finger is thicker than the back of my father.

@c    12:11. And now my father put a heavy yoke upon you, but I will add to
@c    your yoke:  my father beat you with whips, but I will beat you with
@c    scorpions.

@c    12:12. So Jeroboam, and all the people, came to Roboam the third day,
@c    as the king had appointed, saying:  Come to me again the third day.

@c    12:13. And the king answered the people roughly, leaving the counsel of
@c    the old men, which they had given him,

@c    12:14. And he spoke to them according to the counsel of the young men,
@c    saying:  My father made your yoke heavy, but I will add to your yoke:  My
@c    father beat you with whips, but I will beat you with scorpions.

@c    12:15. And the king condescended not to the people:  for the Lord was
@c    turned away from him, to make good his word, which he had spoken in the
@c    hand of Ahias, the Silonite, to Jeroboam, the son of Nabat.

@c    12:16. Then the people, seeing that the king would not hearken to them,
@c    answered him, saying:  What portion have we in David?  or what
@c    inheritance in the son of Isai?  Go home to thy dwellings, O Israel:
@c    now, David, look to thy own house.  So Israel departed to their
@c    dwellings.

@c    12:17. But as for all the children of Israel that dwelt in the cities
@c    of Juda, Roboam reigned over them.

@c    12:18. Then king Roboam sent Aduram, who was over the tribute:  and all
@c    Israel stoned him, and he died.  Wherefore king Roboam made haste to get
@c    him up into his chariot, and he fled to Jerusalem:

@c    12:19. And Israel revolted from the house of David, unto this day.

@c    12:20. And it came to pass when all Israel heard that Jeroboam was come
@c    again, that they gathered an assembly, and sent and called him, and
@c    made him king over all Israel, and there was none that followed the
@c    house of David but the tribe of Juda only.

@c    Juda only. . .Benjamin was a small tribe, and so intermixed with the
@c    tribe of Juda, (the very city of Jerusalem being partly in Juda, partly
@c    in Benjamin,) that they are here counted but as one tribe.

@c    12:21. And Roboam came to Jerusalem, and gathered together all the
@c    house of Juda, and the tribe of Benjamin, a hundred fourscore thousand
@c    chosen men for war, to fight against the house of Israel, and to bring
@c    the kingdom again under Roboam, the son of Solomon.

@c    12:22. But the word of the Lord came to Semeias, the man of God,
@c    saying:

@c    12:23. Speak to Roboam, the son of Solomon, the king of Juda, and to
@c    all the house of Juda, and Benjamin, and the rest of the people,
@c    saying:

@c    12:24. Thus saith the Lord:  You shall not go up, nor fight against your
@c    brethren, the children of Israel:  let every man return to his house,
@c    for this thing is from me.  They hearkened to the word of the Lord, and
@c    returned from their journey, as the Lord had commanded them.

@c    12:25. And Jeroboam built Sichem in mount Ephraim, and dwelt there, and
@c    going out from thence, he built Phanuel.

@c    12:26. And Jeroboam said in his heart:  Now shall the kingdom return to
@c    the house of David,

@c    12:27. If this people go up to offer sacrifices in the house of the
@c    Lord at Jerusalem:  and the heart of this people will turn to their lord
@c    Roboam, the king of Juda, and they will kill me, and return to him.

@c    12:28. And finding out a device, he made two golden calves, and said to
@c    them:  Go ye up no more to Jerusalem:  Behold thy gods, O Israel, who
@c    brought thee out of the land of Egypt.

@c    Golden calves. . .It is likely, by making his gods in this form, he
@c    mimicked the Egyptians, among whom he had sojourned, who worshipped
@c    their Apis and their Osiris under the form of a bullock.

@c    12:29. And he set the one in Bethel, and the other in Dan:

@c    Bethel and Dan. . .Bethel was a city of the tribe of Ephraim in the
@c    southern part of the dominions of Jeroboam, about six leagues from
@c    Jerusalem; Dan was in the extremity of his dominions to the north in
@c    the confines of Syria.

@c    12:30. And this thing became an occasion of sin:  for the people went to
@c    adore the calf as far as Dan.

@c    12:31. And he made temples in the high places, and priests of the
@c    lowest of the people, who were not of the sons of Levi.

@c    12:32. And he appointed a feast in the eighth month, on the fifteenth
@c    day of the month, after the manner of the feast that was celebrated in
@c    Juda.  And going up to the altar, he did in like manner in Bethel, to
@c    sacrifice to the calves, which he had made:  and he placed in Bethel
@c    priests of the high places, which he had made.

@c    12:33. And he went up to the altar, which he had built in Bethel, on
@c    the fifteenth day of the eighth month, which he had devised of his own
@c    heart:  and he ordained a feast to the children of Israel, and went up
@c    on the altar to burn incense.



@c    3 Kings Chapter 13


@c    A prophet sent from Juda to Bethel foretelleth the birth of Josias, and
@c    the destruction of Jeroboam's altar.  Jeroboam's hand offering violence
@c    to the prophet withereth, but is restored by the prophet's prayer:  the
@c    same prophet is deceived by another prophet, and slain by a lion.

@c    13:1. And behold there came a man of God out of Juda, by the word of
@c    the Lord, to Bethel, when Jeroboam was standing upon the altar, and
@c    burning incense.

@c    13:2. And he cried out against the altar in the word of the Lord, and
@c    said:  O altar, altar, thus saith the Lord:  Behold a child shall be born
@c    to the house of David, Josias by name, and he shall immolate upon thee
@c    the priests of the high places, who now burn incense upon thee, and he
@c    shall burn men's bones upon thee.

@c    13:3. And he gave a sign the same day, saying:  This shall be the sign,
@c    that the Lord hath spoken:  Behold the altar shall be rent, and the
@c    ashes that are upon it, shall be poured out.

@c    13:4. And when the king had heard the word of the man of God, which he
@c    had cried out against the altar in Bethel, he stretched forth his hand
@c    from the altar, saying:  Lay hold on him.  And his hand which he
@c    stretched forth against him, withered:  and he was not able to draw it
@c    back again to him.

@c    13:5. The altar also was rent, and the ashes were poured out from the
@c    altar, according to the sign which the man of God had given before in
@c    the word of the Lord.

@c    13:6. And the king said to the man of God:  Entreat the face of the Lord
@c    thy God, and pray for me, that my hand may be restored to me.  And the
@c    man of God besought the face of the Lord, and the king's hand was
@c    restored to him, and it became as it was before.

@c    13:7. And the king said to the man of God:  Come home with me to dine,
@c    and I will make thee presents.

@c    13:8. And the man of God answered the king:  If thou wouldst give me
@c    half thy house, I will not go with thee, nor eat bread, nor drink water
@c    in this place:

@c    13:9. For so it was enjoined me by the word of the Lord commanding me:
@c    Thou shalt not eat bread, nor drink water, nor return by the same way
@c    that thou camest.

@c    13:10. So he departed by another way, and returned not by the way that
@c    he came into Bethel.

@c    13:11. Now a certain old prophet dwelt in Bethel, and his sons came to
@c    him, and told him all the works that the man of God had done that day
@c    in Bethel:  and they told their father the words which he had spoken to
@c    the king.

@c    13:12. And their father said to them:  What way went he?  His sons shewed
@c    him the way by which the man of God went, who came out of Juda.

@c    13:13. And he said to his sons:  Saddle me the ass.  And when they had
@c    saddled it, he got up,

@c    13:14. And went after the man of God, and found him sitting under a
@c    turpentine tree:  and he said to him:  Art thou the man of God who camest
@c    from Juda?  He answered:  I am.

@c    13:15. And he said to him:  Come home with me to eat bread.

@c    13:16. But he said:  I must not return, nor go with thee, neither will I
@c    eat bread, or drink water in this place:

@c    13:17. Because the Lord spoke to me, in the word of the Lord, saying:
@c    Thou shalt not eat bread, and thou shalt not drink water there, nor
@c    return by the way thou wentest.

@c    13:18. He said to him:  I also am a prophet like unto thee:  and an angel
@c    spoke to me, in the word of the Lord, saying:  Bring him back with thee
@c    into thy house, that he may eat bread, and drink water.  He deceived
@c    him,

@c    An angel spoke to me, etc. . .This old man of Bethel was indeed a
@c    prophet, but he sinned in thus deceiving the man of God; the more
@c    because he pretended a revelation for what he did.

@c    13:19. And brought him back with him:  so he ate bread, and drank water
@c    in his house.

@c    13:20. And as they sat at table, the word of the Lord came to the
@c    prophet that brought him back:

@c    13:21. And he cried out to the man of God who came out of Juda, saying:
@c    Thus saith the Lord:  Because thou hast not been obedient to the Lord,
@c    and hast not kept the commandment which the Lord thy God commanded
@c    thee,

@c    13:22. And hast returned, and eaten bread, and drunk water in the place
@c    wherein he commanded thee that thou shouldst not eat bread, nor drink
@c    water, thy dead body shall not be brought into the sepulchre of thy
@c    fathers.

@c    13:23. And when he had eaten and drunk, he saddled his ass for the
@c    prophet, whom he had brought back.

@c    13:24. And when he was gone, a lion found him in the way, and killed
@c    him, and his body was cast in the way:  and the ass stood by him, and
@c    the lion stood by the dead body.

@c    Killed him. . .Thus the Lord often punishes his servants here, that he
@c    may spare them hereafter.  For the generality of divines are of opinion,
@c    that the sin of this prophet, considered with all its circumstances,
@c    was not mortal.

@c    13:25. And behold, men passing by, saw the dead body cast in the way,
@c    and the lion standing by the body.  And they came and told it in the
@c    city, wherein that old prophet dwelt.

@c    13:26. And when that prophet, who had brought him back out of the way,
@c    heard of it, he said:  It is the man of God, that was disobedient to the
@c    mouth of the Lord, and the Lord hath delivered him to the lion, and he
@c    hath torn him, and killed him, according to the word of the Lord, which
@c    he spoke to him.

@c    13:27. And he said to his sons:  Saddle me an ass.  And when they had
@c    saddled it,

@c    13:28. And he was gone, he found the dead body cast in the way, and the
@c    ass and the lion standing by the carcass:  the lion had not eaten of the
@c    dead body, nor hurt the ass.

@c    13:29. And the prophet took up the body of the man of God, and laid it
@c    upon the ass, and going back brought it into the city of the old
@c    prophet, to mourn for him.

@c    13:30. And he laid his dead body in his own sepulchre:  and they mourned
@c    over him, saying:  Alas! alas, my brother.

@c    13:31. And when they had mourned over him, he said to his sons:  When I
@c    am dead, bury me in the sepulchre wherein the man of God is buried:  lay
@c    my bones beside his bones.

@c    13:32. For assuredly the word shall come to pass which he hath foretold
@c    in the word of the Lord, against the altar that is in Bethel:  and
@c    against all the temples of the high places, that are in the cities of
@c    Samaria.

@c    13:33. After these words, Jeroboam came not back from his wicked way:
@c    but on the contrary, he made of the meanest of the people priests of
@c    the high places:  whosoever would, he filled his hand, and he was made a
@c    priest of the high places.

@c    13:34. And for this cause did the house of Jeroboam sin, and was cut
@c    off, and destroyed from the face of the earth.



@c    3 Kings Chapter 14


@c    Ahias prophesieth the destruction of the family of Jeroboam.  He dieth,
@c    and is succeeded by his son Nadab.  The king of Egypt taketh and
@c    pillageth Jerusalem.  Roboam dieth and his son Abiam succeedeth.

@c    14:1. At that time Abia, the son of Jeroboam, fell sick.

@c    14:2. And Jeroboam said to his wife:  Arise, and change thy dress, that
@c    thou be not known to be the wife of Jeroboam, and go to Silo, where
@c    Ahias, the prophet is, who told me that I should reign over this
@c    people.

@c    14:3. Take also with thee ten loaves, and cracknels, and a pot of
@c    honey, and go to him:  for he will tell thee what will become of this
@c    child.

@c    14:4. Jeroboam's wife did as he told her:  and rising up, went to Silo,
@c    and came to the house of Ahias; but he could not see, for his eyes were
@c    dim by reason of his age.

@c    14:5. And the Lord said to Ahias:  Behold the wife of Jeroboam cometh
@c    in, to consult thee concerning her son, that is sick:  thus and thus
@c    shalt thou speak to her.  So when she was coming in, and made as if she
@c    were another woman,

@c    14:6. Ahias heard the sound of her feet, coming in at the door, and
@c    said:  Come in, thou wife of Jeroboam:  why dost thou feign thyself to be
@c    another?  But I am sent to thee with heavy tidings.

@c    14:7. Go, and tell Jeroboam:  Thus saith the Lord, the God of Israel:
@c    For as much as I exalted thee from among the people, and made thee
@c    prince over my people Israel;

@c    14:8. And rent the kingdom away from the house of David, and gave it to
@c    thee, and thou hast not been as my servant, David, who kept my
@c    commandments, and followed me with all his heart, doing that which was
@c    well pleasing in my sight:

@c    14:9. But hast done evil above all that were before thee, and hast made
@c    thee strange gods, and molten gods, to provoke me to anger, and hast
@c    cast me behind thy back:

@c    14:10. Therefore, behold I will bring evils upon the house of Jeroboam,
@c    and will cut off from Jeroboam him that pisseth against the wall, and
@c    him that is shut up, and the last in Israel:  and I will sweep away the
@c    remnant of the house of Jeroboam, as dung is swept away till all be
@c    clean.

@c    14:11. Them that shall die of Jeroboam in the city, the dogs shall eat:
@c    and them that shall die in the field, the birds of the air shall
@c    devour:  for the Lord hath spoken it.

@c    14:12. Arise thou, therefore, and go to thy house:  and when thy feet
@c    shall be entering into the city, the child shall die,

@c    14:13. And all Israel shall mourn for him, and shall bury him:  for he
@c    only of Jeroboam shall be laid in a sepulchre, because in his regard
@c    there is found a good word from the Lord, the God of Israel, in the
@c    house of Jeroboam.

@c    14:14. And the Lord hath appointed himself a king over Israel, who
@c    shall cut off the house of Jeroboam in this day, and in this time:

@c    14:15. And the Lord God shall strike Israel as a reed is shaken in the
@c    water:  and he shall root up Israel out of this good land, which he gave
@c    to their fathers, and shall scatter them beyond the river:  because they
@c    have made to themselves groves, to provoke the Lord.

@c    14:16. And the Lord shall give up Israel for the sins of Jeroboam, who
@c    hath sinned, and made Israel to sin.

@c    14:17. And the wife of Jeroboam arose, and departed, and came to
@c    Thersa:  and when she was coming in to the threshold of the house, the
@c    child died,

@c    14:18. And they buried him.  And all Israel mourned for him, according
@c    to the word of the Lord, which he spoke by the hand of his servant
@c    Ahias, the prophet.

@c    14:19. And the rest of the acts of Jeroboam, how he fought, and how he
@c    reigned, behold they are written in the book of the words of the days
@c    of the kings of Israel.

@c    The book of the words of the days of the kings of Israel. . .This book,
@c    which is often mentioned in the Book of Kings, is long since lost.  For
@c    as to the books of Paralipomenon, or Chronicles, (which the Hebrews
@c    call the words of the days,) they were certainly written after the Book
@c    of Kings, since they frequently refer to them.

@c    14:20. And the days that Jeroboam reigned, were two and twenty years:
@c    and he slept with his fathers:  and Nadab, his son, reigned in his
@c    stead.

@c    14:21. And Roboam, the son of Solomon, reigned in Juda:  Roboam was one
@c    and forty years old when he began to reign:  and he reigned seventeen
@c    years in Jerusalem, the city which the Lord chose out of all the tribes
@c    of Israel to put his name there.  And his mother's name was Naama, an
@c    Ammonitess.

@c    14:22. And Juda did evil in the sight of the Lord, and provoked him
@c    above all that their fathers had done, in their sins which they
@c    committed.

@c    14:23. For they also built them altars, and statues, and groves, upon
@c    every high hill, and under every green tree:

@c    14:24. There were also the effeminate in the land, and they did
@c    according to all the abominations of the people, whom the Lord had
@c    destroyed before the face of the children of Israel.

@c    The effeminate. . .Catamites, or men addicted to unnatural lust.

@c    14:25. And in the fifth year of the reign of Roboam, Sesac, king of
@c    Egypt, came up against Jerusalem.

@c    14:26. And he took away the treasures of the house of the Lord, and the
@c    king's treasures, and carried all off:  as also the shields of gold
@c    which Solomon had made:

@c    14:27. And Roboam made shields of brass instead of them, and delivered
@c    them into the hand of the captains of the shieldbearers, and of them
@c    that kept watch before the gate of the king's house.

@c    14:28. And when the king went into the house of the Lord, they whose
@c    office it was to go before him, carried them:  and afterwards they
@c    brought them back to the armoury of the shieldbearers.

@c    14:29. Now the rest of the acts of Roboam, and all that he did, behold
@c    they are written in the book of the words of the days of the kings of
@c    Juda.

@c    14:30. And there was war between Roboam and Jeroboam always.

@c    14:31. And Roboam slept with his fathers, and was buried with them, in
@c    the city of David:  and his mother's name was Naama, an Ammonitess:  and
@c    Abiam, his son, reigned in his stead.



@c    3 Kings Chapter 15


@c    The acts of Abiam and of Asa kings of Juda.  And of Nadab and Baasa
@c    kings of Israel.

@c    15:1. Now in the eighteenth year of the reign of Jeroboam, the son of
@c    Nabat, Abiam reigned over Juda.

@c    15:2. He reigned three years in Jerusalem:  the name of his mother was
@c    Maacha, the daughter of Abessalom.

@c    Maacha, etc. . .She is called elsewhere Michaia, daughter of Uriel; but
@c    it was common in those days for the same person to have two names.

@c    15:3. And he walked in all the sins of his father, which he had done
@c    before him:  and his heart was not perfect with the Lord his God, as was
@c    the heart of David, his father.

@c    15:4. But for David's sake the Lord his God gave him a lamp in
@c    Jerusalem, to set up his son after him, and to establish Jerusalem:

@c    15:5. Because David had done that which was right in the eyes of the
@c    Lord, and had not turned aside from any thing that he commanded him,
@c    all the days of his life, except the matter of Urias, the Hethite.

@c    15:6. But there was war between Roboam and Jeroboam all the time of his
@c    life.

@c    15:7. And the rest of the words of Abiam, and all that he did, are they
@c    not written in the book of the words of the days of the kings of Juda?
@c    And there was war between Abiam and Jeroboam.

@c    15:8. And Abiam slept with his fathers, and they buried him in the city
@c    of David:  and Asa, his son, reigned in his stead.

@c    15:9. So in the twentieth year of Jeroboam, king of Israel, reigned
@c    Asa, king of Juda,

@c    15:10. And he reigned one and forty years in Jerusalem.  His mother's
@c    name was Maacha, the daughter of Abessalom.

@c    His mother, etc. . .That is, his grandmother; unless we suppose, which
@c    is not improbable, that the Maacha here named is different from the
@c    Maacha mentioned, ver. 2.

@c    15:11. And Asa did that which was right in the sight of the Lord, as
@c    did David, his father:

@c    15:12. And he took away the effeminate out of the land, and removed all
@c    the filth of the idols, which his fathers had made.

@c    15:13. Moreover, he also removed his mother, Maacha, from being the
@c    princess in the sacrifices of Priapus, and in the grove which she had
@c    consecrated to him:  and he destroyed her den, and broke in pieces the
@c    filthy idol, and burnt it by the torrent Cedron:

@c    15:14. But the high places he did not take away.  Nevertheless, the
@c    heart of Asa was perfect with the Lord all his days:

@c    The high places. . .There were excelsa or high places of two different
@c    kinds.  Some were set up, and dedicated to the worship of idols, or
@c    strange gods; and these Asa removed, 2 Par. 14.2; others were only
@c    altars of the true God, but were erected contrary to the law, which
@c    allowed of no sacrifices but in the temple; and these were not removed
@c    by Asa.--Ibid.  Perfect with the Lord. . .Asa had his faults; but never
@c    forsook the worship of the Lord.

@c    15:15. And he brought in the things which his father had dedicated, and
@c    he had vowed, into the house of the Lord, silver and gold, and vessels.

@c    15:16. And there was war between Asa, and Baasa, king of Israel, all
@c    their days.

@c    15:17. And Baasa, king of Israel, went up against Juda, and built Rama,
@c    that no man might go out or come in of the side of Asa, king of Juda.

@c    15:18. Then Asa took all the silver and gold that remained in the
@c    treasures of the house of the Lord, and in the treasures of the king's
@c    house, and delivered it into the hands of his servants:  and sent them
@c    to Benadad, son of Tabremon, the son of Hezion, king of Syria, who
@c    dwelt in Damascus, saying:

@c    15:19. There is a league between me and thee, and between my father and
@c    thy father:  therefore I have sent thee presents of silver and gold:  and
@c    I desire thee to come, and break thy league with Baasa, king of Israel,
@c    that he may depart from me.

@c    15:20. Benadad, hearkening to king Asa, sent the captains of his army
@c    against the cities of Israel, and they smote Ahion, and Dan, and
@c    Abeldomum Maacha, and all Cenneroth; that is all the land of Nephthali.

@c    15:21. And when Baasa had heard this, he left off building Rama, and
@c    returned into Thersa.

@c    15:22. But king Asa sent word into all Juda, saying:  Let no man be
@c    excused:  and they took away the stones from Rama, and the timber
@c    thereof, wherewith Baasa had been building, and with them king Asa
@c    built Gabaa of Benjamin, and Maspha.

@c    15:23. But the rest of all the acts of Asa, and all his strength, and
@c    all that he did, and the cities that he built, are they not written in
@c    the book of the words of the days of the kings of Juda?  But in the time
@c    of his old age he was diseased in his feet.

@c    15:24. And he slept with his fathers, and was buried with them in the
@c    city of David, his father.  And Josaphat, his son, reigned in his place.

@c    15:25. But Nadab, the son of Jeroboam, reigned over Israel the second
@c    year of Asa, king of Juda:  and he reigned over Israel two years.

@c    15:26. And he did evil in the sight of the Lord, and walked in the ways
@c    of his father, and in his sins, wherewith he made Israel to sin.

@c    15:27. And Baasa, the son of Ahias, of the house of Issachar, conspired
@c    against him, and slew him in Gebbethon, which is a city of the
@c    Philistines:  for Nadab and all Israel besieged Gebbethon.

@c    15:28. So Baasa slew him in the third year of Asa, king of Juda, and
@c    reigned in his place.

@c    15:29. And when he was king, he cut off all the house of Jeroboam:  he
@c    left not so much as one soul of his seed, till he had utterly destroyed
@c    him, according to the word of the Lord, which he had spoken in the hand
@c    of Ahias, the Silonite:

@c    15:30. Because of the sin of Jeroboam, which he had sinned, and
@c    wherewith he had made Israel to sin, and for the offence wherewith he
@c    provoked the Lord, the God of Israel.

@c    15:31. But the rest of the acts of Nadab, and all that he did, are they
@c    not written in the book of the words of the days of the kings of
@c    Israel?

@c    15:32. And there was war between Asa and Baasa, the king of Israel, all
@c    their days.

@c    15:33. In the third year of Asa, king of Juda, Baasa, the son of Ahias,
@c    reigned over all Israel, in Thersa, four and twenty years.

@c    15:34. And he did evil before the Lord, and walked in the ways of
@c    Jeroboam, and in his sins, wherewith he made Israel to sin.



@c    3 Kings Chapter 16


@c    Jehu prophesieth against Baasa:  his son Ela is slain and all his family
@c    destroyed by Zambri.  Of the reign of Amri father of Achab.

@c    16:1. Then the word of the Lord came to Jehu, the son of Hanani,
@c    against Baasa, saying:

@c    16:2. For as much as I have exalted thee out of the dust and made thee
@c    prince over my people Israel, and thou hast walked in the way of
@c    Jeroboam, and hast made my people Israel to sin, to provoke me to anger
@c    with their sins:

@c    16:3. Behold I will cut down the posterity of Baasa, and the posterity
@c    of his house, and I will make thy house as the house of Jeroboam, the
@c    son of Nabat.

@c    16:4. Him that dieth of Baasa, in the city, the dogs shall eat:  and him
@c    that dieth of his in the country, the fowls of the air shall devour.

@c    16:5. But the rest of the acts of Baasa, and all that he did, and his
@c    battles, are they not written in the book of the words of the days of
@c    the kings of Israel?

@c    16:6. So Baasa slept with his fathers, and was buried in Thersa:  and
@c    Ela, his son, reigned in his stead.

@c    16:7. And when the word of the Lord came in the hand of Jehu, the son
@c    of Hanani, the prophet, against Baasa, and against his house, and
@c    against all the evil that he had done before the Lord, to provoke him
@c    to anger by the works of his hands, to become as the house of Jeroboam:
@c    for this cause he slew him; that is to say, Jehu, the son of Hanani,
@c    the prophet.

@c    16:8. In the six and twentieth year of Asa, king of Juda, Ela, the son
@c    of Baasa, reigned over Israel, in Thersa, two years.

@c    16:9. And his servant Zambri, who was captain of half the horsemen,
@c    rebelled against him:  now Ela was drinking in Thersa, and drunk in the
@c    house of Arsa, the governor of Thersa.

@c    16:10. And Zambri rushing in, struck him, and slew him, in the seven
@c    and twentieth year of Asa, king of Juda and he reigned in his stead.

@c    16:11. And when he was king, and sat upon his throne, he slew all the
@c    house of Baasa, and he left not one thereof to piss against a wall and
@c    all his kinsfolks and friends.

@c    16:12. And Zambri destroyed all the house of Baasa, according to the
@c    word of the Lord, that he had spoken to Baasa, in the hand of Jehu, the
@c    prophet,

@c    16:13. For all the sins of Baasa, and the sins of Ela, his son, who
@c    sinned, and made Israel to sin, provoking the Lord, the God of Israel,
@c    with their vanities.

@c    16:14. But the rest of the acts of Ela, and all that he did, are they
@c    not written in the book of the words of the days of the kings of
@c    Israel?

@c    16:15. In the seven and twentieth year of Asa, king of Juda, Zambri
@c    reigned seven days in Thersa:  now the army was besieging Gebbethon, a
@c    city of the Philistines.

@c    16:16. And when they heard that Zambri had rebelled, and slain the
@c    king, all Israel made Amri their king, who was general over Israel in
@c    the camp that day.

@c    16:17. And Amri went up, and all Israel with him, from Gebbethon, and
@c    they besieged Thersa.

@c    16:18. And Zambri, seeing that the city was about to be taken, went
@c    into the palace, and burnt himself with the king's house:  and he died

@c    16:19. In his sins, which he had sinned, doing evil before the Lord,
@c    and walking in the way of Jeroboam, and in his sin, wherewith he made
@c    Israel to sin.

@c    16:20. But the rest of the acts of Zambri, and of his conspiracy and
@c    tyranny, are they not written in the book of the words of the days of
@c    the kings of Israel?

@c    16:21. Then were the people of Israel divided into two parts:  one half
@c    of the people followed Thebni, the son of Gineth, to make him king:  and
@c    one half followed Amri.

@c    16:22. But the people that were with Amri, prevailed over the people
@c    that followed Thebni, the son of Gineth:  and Thebni died, and Amri
@c    reigned.

@c    16:23. In the one and thirtieth year of Asa, king of Juda, Amri reigned
@c    over Israel twelve years:  in Thersa he reigned six years.

@c    In the one and thirtieth year, etc. . .Amri began to reign in the seven
@c    and twentieth year of Asa; but had not quiet possession of the kingdom
@c    till the death of his competitor Thebni, which was in the one and
@c    thirtieth year of Asa's reign.

@c    16:24. And he bought the hill of Samaria of Semer, for two talents of
@c    silver:  and he built upon it, and he called the city which he built
@c    Samaria, after the name of Semer, the owner of the hill.

@c    16:25. And Amri did evil in the sight of the Lord, and acted wickedly
@c    above all that were before him.

@c    16:26. And he walked in all the way of Jeroboam, the son of Nabat, and
@c    in his sins, wherewith he made Israel to sin:  to provoke the Lord, the
@c    God of Israel, to anger with their vanities.

@c    With their vanities. . .That is, their idols their golden calves, vain,
@c    false, deceitful things.

@c    16:27. Now the rest of the acts of Amri, and the battles he fought, are
@c    they not written in the book of the words of the days of the kings of
@c    Israel?

@c    16:28. And Amri slept with his fathers, and was buried in Samaria, and
@c    Achab, his son, reigned in his stead.

@c    16:29. Now Achab, the son of Amri, reigned over Israel in the eight and
@c    thirtieth year of Asa, king of Juda.  And Achab, the son of Amri,
@c    reigned over Israel in Samaria two and twenty years.

@c    16:30. And Achab, the son of Amri, did evil in the sight of the Lord
@c    above all that were before him.

@c    16:31. Nor was it enough for him to walk in the sins of Jeroboam, the
@c    son of Nabat:  but he also took to wife Jezabel, daughter of Ethbaal,
@c    king of the Sidonians.  And he went, and served Baal, and adored him.

@c    16:32. And he set up an altar for Baal, in the temple of Baal, which he
@c    had built in Samaria;

@c    16:33. And he planted a grove:  and Achab did more to provoke the Lord,
@c    the God of Israel, than all the kings of Israel that were before him.

@c    16:34. In his days Hiel, of Bethel, built Jericho:  in Abiram, his
@c    firstborn, he laid its foundations:  and in his youngest son, Segub, he
@c    set up the gates thereof:  according to the word of the Lord, which he
@c    spoke in the hand of Josue, the son of Nun.



@c    3 Kings Chapter 17


@c    Elias shutteth up the heaven from raining.  He is fed by ravens, and
@c    afterwards by a widow of Sarephta.  He raiseth the window's son to life.

@c    17:1. And Elias the Thesbite, of the inhabitants of Galaad, said to
@c    Achab:  As the Lord liveth, the God of Israel, in whose sight I stand,
@c    there shall not be dew nor rain these years, but according to the words
@c    of my mouth.

@c    17:2. And the word of the Lord came to him, saying:

@c    17:3. Get thee hence, and go towards the east, and hide thyself by the
@c    torrent of Carith, which is over against the Jordan;

@c    17:4. And there thou shalt drink of the torrent:  and I have commanded
@c    the ravens to feed thee there.

@c    17:5. So he went, and did according to the word of the Lord:  and going,
@c    he dwelt by the torrent Carith, which is over against the Jordan.

@c    17:6. And the ravens brought him bread and flesh in the morning, and
@c    bread and flesh in the evening; and he drank of the torrent.

@c    17:7. But after some time the torrent was dried up:  for it had not
@c    rained upon the earth.

@c    17:8. Then the word of the Lord came to him, saying:

@c    17:9. Arise, and go to Sarephta of the Sidonians, and dwell there:  for
@c    I have commanded a widow woman there to feed thee.

@c    Sarephta of the Sidonians. . .That is, a city of the Sidonians.

@c    17:10. He arose, and went to Sarephta.  And when he was come to the gate
@c    of the city, he saw the widow woman gathering sticks, and he called
@c    her, and said to her:  Give me a little water in a vessel, that I may
@c    drink.

@c    17:11. And when she was going to fetch it, he called after her, saying:
@c    Bring me also, I beseech thee, a morsel of bread in thy hand.

@c    17:12. And she answered:  As the Lord thy God liveth, I have no bread,
@c    but only a handful of meal in a pot, and a little oil in a cruise:
@c    behold I am gathering two sticks, that I may go in and dress it, for me
@c    and my son, that we may eat it and die.

@c    17:13. And Elias said to her:  Fear not; but go, and do as thou hast
@c    said but first make for me of the same meal a little hearth cake, and
@c    bring it to me, and after make for thyself and thy son.

@c    17:14. For thus saith the Lord, the God of Israel:  The pot of meal
@c    shall not waste, nor the cruise of oil be diminished, until the day
@c    wherein the Lord will give rain upon the face of the earth.

@c    17:15. She went, and did according to the word of Elias:  and he ate,
@c    and she, and her house:  and from that day

@c    17:16. The pot of meal wasted not, and the cruise of oil was not
@c    diminished according to the word of the Lord, which he spoke in the
@c    hand of Elias.

@c    17:17. And it came to pass after this, that the son of the woman, the
@c    mistress of the house, fell sick, and the sickness was very grievous,
@c    so that there was no breath left in him.

@c    17:18. And she said to Elias:  What have I to do with thee, thou man of
@c    God?  art thou come to me, that my iniquities should be remembered, and
@c    that thou shouldst kill my son?

@c    17:11. And Elias said to her:  Give me thy son.  And he took him out of
@c    her bosom, and carried him into the upper chamber where he abode, and
@c    laid him upon his own bed.

@c    17:20. And he cried to the Lord, and said:  O Lord, my God, hast thou
@c    afflicted also the widow, with whom I am after a sort maintained, so as
@c    to kill her son?

@c    17:21. And he stretched, and measured himself upon the child three
@c    times, and cried to the Lord, and said:  O Lord, my God, let the soul of
@c    this child, I beseech thee, return into his body.

@c    17:22. And the Lord heard the voice of Elias:  and the soul of the child
@c    returned into him, and he revived.

@c    17:23. And Elias took the child, and brought him down from the upper
@c    chamber to the house below, and delivered him to his mother, and said
@c    to her:  Behold thy son liveth.

@c    17:24. And the woman said to Elias:  Now by this I know that thou art a
@c    man of God, and the word of the Lord in thy mouth is true.



@c    3 Kings Chapter 18


@c    Elias cometh before Achab.  He convinceth the false prophets by bringing
@c    fire from heaven:  he obtaineth rain by his prayer.

@c    18:1. After many days, the word of the Lord came to Elias, in the third
@c    year, saying:  Go, and shew thyself to Achab, that I may give rain upon
@c    the face of the earth.

@c    18:2. And Elias went to shew himself to Achab, and there was a grievous
@c    famine in Samaria.

@c    18:3. And Achab called Abdias the governor of his house:  now Abdias
@c    feared the Lord very much.

@c    18:4. For when Jezabel killed the prophets of the Lord, he took a
@c    hundred prophets, and hid them by fifty and fifty in caves, and fed
@c    them with bread and water.

@c    18:5. And Achab said to Abdias:  Go into the land unto all fountains of
@c    waters, and into all valleys, to see if we can find grass, and save the
@c    horses and mules, that the beasts may not utterly perish.

@c    18:6. And they divided the countries between them, that they might go
@c    round about them:  Achab went one way, and Abdias another way by
@c    himself.

@c    18:7. And as Abdias was in the way, Elias met him:  and he knew him, and
@c    fell on his face, and said:  Art thou my lord Elias?

@c    18:8. And he answered:  I am.  Go, and tell thy master:  Elias is here.

@c    18:9. And he said:  What have I sinned, that thou wouldst deliver me,
@c    thy servant, into the hand of Achab, that he should kill me?

@c    18:10. As the Lord thy God liveth, there is no nation or kingdom,
@c    whither my lord hath not sent to seek thee:  and when all answered:  He
@c    is not here:  he took an oath of every kingdom and nation, because thou
@c    wast not found.

@c    18:11. And now thou sayest to me:  Go and tell thy master:  Elias is
@c    here.

@c    18:12. And when I am gone from thee, the Spirit of the Lord will carry
@c    thee into a place that I know not:  and I shall go in and tell Achab;
@c    and he, not finding thee, will kill me:  but thy servant feareth the
@c    Lord from his infancy.

@c    18:13. Hath it not been told thee, my lord, what I did when Jezabel
@c    killed the prophets of the Lord; how I hid a hundred men of the
@c    prophets of the Lord, by fifty and fifty in caves, and fed them with
@c    bread and water?

@c    18:14. And now thou sayest:  Go and tell thy master:  Elias is here:
@c    that he may kill me.

@c    18:15. And Elias said:  As the Lord of hosts liveth, before whose face I
@c    stand, this day I will shew myself unto him.

@c    18:16. Abdias therefore went to meet Achab, and told him:  and Achab
@c    came to meet Elias.

@c    18:17. And when he had seen him, he said:  Art thou he that troublest
@c    Israel?

@c    18:18. And he said:  I have not troubled Israel, but thou and thy
@c    father's house, who have forsaken the commandments of the Lord, and
@c    have followed Baalim.

@c    18:19. Nevertheless send now, and gather unto me all Israel, unto Mount
@c    Carmel, and the prophets of Baal four hundred and fifty, and the
@c    prophets of the groves four hundred, who eat at Jezabel's table.

@c    18:20. Achab sent to all the children of Israel, and gathered together
@c    the prophets unto mount Carmel.

@c    18:21. And Elias coming to all the people, said:  How long do you halt
@c    between two sides?  If the Lord be God, follow him:  but if Baal, then
@c    follow him.  And the people did not answer him a word.

@c    18:22. And Elias said again to the people:  I only remain a prophet of
@c    the Lord:  but the prophets of Baal are four hundred and fifty men.

@c    18:23. Let two bullocks be given us, and let them choose one bullock
@c    for themselves, and cut it in pieces, and lay it upon wood, but put no
@c    fire under:  and I will dress the other bullock, and lay it on wood, and
@c    put no fire under it.

@c    18:24. Call ye on the names of your gods, and I will call on the name
@c    of my Lord:  and the God that shall answer by fire, let him be God.  And
@c    all the people answering, said:  A very good proposal.

@c    18:25. Then Elias said to the prophets of Baal:  Choose you one bullock
@c    and dress it first, because you are many:  and call on the names of your
@c    gods; but put no fire under.

@c    18:26. And they took the bullock, which he gave them, and dressed it:
@c    and they called on the name of Baal from morning even until noon,
@c    saying:  O Baal, hear us.  But there was no voice, nor any that answered:
@c    and they leaped over the altar that they had made.

@c    18:27. And when it was now noon, Elias jested at them, saying:  Cry with
@c    a louder voice:  for he is a god; and perhaps he is talking, or is in an
@c    inn, or on a journey; or perhaps he is asleep, and must be awaked.

@c    18:28. So they cried with a loud voice, and cut themselves after their
@c    manner with knives and lancets, till they were all covered with blood.

@c    18:29. And after midday was past, and while they were prophesying, the
@c    time was come of offering sacrifice, and there was no voice heard, nor
@c    did any one answer, nor regard them as they prayed.

@c    18:30. Elias said to all the people:  Come ye unto me.  And the people
@c    coming near unto him, he repaired the altar of the Lord, that was
@c    broken down:

@c    18:31. And he took twelve stones, according to the number of the tribes
@c    of the sons of Jacob to whom the word of the Lord came, saying:  Israel
@c    shall be thy name.

@c    18:32. And he built with the stones an altar to the name of the Lord:
@c    and he made a trench for water, of the breadth of two furrows, round
@c    about the altar.

@c    18:33. And he laid the wood in order, and cut the bullock in pieces,
@c    and laid it upon the wood.

@c    18:34. And he said:  Fill four buckets with water, and pour it upon the
@c    burnt offering, and upon the wood.  And again he said:  Do the same the
@c    second time.  And when they had done it the second time, he said:  Do the
@c    same also the third time.  And they did so the third time.

@c    18:35. And the water run round about the altar, and the trench was
@c    filled with water.

@c    18:36. And when it was now time to offer the holocaust, Elias, the
@c    prophet, came near and said:  O Lord God of Abraham, and Isaac, and
@c    Israel, shew this day that thou art the God of Israel, and I thy
@c    servant, and that according to thy commandment I have done all these
@c    things.

@c    18:37. Dear me, O Lord, hear me:  that this people may learn that thou
@c    art the Lord God, and that thou hast turned their heart again.

@c    18:38. Then the fire of the Lord fell, and consumed the holocaust, and
@c    the wood, and the stones, and the dust, and licked up the water that
@c    was in the trench.

@c    18:39. And when all the people saw this, they fell on their faces, and
@c    they said:  The Lord, he is God; the Lord, he is God.

@c    18:40. And Elias said to them:  Take the prophets of Baal, and let not
@c    one of them escape.  And when they had taken them, Elias brought them
@c    down to the torrent Cison, and killed them there.

@c    18:41. And Elias said to Achab:  Go up, eat and drink:  for there is a
@c    sound of abundance of rain.

@c    18:42. Achab went up to eat and drink:  and Elias went up to the top of
@c    Carmel, and casting himself down upon the earth, put his face between
@c    his knees,

@c    18:43. And he said to his servant:  Go up, and look towards the sea.  And
@c    he went up, and looked, and said:  There is nothing.  And again he said
@c    to him:  Return seven times.

@c    18:44. And at the seventh time:  Behold a little cloud arose out of the
@c    sea like a man's foot.  And he said:  Go up, and say to Achab:  Prepare
@c    thy chariot, and go down, lest the rain prevent thee.

@c    18:45. And while he turned himself this way and that way, behold the
@c    heavens grew dark, with clouds and wind, and there fell a great rain.
@c    And Achab getting up, went away to Jezrahel:

@c    18:46. And the hand of the Lord was upon Elias, and he girded up his
@c    loins, and ran before Achab, till he came to Jezrahel.



@c    3 Kings Chapter 19


@c    Elias, fleeing from Jezabel, is fed by an angel in the desert; and by
@c    the strength of that food walketh forty days, till he cometh to Horeb,
@c    where he hath a vision of God.

@c    19:1. And Achab told Jezabel all that Elias had done, and how he had
@c    slain all the prophets with the sword.

@c    19:2. And Jezabel sent a messenger to Elias, saying:  Such and such
@c    things may the gods do to me, and add still more, if by this hour to
@c    morrow I make not thy life as the life of one of them.

@c    19:3. Then EIias was afraid, and rising up, he went whithersoever he
@c    had a mind:  and he came to Bersabee of Juda, and left his servant
@c    there,

@c    19:4. And he went forward, one day's journey into the desert.  And when
@c    he was there, and sat under a juniper tree, he requested for his soul
@c    that he might die, and said:  It is enough for me, Lord; take away my
@c    soul:  for I am no better than my fathers.

@c    That he might die. . .Elias requested to die, not out of impatience or
@c    pusillanimity, but out of zeal against sin; and that he might no longer
@c    be witness of the miseries of his people; and the war they were waging
@c    against God and his servants.  See ver. 10.

@c    19:5. And he cast himself down, and slept in the shadow of the juniper
@c    tree:  and behold an angel of the Lord touched him, and said to him:
@c    Arise and eat.

@c    19:6. He looked, and behold there was at his head a hearth cake, and a
@c    vessel of water:  and he ate and drank, and he fell asleep again.

@c    19:7. And the angel of the Lord came again the second time, and touched
@c    him, and said to him:  Arise, eat:  for thou hast yet a great way to go.

@c    19:8. And he arose, and ate and drank, and walked in the strength of
@c    that food forty days and forty nights, unto the mount of God, Horeb.

@c    In the strength of that food, etc. . .This bread, with which Elias was
@c    fed in the wilderness, was a figure of the bread of life which we
@c    receive in the blessed sacrament; by the strength of which we are to be
@c    supported in our journey through the wilderness of this world till we
@c    come to the true mountain of God, and his vision in a happy eternity.

@c    19:9. And when he was come thither, he abode in a cave.  and behold the
@c    word of the Lord came unto him, and he said to him:  What dost thou
@c    here, Elias?

@c    19:10. And he answered:  With zeal have I been zealous for the Lord God
@c    of hosts:  for the children of Israel have forsaken thy covenant:  they
@c    have thrown down thy altars, they have slain thy prophets with the
@c    sword, and I alone am left, and they seek my life to take it away.

@c    I alone am left. . .Viz., of the prophets in the kingdom of Israel, or
@c    of the ten tribes; for in the kingdom of Juda religion was at that time
@c    in a very flourishing condition under the kings Asa and Josaphat.  And
@c    even in Israel there remained several prophets, though not then known
@c    to Elias.  See chap. 20.13, 28, 35.

@c    19:11. And he said to him:  Go forth, and stand upon the mount before
@c    the Lord:  and behold the Lord passeth, and a great and strong wind
@c    before the Lord, overthrowing the mountains, and breaking the rocks in
@c    pieces:  but the Lord is not in the wind.  And after the wind, an
@c    earthquake:  but the Lord is not in the earthquake.

@c    19:12. And after the earthquake, a fire:  but the Lord is not in the
@c    fire.  And after the fire, a whistling of a gentle air.

@c    19:13. And when Elias heard it, he covered his face with his mantle,
@c    and coming forth, stood in the entering in of the cave, and behold a
@c    voice unto him, saying:  What dost thou here, Elias?  And he answered:

@c    19:14. With zeal have I been zealous for the Lord God of hosts:  because
@c    the children of Israel have forsaken thy covenant:  they have destroyed
@c    thy altars, they have slain thy prophets with the sword; and I alone am
@c    left, and they seek my life to take it away.

@c    19:15. And the Lord said to him:  Go, and return on thy way, through the
@c    desert, to Damascus:  and when thou art come thither, thou shalt anoint
@c    Hazael to be king over Syria;

@c    19:16. And thou shalt anoint Jehu, the son of Namsi, to be king over
@c    Israel:  and Eliseus, the son of Saphat, of Abelmeula, thou shalt anoint
@c    to be prophet in thy room.

@c    19:17. And it shall come to pass, that whosoever shall escape the sword
@c    of Hazael, shall be slain by Jehu:  and whosoever shall escape the sword
@c    of Jehu, shall be slain by Eliseus.

@c    Shall be slain by Eliseus. . .Eliseus did not kill any of the idolaters
@c    with the material sword:  but he is here joined with Hazael and Jehu,
@c    the great instruments of God in punishing the idolatry of Israel,
@c    because he foretold to the former his exaltation to the kingdom of
@c    Syria, and the vengeance he would execute against Israel, and anointed
@c    the latter by one of his disciples to be king of Israel, with
@c    commission to extirpate the house of Achab.

@c    19:18. And I will leave me seven thousand men in Israel, whose knees
@c    have not been bowed before Baal, and every mouth that hath not
@c    worshipped him, kissing the hands.

@c    19:19. And Elias departing from thence, found Eliseus, the son of
@c    Saphat, ploughing with twelve yoke of oxen:  and he was one of them that
@c    were ploughing with, twelve yoke of oxen:  and when Elias came up to
@c    him, he cast his mantle upon him.

@c    19:20. And he forthwith left the oxen, and run after Elias, and said:
@c    Let me, I pray thee, kiss my father and my mother, and then I will
@c    follow thee.  And he said to him:  Go, and return back:  for that which
@c    was my part, I have done to thee.

@c    19:21. And returning back from him, he took a yoke of oxen, and killed
@c    them, and boiled the flesh with the plough of the oxen, and gave to the
@c    people, and they ate:  and rising up, he went away, and followed Elias,
@c    and ministered to him.



@c    3 Kings Chapter 20


@c    The Syrians besiege Samaria:  they are twice defeated by Achab:  who is
@c    reprehended by a prophet for letting Benadad go.

@c    20:1. And Benadad, king of Syria, gathered together all his host, and
@c    there were two and thirty kings with him, and horses, and chariots:  and
@c    going up, he fought against Samaria, and besieged it.

@c    20:2. And sending messengers to Achab, king of Israel, into the city,

@c    20:3. He said:  Thus saith Benadad:  Thy silver and thy gold is mine:
@c    and thy wives and thy goodliest children are mine.

@c    20:4. And the king of Israel answered:  According to thy word, my lord,
@c    O king, I am thine, and all that I have.

@c    20:5. And the messengers came again, and said:  Thus saith Benadad, who
@c    sent us unto thee:  Thy silver and thy gold, and thy wives and thy
@c    children, thou shalt deliver up to me.

@c    20:6. To morrow, therefore, at this same hour, I will send my servants
@c    to thee, and they shall search thy house, and the houses of thy
@c    servants:  and all that pleaseth them, they shall put in their hands,
@c    and take away.

@c    20:7. And the king of Israel called all the ancients of the land, and
@c    said:  Mark, and see that he layeth snares for us.  For he sent to me for
@c    my wives, and for my children, and for my silver and gold:  and I said
@c    not nay.

@c    20:8. And all the ancients, and all the people said to him:  Hearken not
@c    to him, nor consent to him.

@c    20:9. Wherefore he answered the messengers of Benadad:  Tell my lord,
@c    the king:  All that thou didst send for to me, thy servant at first, I
@c    will do:  but this thing I cannot do.

@c    20:10. And the messengers returning brought him word.  And he sent
@c    again, and said:  Such and such things may the gods do to me, and more
@c    may they add, if the dust of Samaria shall suffice for handfuls for all
@c    the people that follow me.

@c    20:11. And the king of Israel answering, said:  Tell him:  Let not the
@c    girded boast himself as the ungirded.

@c    Let not the girded, etc. . .Let him not boast before the victory:  it
@c    will then be time to glory when he putteth off his armour, having
@c    overcome his adversary.

@c    20:12. And it came to pass, when Benadad heard this word, that he and
@c    the kings were drinking in pavilions, and he said to his servants:
@c    Beset the city.  And they beset it.

@c    20:13. And behold a prophet coming to Achab, king of Israel, said to
@c    him:  Thus saith the Lord:  Hast thou seen all this exceeding great
@c    multitude?  behold I will deliver them into thy hand this day:  that thou
@c    mayst know that I am the Lord.

@c    20:14. And Achab said:  By whom?  And he said to him:  Thus saith the
@c    Lord:  By the servants of the princes of the provinces.  And he said:
@c    Who shall begin to fight?  And he said:  Thou.

@c    20:15. So he mustered the servants of the princes of the provinces, and
@c    he found the number of two hundred and thirty-two:  and he mustered
@c    after them the people, all the children of Israel, seven thousand:

@c    20:16. And they went out at noon.  But Benadad was drinking himself
@c    drunk in his pavilion, and the two and thirty kings with him, who were
@c    come to help him.

@c    20:17. And the servants of the princes of the provinces went out first.
@c    And Benadad sent.  And they told him, saying:  There are men come out of
@c    Samaria.

@c    20:18. And he said:  Whether they come for peace, take them alive:  or
@c    whether they come to fight, take them alive.

@c    20:19. So the servants of the princes of the provinces went out, and
@c    the rest of the army followed:

@c    20:20. And every one slew the man that came against him:  and the
@c    Syrians fled, and Israel pursued after them.  And Benadad, king of
@c    Syria, fled away on horseback with his horsemen.

@c    20:21. But the king of Israel going out overthrew the horses and
@c    chariots, and slew the Syrians with a great slaughter.

@c    20:22. (And a prophet coming to the king of Israel, said to him:  Go,
@c    and strengthen thyself, and know, and see what thou dost:  for the next
@c    year the king of Syria will come up against thee.)

@c    20:23. But the servants of the king of Syria said to him:  Their gods
@c    are gods of the hills, therefore they have overcome us:  but it is
@c    better that we should fight against them in the plains, and we shall
@c    overcome them.

@c    20:24. Do thou, therefore, this thing:  Remove all the kings from thy
@c    army, and put captains in their stead:

@c    20:25. And make up the number of soldiers that have been slain of
@c    thine, and horses, according to the former horses, and chariots,
@c    according to the chariots which thou hadst before:  and we will fight
@c    against them in the plains, and thou shalt see that we shall overcome
@c    them.  He believed their counsel, and did so.

@c    20:26. Wherefore, at the return of the year, Benadad mustered the
@c    Syrians, and went up to Aphec, to fight against Israel.

@c    20:27. And the children of Israel were mustered, and taking victuals,
@c    went out on the other side, and encamped over against them, like two
@c    little flocks of goats:  but the Syrians filled the land.

@c    20:28. (And a man of God coming, said to the king of Israel:  Thus saith
@c    the Lord:  Because the Syrians have said:  The Lord is God of the hills,
@c    but is not God of the valleys:  I will deliver all this great multitude
@c    into thy hand, and you shall know that I am the Lord.)

@c    20:29. And both sides set their armies in array one against the other
@c    seven days, and on the seventh day the battle was fought:  and the
@c    children of Israel slew, of the Syrians, a hundred thousand footmen in
@c    one day.

@c    20:30. And they that remained fled to Aphec, into the city:  and the
@c    wall fell upon seven and twenty thousand men, that were left.  And
@c    Benadad fleeing, went into the city, into a chamber that was within a
@c    chamber.

@c    20:31. And his servants said to him:  Behold, we have heard that the
@c    kings of the house of Israel are merciful; so let us put sackcloths on
@c    our loins, and ropes on our heads, and go out to the king of Israel:
@c    perhaps he will save our lives.

@c    20:32. So they girded sackcloths on their loins, and put ropes on their
@c    heads, and came to the king of Israel, and said to him:  Thy servant,
@c    Benadad, saith:  I beseech thee let me have my life.  And he said:  If he
@c    be yet alive, he is my brother.

@c    20:33. The men took this for good luck:  and in haste caught the word
@c    out of his mouth, and said:  Thy brother Benadad.  And he said to them:
@c    Go, and bring him to me.  Then Benadad came out to him, and he lifted
@c    him up into his chariot.

@c    20:34. And he said to him:  The cities which my father took from thy
@c    father, I will restore:  and do thou make thee streets in Damascus, as
@c    my father made in Samaria and having made a league, I will depart from
@c    thee.  So he made a league with him, and let him go.

@c    20:35. Then a certain man of the sons of the prophets, said to his
@c    companion, in the word of the Lord:  Strike me.  But he would not strike.

@c    20:36. Then he said to him:  Because thou wouldst not hearken to the
@c    word of the Lord, behold thou shalt depart from me, and a lion shall
@c    slay thee.  And when he was gone a little from him, a lion found him,
@c    and slew him.

@c    20:37. Then he found another man, and said to him:  Strike me.  And he
@c    struck him and wounded him.

@c    20:38. So the prophet went, and met the king in the way, and disguised
@c    himself by sprinkling dust on his face and his eyes.

@c    20:39. And as the king passed by, he cried to the king, and said:  Thy
@c    servant went out to fight hand to hand:  and when a certain man was run
@c    away, one brought him to me, and said:  Keep this man:  and if he shall
@c    slip away, thy life shall be for his life, or thou shalt pay a talent
@c    of silver.

@c    20:40. And whilst I, in the hurry, turned this way and that, on a
@c    sudden he was not to be seen.  And the king of Israel said to him:  This
@c    is thy judgment, which thyself hast decreed.

@c    20:41. But he forthwith wiped off the dust from his face, and the king
@c    of Israel knew him, that he was one of the prophets.

@c    20:42. And he said to him:  Thus saith the Lord.  Because thou hast let
@c    go out of thy hand a man worthy of death, thy life shall be for his
@c    life, and thy people for his people.

@c    20:43. And the king of Israel returned to his house, slighting to hear,
@c    and raging came into Samaria.



@c    3 Kings Chapter 21


@c    Naboth, for denying his vineyard to king Achab, is by Jezabel's
@c    commandment, falsely accused and stoned to death.  For which crime Elias
@c    denounceth to Achab the judgments of God:  upon his humbling himself the
@c    sentence is mitigated.

@c    21:1. And after these things, Naboth the Jezrahelite, who was in
@c    Jezrahel, had at that time a vineyard, near the palace of Achab, king
@c    of Samaria.

@c    21:2. And Achab spoke to Naboth, saying:  Give me thy vineyard, that I
@c    may make me a garden of herbs, because it is nigh, and adjoining to my
@c    house; and I will give thee for it a better vineyard:  or if thou think
@c    it more convenient for thee, I will give thee the worth of it in money.

@c    21:3. Naboth answered him:  The Lord be merciful to me, and not let me
@c    give thee the inheritance of my fathers.

@c    21:4. And Achab came into his house angry and fretting, because of the
@c    word that Naboth, the Jezrahelite, had spoken to him, saying:  I will
@c    not give thee the inheritance of my fathers.  And casting himself upon
@c    his bed, he turned away his face to the wall, and would eat no bread.

@c    21:5. And Jezabel, his wife, went in to him, and said to him:  What is
@c    the matter that thy soul is so grieved?  and why eatest thou no bread?

@c    21:6. And he answered her:  I spoke to Naboth, the Jezrahelite, and said
@c    to him:  Give me thy vineyard, and take money for it:  or if it please
@c    thee, I will give thee a better vineyard for it.  And he said:  I will
@c    not give thee my vineyard.

@c    21:7. Then Jezabel, his wife, said to him.  Thou art of great authority
@c    indeed, and governest well the kingdom of Israel.  Arise, and eat bread,
@c    and be of good cheer; I will give thee the vineyard of Naboth, the
@c    Jezrahelite.

@c    21:8. So she wrote letters in Achab's name, and sealed them with his
@c    ring, and sent them to the ancients, and the chief men that were in his
@c    city, and that dwelt with Naboth.

@c    21:9. And this was the tenor of the letters:  Proclaim a fast, and make
@c    Naboth sit among the chief of the people;

@c    21:10. And suborn two men, sons of Belial, against him.  and let them
@c    bear false witness; that he hath blasphemed God and the king:  and then
@c    carry him out, and stone him, and so let him die.

@c    21:11. And the men of his city, the ancients and nobles, that dwelt
@c    with him in the city, did as Jezabel had commanded them, and as it was
@c    written in the letters which she had sent to them;

@c    21:12. They proclaimed a fast, and made Naboth sit among the chief of
@c    the people.

@c    21:13. And bringing two men, sons of the devil, they made them sit
@c    against him:  and they, like men of the devil, bore witness against him
@c    before the people:  saying:  Naboth hath blasphemed God and the king.
@c    Wherefore they brought him forth without the city, and stoned him to
@c    death.

@c    21:14. And they sent to Jezabel, saying:  Naboth is stoned, and is dead.

@c    21:15. And it came to pass, when Jezabel heard that Naboth was stoned,
@c    and dead, that she said to Achab:  Arise, and take possession of the
@c    vineyard of Naboth, the Jezrahelite, who would not agree with thee, and
@c    give it thee for money:  for Naboth is not alive, but dead.

@c    21:16. And when Achab heard this, to wit, that Naboth was dead, he
@c    arose, and went down into the vineyard of Naboth, the Jezrahelite, to
@c    take possession of it.

@c    21:17. And the word of the Lord came to Elias, the Thesbite, saying:

@c    21:18. Arise, and go down to meet Achab, king of Israel, who is in
@c    Samaria:  behold he is going down to the vineyard of Naboth, to take
@c    possession of it:

@c    21:19. And thou shalt speak to him, saying:  Thus saith the Lord:  Thou
@c    hast slain:  moreover also thou hast taken possession.  And after these
@c    words thou shalt add:  Thus saith the Lord:  In this place, wherein the
@c    dogs have licked the blood of Naboth, they shall lick thy blood also.

@c    21:20. And Achab said to Elias:  Hast thou found me thy enemy?  He said:
@c    I have found thee because thou art sold, to do evil in the sight of the
@c    Lord.

@c    Sold, to do evil in the sight, etc. . .That is, so addicted to evil, as
@c    if thou hadst sold thyself to the devil, to be his slave to work all
@c    kinds of evil.

@c    21:21. Behold I will bring evil upon thee, and I will cut down thy
@c    posterity, and I will kill of Achab him that pisseth against the wall,
@c    and him that is shut up, and the last in Israel.

@c    21:22. And I will make thy house like the house of Jeroboam the son of
@c    Nabat, and like the house of Baasa the son of Ahias:  for what thou hast
@c    done to provoke me to anger, and for making Israel to sin.

@c    21:23. And of Jezabel also, the Lord spoke, saying:  The dogs shall eat
@c    Jezabel in the field of Jezrahel.

@c    21:24. If Achab die in the city, the dogs shall eat him:  but if he die
@c    in the field, the birds of the air shall eat him.

@c    21:25. Now, there was not such another as Achab, who was sold to do
@c    evil in the sight of the Lord:  for his wife, Jezabel, set him on,

@c    21:26. And he became abominable, insomuch that he followed the idols
@c    which the Amorrhites had made, whom the Lord destroyed before the face
@c    of the children of Israel.

@c    21:27. And when Achab had heard these words, he rent his garments, and
@c    put haircloth upon his flesh, and fasted, and slept in sackcloth, and
@c    walked with his head cast down.

@c    21:28. And the word of the Lord came to Elias, the Thesbite, saying:

@c    21:29. Hast thou not seen Achab humbled before me?  therefore, because
@c    he hath humbled himself, for my sake, I will not bring the evil in his
@c    days, but in his son's days will I bring the evil upon his house.



@c    3 Kings Chapter 22


@c    Achab believing his false prophets, rather than Micheas, is slain in
@c    Ramoth Galaad.  Ochozias succeedeth him.  Good king Josaphat dieth, and
@c    his son Joram succeedeth him.

@c    22:1. And there passed three years without war between Syria and
@c    Israel.

@c    22:2. And in the third year, Josaphat, king of Juda, came down to the
@c    king of Israel.

@c    22:3. (And the king of Israel said to his servants:  Know ye not that
@c    Ramoth Galaad is ours, and we neglect to take it out of the hand of the
@c    king of Syria?)

@c    22:4. And he said to Josaphat:  Wilt thou come with me to battle to
@c    Ramoth Galaad?

@c    22:5. And Josaphat said to the king of Israel:  As I am, so art thou:  my
@c    people and thy people are one:  and my horsemen are thy horsemen.  And
@c    Josaphat said to the king of Israel:  Inquire, I beseech thee, this day
@c    the word of the Lord.

@c    22:6. Then the king of Israel assembled the prophets, about four
@c    hundred men, and he said to them:  Shall I go to Ramoth Galaad to fight,
@c    or shall I forbear?  They answered:  Go up, and the Lord will deliver it
@c    into the hand of the king.

@c    22:7. And Josaphat said:  Is there not here some prophet of the Lord,
@c    that we may inquire by him?

@c    22:8. And the king of Israel said to Josaphat.  There is one man left,
@c    by whom we may inquire of the Lord; Micheas, the son of Jemla:  but I
@c    hate him, for he doth not prophecy good to me, but evil.  And Josaphat
@c    said:  Speak not so, O king.

@c    22:9. Then the king of Israel called an eunuch, and said to him:  Make
@c    haste, and bring hither Micheas, the son of Jemla.

@c    22:10. And the king of Israel, and Josaphat, king of Juda, sat each on
@c    his throne, clothed with royal robes, in a court, by the entrance of
@c    the gate of Samaria, and all the prophets prophesied before them.

@c    22:11. And Sedecias, the son of Chanaana, made himself horns of iron,
@c    and said:  Thus saith the Lord:  With these shalt thou push Syria, till
@c    thou destroy it.

@c    22:12. And all the prophets prophesied in like manner, saying:  Go up to
@c    Ramoth Galaad, and prosper, for the Lord will deliver it into the
@c    king's hands.

@c    22:13. And the messenger that went to call Micheas, spoke to him,
@c    saying:  Behold the words of the prophets with one mouth declare good
@c    things to the king:  let thy word, therefore, be like to theirs, and
@c    speak that which is good.

@c    22:14. But Micheas said to him:  As the Lord liveth, whatsoever the Lord
@c    shall say to me, that will I speak.

@c    22:15. So he came to the king, and the king said to him:  Micheas, shall
@c    we go to Ramoth Galaad to battle, or shall we forbear?  He answered him:
@c    Go up, and prosper, and the Lord shall deliver it into the king's
@c    hands.

@c    Go up, etc. . .This was spoken ironically, and by way of jesting at the
@c    flattering speeches of the false prophets:  and so the king understood
@c    it, as appears by his adjuring Micheas, in the following verse, to tell
@c    him the truth in the name of the Lord.

@c    22:16. But the king said to him:  I adjure thee again and again, that
@c    thou tell me nothing but that which is true, in the name of the Lord.

@c    22:17. And he said:  I saw all Israel scattered upon the hills, like
@c    sheep that have no shepherd; and the Lord said:  These have no master:
@c    let every man of them return to his house in peace.

@c    22:18. (Then the king of Israel said to Josaphat:  Did I not tell thee,
@c    that he prophesieth no good to me, but always evil?)

@c    22:19. And he added and said:  Hear thou, therefore, the word of the
@c    Lord:  I saw the Lord sitting on his throne, and all the army of heaven
@c    standing by him on the right hand and on the left:

@c    22:20. And the Lord said:  Who shall deceive Achab, king of Israel, that
@c    he may go up, and fall at Ramoth Galaad?  And one spoke words of this
@c    manner, and another otherwise.

@c    The Lord said, etc. . .God standeth not in need of any counsellor; nor
@c    are we to suppose that things pass in heaven in the manner here
@c    described:  but this representation was made to the prophet, to be
@c    delivered by him in a manner adapted to the common ways and notions of
@c    men.

@c    22:21. And there came forth a spirit, and stood before the Lord, and
@c    said:  I will deceive him.  And the Lord said to him:  By what means?

@c    22:22. And he said:  I will go forth, and be a lying spirit, in the
@c    mouth of all his prophets.  And the Lord said:  Thou shalt deceive him,
@c    and shalt prevail:  go forth, and do so.

@c    Go forth, and do so. . .This was not a command, but a permission:  for
@c    God never ordaineth lies; though he often permitteth the lying spirit
@c    to deceive those who love not the truth.  2 Thess. 2.10.  And in this
@c    sense it is said in the following verse, The Lord hath given a lying
@c    spirit in the mouth of all thy prophets.

@c    22:23. Now, therefore, behold the Lord hath given a lying spirit in the
@c    mouth of all thy prophets that are here, and the Lord hath spoken evil
@c    against thee.

@c    22:24. And Sedecias, the son of Chanaana, came, and struck Micheas on
@c    the cheek, and said:  Hath then the spirit of the Lord left me, and
@c    spoken to thee?

@c    22:25. And Micheas said:  Thou shalt see in the day when thou shalt go
@c    into a chamber within a chamber to hide thyself.

@c    Go into a chamber, etc. . .This happened when he heard the king was
@c    slain, and justly apprehended that he should be punished for his false
@c    prophecy.

@c    22:26. And the king of Israel said:  Take Micheas and let him abide with
@c    Amon, the governor of the city, and with Joas, the son of Amalech;

@c    22:27. And tell them:  Thus saith the king:  Put this man in prison, and
@c    feed him with bread of affliction, and water of distress till I return
@c    in peace.

@c    22:28. And Micheas said:  If thou return in peace, the Lord hath not
@c    spoken by me.  And he said:  Hear, all ye people.

@c    22:29. So the king of Israel, and Josaphat, king of Juda, went up to
@c    Ramoth-Galaad.

@c    22:30. And the king of Israel said to Josaphat:  Take thy armour, and go
@c    into the battle, and put on thy own garments.  But the king of Israel
@c    changed his dress, and went into the battle.

@c    22:31. And the king of Syria had commanded the two and thirty captains
@c    of the chariots, saying:  You shall not fight against any, small or
@c    great, but against the king of Israel only.

@c    22:32. So when the captains of the chariots saw Josaphat, they
@c    suspected that he was the king of Israel, and making a violent assault,
@c    they fought against him:  and Josaphat cried out.

@c    22:33. And the captains of the chariots perceived that he was not the
@c    king of Israel, and they turned away from him.

@c    22:34. And a certain man bent his bow, shooting at a venture, and
@c    chanced to strike the king of Israel, between the lungs and the
@c    stomach.  But he said to the driver of his chariot:  Turn thy hand, and
@c    carry me out of the army, for I am grievously wounded.

@c    22:35. And the battle was fought that day, and the king of Israel stood
@c    in his chariot against the Syrians, and he died in the evening:  and the
@c    blood ran out of the wound into the midst of the chariot.

@c    22:36. And the herald proclaimed through all the army, before the sun
@c    set, saying:  Let every man return to his own city, and to his own
@c    country.

@c    22:37. And the king died, and was carried into Samaria:  and they buried
@c    the king in Samaria.

@c    22:38. And they washed his chariot in the pool of Samaria and the dogs
@c    licked up his blood, and they washed the reins according to the word of
@c    the Lord which he had spoken.

@c    22:39. But the rest of the acts of Achab, and all that he did, and the
@c    house of ivory that he made, and all the cities that he built, are they
@c    not written in the book of the words of the days of the kings of
@c    Israel?

@c    22:40. So Achab slept with his fathers; and Ochozias, his son, reigned
@c    in his stead.

@c    22:41. But Josaphat, the son of Asa, began to reign over Juda, in the
@c    fourth year of Acbab, king of Israel.

@c    22:42. He was five and thirty years old when he began to reign, and he
@c    reigned five and twenty years in Jerusalem:  the name of his mother was
@c    Azuba, the daughter of Salai.

@c    22:43. And he walked in all the way of Asa, his father, and he declined
@c    not from it:  and he did that which was right in the sight of the Lord.

@c    22:44. Nevertheless, he took not away the high places for as yet the
@c    people offered sacrifice, and burnt incense in the high places.

@c    He took not away, etc. . .He left some of the high places, viz., those
@c    in which they worshipped the true God:  but took away all others, 2 Par.
@c    17.6, and note ver. 14 of chap. 15. 3 Kings.

@c    22:45. And Josaphat had peace with the king of Israel.

@c    22:46. But the rest of the acts of Josaphat, and his works which he
@c    did, and his battles, are they not written in the book of the words of
@c    the days of the kings of Juda?

@c    22:47. And the remnant also of the effeminate, who remained in the days
@c    of Asa, his father, he took out of the land.

@c    22:48. And there was then no king appointed in Edom.

@c    22:49. But king Josaphat made navies on the sea, to sail into Ophir for
@c    gold:  but they could not go, for the ships were broken in Asiongaber.

@c    22:50. Then Ochozias, the son of Achab, said to Josaphat:  Let my
@c    servants go with thy servants in the ships.  And Josaphat would not.

@c    Would not. . .He had been reprehended before for admitting such a
@c    partner:  and therefore would have no more to do with him.

@c    22:51. And Josaphat slept with his fathers, and was buried with them in
@c    the city of David, his father:  and Joram, his son, reigned in his
@c    stead.

@c    22:52. And Ochozias, the son of Achab, began to reign over Israel, in
@c    Samaria, in the seventeenth year of Josaphat, king of Juda, and he
@c    reigned over Israel two years.

@c    22:53. And he did evil in the sight of the Lord, and walked in the way
@c    of his father and his mother, and in the way of Jeroboam, the son of
@c    Nabat, who made Israel to sin.

@c    22:54. He served also Baal, and worshipped him, and provoked the Lord,
@c    the God of Israel, according to all that his father had done.
