@c    THE PROPHECY OF AMOS



@c    AMOS prophesied in Israel about the same time as OSEE:  and was called
@c    from following the cattle to denounce GOD'S judgments to the people of
@c    Israel, and the neighbouring nations, for their repeated crimes, in
@c    which they continued without repentance.



@c    Amos Chapter 1


@c    The prophet threatens Damascus, Gaza, Tyre, Edom, and Ammon with the
@c    judgments of God, for their obstinacy in sin.

@c    1:1. The words of Amos, who was among the herdsmen of Thecua:  which he
@c    saw concerning Israel in the days of Ozias king of Juda, and in the
@c    days of Jeroboam the son of Joas king of Israel two years before the
@c    earthquake.

@c    The earthquake. . .Many understand this of a great earthquake, which
@c    they say was felt at the time that king Ozias attempted to offer
@c    incense in the temple.  But the best chronologists prove that the
@c    earthquake here spoken of must have been before that time:  because
@c    Jeroboam the second, under whom Amos prophesied, was dead long before
@c    that attempt of Ozias.

@c    1:2. And he said:  The Lord will roar from Sion, and utter his voice
@c    from Jerusalem:  and the beautiful places of the shepherds have mourned,
@c    and the top of Carmel is withered.

@c    1:3. Thus saith the Lord:  For three crimes of Damascus, and for four I
@c    will not convert it:  because they have thrashed Galaad with iron wains.

@c    For three crimes--and for four. . .That is, for their many unrepented of
@c    crimes.--Ibid.  I will not convert it. . .That is, I will not spare them,
@c    nor turn away the punishments I design to inflict upon them.

@c    1:4. And I will send a fire into the house of Azael, and it shall
@c    devour the houses of Benadad.

@c    1:5. And I will break the bar of Damascus:  and I will cut off the
@c    inhabitants from the plain of the idol, and him that holdeth the
@c    sceptre from the house of pleasure:  and the people of Syria shall be
@c    carried away to Cyrene, saith the Lord.

@c    1:6. Thus saith the Lord:  For three crimes of Gaza, and for four I will
@c    not convert it:  because they have carried away a perfect captivity to
@c    shut them up in Edom.

@c    1:7. And I will send a fire on the wall of Gaza, and it shall devour
@c    the houses thereof.

@c    1:8. And I will cut off the inhabitant from Azotus, and him that
@c    holdeth the sceptre from Ascalon:  and I will turn my hand against
@c    Accaron, and the rest of the Philistines shall perish, saith the Lord
@c    God.

@c    1:9. Thus saith the Lord:  For three crimes of Tyre, and for four I will
@c    not convert it:  because they have shut up an entire captivity in Edom,
@c    and have not remembered the covenant of brethren.

@c    1:10. And I will send a fire upon the wall of Tyre, and it shall devour
@c    the houses thereof.

@c    1:11. Thus saith the Lord:  For three crimes of Edom, and for four I
@c    will not convert him:  because he hath pursued his brother with the
@c    sword, and hath carried on his fury, and hath kept his wrath to the
@c    end.

@c    1:12. I will send a fire into Theman:  and it shall devour the houses of
@c    Bosra.

@c    1:13. Thus saith the Lord:  For three crimes of the children of Ammon,
@c    and for four I will not convert him:  because he hath ripped up the
@c    women with child of Galaad to enlarge his border.

@c    1:14. And I will kindle a fire in the wall of Rabba:  and it shall
@c    devour the houses thereof with shouting in the day of battle, and with
@c    a whirlwind in the day of trouble.

@c    1:15. And Melchom shall go into captivity, both he, and his princes
@c    together, saith the Lord.

@c    Melchom. . .The god or idol of the Ammonites, otherwise called Moloch,
@c    and Melech:  which in Hebrew signifies a king, and Melchom their king.



@c    Amos Chapter 2


@c    The judgments with which God threatens Moab, Juda, and Israel for their
@c    sins, and their ingratitude.

@c    2:1. Thus saith the Lord:  For three crimes of Moab, and for four I will
@c    not convert him:  because he hath burnt the bones of the king of Edom
@c    even to ashes.

@c    2:2. And I will send a fire into Moab, and it shall devour the houses
@c    of Carioth:  and Moab shall die with a noise, with the sound of the
@c    trumpet:

@c    2:3. And I will cut off the judge from the midst thereof, and will slay
@c    all his princes with him, saith the Lord.

@c    2:4. Thus saith the Lord:  For three crimes of Juda, and for four I will
@c    not convert him:  because he hath cast away the law of the Lord, and
@c    hath not kept his commandments:  for their idols have caused them to
@c    err, after which their fathers have walked.

@c    2:5. And I will send a fire into Juda, and it shall devour the houses
@c    of Jerusalem.

@c    2:6. Thus saith the Lord:  For three crimes of Israel, and for four I
@c    will not convert him:  because he hath sold the just man for silver, and
@c    the poor man for a pair of shoes.

@c    2:7. They bruise the heads of the poor upon the dust of the earth, and
@c    turn aside the way of the humble:  and the son and his father have gone
@c    to the same young woman, to profane my holy name.

@c    2:8. And they sat down upon garments laid to pledge by every altar:  and
@c    drank the wine of the condemned in the house of their God.

@c    2:9. Yet I cast out the Amorrhite before their face:  whose height was
@c    like the height of cedars, and who was strong as an oak:  and I
@c    destroyed his fruit from above, and his roots beneath.

@c    2:10. It is I that brought you up out of the land of Egypt, and I led
@c    you forty years through the wilderness, that you might possess the land
@c    of the Amorrhite.

@c    2:11. And I raised up of your sons for prophets, and of your young men
@c    for Nazarites.  Is it not so, O ye children of Israel, saith the Lord?

@c    2:12. And you will present wine to the Nazarites:  and command the
@c    prophets, saying:  Prophesy not.

@c    2:13. Behold, I will screak under you as a wain screaketh that is laden
@c    with hay.

@c    I will screak. . .Unable to bear any longer the enormous load of your
@c    sins, etc.  The spirit of God, as St. Jerome takes notice, accommodates
@c    himself to the education of the prophet and inspires him with
@c    comparisons taken from country affairs.

@c    2:14. And flight shall perish from the swift, and the valiant shall not
@c    possess his strength, neither shall the strong save his life.

@c    2:15. And he that holdeth the bow shall not stand, and the swift of
@c    foot shall not escape, neither shall the rider of the horse save his
@c    life.

@c    2:16. And the stout of heart among the valiant shall flee away naked in
@c    that day, saith the Lord.



@c    Amos Chapter 3


@c    The evils that shall fall upon Israel for their sins.

@c    3:1. Hear the word that the Lord hath spoken concerning you, O ye
@c    children of Israel:  concerning the whole family that I brought up out
@c    of the land of Egypt, saying:

@c    3:2. You only have I known of all the families of the earth:  therefore
@c    will I visit upon you all your iniquities.

@c    Visit upon. . .That is, punish.

@c    3:3. Shall two walk together except they be agreed?

@c    3:4. Will a lion roar in the forest, if he have no prey?  will the
@c    lion's whelp cry out of his den, if he have taken nothing?

@c    3:5. Will the bird fall into the snare upon the earth, if there be no
@c    fowler?  Shall the snare be taken up from the earth, before it hath
@c    taken somewhat?

@c    3:6. Shall the trumpet sound in a city, and the people not be afraid?
@c    Shall there be evil in a city, which the Lord hath not done?

@c    Evil in a city. . .He speaks of the evil of punishments of war, famine,
@c    pestilence, desolation, etc., but not of the evil of sin, of which God
@c    is not the author.

@c    3:7. For the Lord God doth nothing without revealing his secret to his
@c    servants the prophets.

@c    3:8. The lion shall roar, who will not fear?  The Lord God hath spoken,
@c    who shall not prophesy?

@c    3:9. Publish it in the houses of Azotus, and in the houses of the land
@c    of Egypt, and say:  Assemble yourselves upon the mountains of Samaria,
@c    and behold the many follies in the midst thereof, and them that suffer
@c    oppression in the inner rooms thereof.

@c    3:10. And they have not known to do the right thing, saith the Lord,
@c    storing up iniquity, and robberies in their houses.

@c    3:11. Therefore thus saith the Lord God:  The land shall be in
@c    tribulation, and shall be compassed about:  and thy strength shall be
@c    taken away from thee, and thy houses shall be spoiled.

@c    3:12. Thus saith the Lord:  As if a shepherd should get out of the
@c    lion's mouth two legs, or the tip of the ear:  so shall the children of
@c    Israel be taken out that dwell in Samaria, in a place of a bed, and in
@c    the couch of Damascus.

@c    3:13. Hear ye, and testify in the house of Jacob, saith the Lord the
@c    God of hosts:

@c    3:14. That in the day when I shall begin to visit the transgressions of
@c    Israel, I will visit upon him, and upon the altars of Bethel:  and the
@c    horns of the altars shall be cut off, and shall fall to the ground.

@c    3:15. And I will strike the winter house with the summer house:  and the
@c    houses of ivory shall perish, and many houses shall be destroyed, saith
@c    the Lord.



@c    Amos Chapter 4


@c    The Israelites are reproved for their oppressing the poor, for their
@c    idolatry, and their incorrigibleness.

@c    4:1. Hear this word, ye fat kine that are in the mountains of Samaria:
@c    you that oppress the needy, and crush the poor:  that say to your
@c    masters:  Bring, and we will drink.

@c    Fat kine. . .He means the great ones that lived in plenty and wealth.

@c    4:2. The Lord God hath sworn by his holiness, that lo, the days shall
@c    come upon you, when they shall lift you up on pikes, and what shall
@c    remain of you in boiling pots.

@c    4:3. And you shall go out at the breaches one over against the other,
@c    and you shall be cast forth into Armon, saith the Lord.

@c    Armon. . .A foreign country; some understand it of Armenia.

@c    4:4. Come ye to Bethel, and do wickedly:  to Galgal, and multiply
@c    transgressions:  and bring in the morning your victims, your tithes in
@c    three days.

@c    4:5. And offer a sacrifice of praise with leaven:  and call free
@c    offerings, and proclaim it:  for so you would do, O children of Israel,
@c    saith the Lord God.

@c    4:6. Whereupon I also have given you dulness of teeth in all your
@c    cities, and want of bread in all your places:  yet you have not returned
@c    to me, saith the Lord.

@c    4:7. I also have withholden the rain from you, when there were yet
@c    three months to the harvest:  and I caused it to rain upon on city, and
@c    caused it not to rain upon another city:  one piece was rained upon:  and
@c    the piece whereupon I rained not, withered.

@c    4:8. And two and three cities went to one city to drink water, and were
@c    not filled:  yet you returned not to me, saith the Lord.

@c    4:9. I struck you with a burning wind, and with mildew, the palmerworm
@c    hath eaten up your many gardens, and your vineyards:  your olive groves,
@c    and fig groves:  yet you returned not to me, saith the Lord.

@c    4:10. I sent death upon you in the way of Egypt, I slew your young men
@c    with the sword, even to the captivity of your horses:  and I made the
@c    stench of your camp to come up into your nostrils:  yet you returned not
@c    to me, saith the Lord.

@c    4:11. I destroyed some of you, as God destroyed Sodom and Gomorrha, and
@c    you were as a firebrand plucked out of the burning:  yet you returned
@c    not to me, saith the Lord.

@c    4:12. Therefore I will do these things to thee, O Israel:  and after I
@c    shall have done these things to thee, be prepared to meet thy God, O
@c    Israel.

@c    4:13. For behold he that formeth the mountains and createth the wind,
@c    and declareth his word to man, he that maketh the morning mist, and
@c    walketh upon the high places of the earth:  the Lord the God of hosts is
@c    his name.



@c    Amos Chapter 5


@c    A lamentation for Israel:  an exhortation to return to God.

@c    5:1. Hear ye this word, which I take up concerning you for a
@c    lamentation.  The house of Israel is fallen, and it shall rise no more.

@c    5:2. The virgin of Israel is cast down upon her land, there is none to
@c    raise her up.

@c    5:3. For thus saith the Lord God:  The city, out of which came forth a
@c    thousand, there shall be left in it a hundred:  and out of which there
@c    came a hundred, there shall be left in it ten, in the house of Israel.

@c    5:4. For thus saith the Lord to the house of Israel:  Seek ye me, and
@c    you shall live.

@c    5:5. But seek not Bethel, and go not into Galgal, neither shall you
@c    pass over to Bersabee:  for Galgal shall go into captivity, and Bethel
@c    shall be unprofitable.

@c    Bethel,--Galgal,--Bersabee. . .The places where they worshipped their
@c    idols.

@c    5:6. Seek ye the Lord, and live:  lest the house of Joseph be burnt with
@c    fire, and it shall devour, and there shall be none to quench Bethel.

@c    5:7. You that turn judgment into wormwood, and forsake justice in the
@c    land,

@c    5:8. Seek him that maketh Arcturus, and Orion, and that turneth
@c    darkness into morning, and that changeth day into night:  that calleth
@c    the waters of the sea, and poureth them out upon the face of the earth:
@c    The Lord is his name.

@c    Arcturus and Orion. . .Arcturus is a bright star in the north:  Orion a
@c    beautiful constellation in the south.

@c    5:9. He that with a smile bringeth destruction upon the strong, and
@c    waste upon the mighty.

@c    With a smile. . .That is, with all ease, and without making any effort.

@c    5:10. They have hated him that rebuketh in the gate:  and have abhorred
@c    him that speaketh perfectly.

@c    5:11. Therefore because you robbed the poor, and took the choice prey
@c    from him:  you shall build houses with square stone, and shall not dwell
@c    in them:  you shall plant most delightful vineyards, and shall not drink
@c    the wine of them.

@c    5:12. Because I know your manifold crimes, and your grievous sins:
@c    enemies of the just, taking bribes, and oppressing the poor in the
@c    gate.

@c    5:13. Therefore the prudent shall keep silence at that time, for it is
@c    an evil time.

@c    5:14. Seek ye good, and not evil, that you may live:  and the Lord the
@c    God of hosts will be with you, as you have said.

@c    5:15. Hate evil, and love good, and establish judgment in the gate:  it
@c    may be the Lord the God of hosts may have mercy on the remnant of
@c    Joseph.

@c    5:16. Therefore thus saith the Lord the God of hosts the sovereign
@c    Lord:  In every street there shall be wailing:  and in all places that
@c    are without, they shall say:  Alas, alas! and they shall call the
@c    husbandman to mourning, and such as are skilful in lamentation to
@c    lament.

@c    5:17. And in all vineyards there shall be wailing:  because I will pass
@c    through in the midst of thee, saith the Lord.

@c    5:18. Woe to them that desire the day of the Lord:  to what end is it
@c    for you?  the day of the Lord is darkness, and not light.

@c    5:19. As if a man should flee from the face of a lion, and a bear
@c    should meet him:  or enter into the house, and lean with his hand upon
@c    the wall, and a serpent should bite him.

@c    5:20. Shall not the day of the Lord be darkness, and not light:  and
@c    obscurity, and no brightness in it?

@c    5:21. I hate, and have rejected your festivities:  and I will not
@c    receive the odour of your assemblies.

@c    5:22. And if you offer me holocausts, and your gifts, I will not
@c    receive them:  neither will I regard the vows of your fat beasts.

@c    5:23. Take away from me the tumult of thy songs:  and I will not hear
@c    the canticles of thy harp.

@c    5:24. But judgment shall be revealed as water, and justice as a mighty
@c    torrent.

@c    5:25. Did you offer victims and sacrifices to me in the desert for
@c    forty years, O house of Israel?

@c    Did you offer, etc. . .Except the sacrifices that were offered at the
@c    first, in the dedication of the tabernacle, the Israelites offered no
@c    sacrifices in the desert.

@c    5:26.But you carried a tabernacle for your Moloch, and the image of
@c    your idols, the star of your god, which you made to yourselves.

@c    A tabernacle, etc. . .All this alludes to the idolatry which they
@c    committed, when they were drawn away by the daughters of Moab to the
@c    worship of their gods.  Num. 25.

@c    5:27. And I will cause you to go into captivity beyond Damascus, saith
@c    the Lord, the God of hosts is his name.



@c    Amos Chapter 6


@c    The desolation of Israel for their pride and luxury.

@c    6:1. Woe to you that are wealthy in Sion, and to you that have
@c    confidence in the mountain of Samaria:  ye great men, heads of the
@c    people, that go in with state into the house of Israel.

@c    6:2. Pass ye over to Chalane, and see, and go from thence into Emath
@c    the great:  and go down into Geth of the Philistines, and to all the
@c    best kingdoms of these:  if their border be larger than your border.

@c    6:3. You that are separated unto the evil day:  and that approach to the
@c    throne of iniquity;

@c    6:4. You that sleep upon beds of ivory, and are wanton on your couches:
@c    that eat the lambs out of the flock, and the calves out of the midst of
@c    the herd;

@c    6:5. You that sing to the sound of the psaltery:  they have thought
@c    themselves to have instruments of music like David;

@c    6:6. That drink wine in bowls, and anoint themselves with the best
@c    ointments:  and they are not concerned for the affliction of Joseph.

@c    6:7. Wherefore now they shall go captive at the head of them that go
@c    into captivity:  and the faction of the luxurious ones shall be taken
@c    away.

@c    6:8. The Lord God hath sworn by his own soul, saith the Lord the God of
@c    hosts:  I detest the pride of Jacob, and I hate his houses, and I will
@c    deliver up the city with the inhabitants thereof.

@c    6:9. And if there remain ten men in one house, they also shall die.

@c    6:10. And a man's kinsman shall take him up, and shall burn him, that
@c    he may carry the bones out of the house; and he shall say to him that
@c    is in the inner rooms of the house:  Is there yet any with thee?

@c    6:11. And he shall answer:  There is an end.  And he shall say to him:
@c    Hold thy peace, and mention not the name of the Lord.

@c    6:12. For behold the Lord hath commanded, and he will strike the
@c    greater house with breaches, and the lesser house with clefts.

@c    6:13. Can horses run upon the rocks, or can any one plough with
@c    buffles?  for you have turned judgment into bitterness, and the fruit of
@c    justice into wormwood.

@c    6:14. You that rejoice in a thing of nought:  you that say:  Have we not
@c    taken unto us horns by our own strength?

@c    6:15. But behold, I will raise up a nation against you, O house of
@c    Israel, saith the Lord the God of hosts; and they shall destroy you
@c    from the entrance of Emath, even to the torrent of the desert.



@c    Amos Chapter 7


@c    The prophet sees, in three visions, evils coming upon Israel:  he is
@c    accused of treason by the false priest of Bethel.

@c    7:1. These things the Lord God shewed to me:  and behold the locust was
@c    formed in the beginning of the shooting up of the latter rain, and lo,
@c    it was the latter rain after the king's mowing.

@c    The locust, etc. . .These judgments by locusts and fire, which, by the
@c    prophet's intercession, were moderated, signify the former invasions of
@c    the Assyrians under Phul and Theglathphalasar, before the utter
@c    desolation of Israel by Salmanasar.

@c    7:2. And it came to pass, that when they had made an end of eating the
@c    grass of the land, I said:  O Lord God, be merciful, I beseech thee:  who
@c    shall raise up Jacob, for he is very little?

@c    7:3. The Lord had pity upon this:  It shall not be, said the Lord.

@c    7:4. These things the Lord God shewed to me:  and behold the Lord called
@c    for judgment unto fire, and it devoured the great deep, and ate up a
@c    part at the same time.

@c    7:5. And I said:  O Lord God, cease, I beseech thee, who shall raise up
@c    Jacob, for he is a little one?

@c    7:6. The Lord had pity upon this.  Yea this also shall not be, said the
@c    Lord God.

@c    7:7. These things the Lord shewed to me:  and behold the Lord was
@c    standing upon a plastered wall, and in his hand a mason's trowel.

@c    7:8. And the Lord said to me:  What seest thou, Amos?  And I said:  A
@c    mason's trowel.  And the Lord said:  Behold, I will lay down the trowel
@c    in the midst of my people Israel.  I will plaster them over no more.

@c    7:9. And the high places of the idol shall be thrown down, and the
@c    sanctuaries of Israel shall be laid waste:  and I will rise up against
@c    the house of Jeroboam with the sword.

@c    7:10. And Amasias the priest of Bethel sent to Jeroboam king of Israel,
@c    saying:  Amos hath rebelled against thee in the midst of the house of
@c    Israel:  the land is not able to bear all his words.

@c    7:11. For thus saith Amos:  Jeroboam shall die by the sword, and Israel
@c    shall be carried away captive out of their own land.

@c    Jeroboam shall die by the sword. . .The prophet did not say this; but
@c    that the Lord would rise up against the house of Jeroboam with the
@c    sword:  which was verified, when Zacharias, the son and successor of
@c    Jeroboam, was slain by the sword.  4 Kings 15.10.

@c    7:12. And Amasias said to Amos:  Thou seer, go, flee away into the land
@c    of Juda:  and eat bread there, and prophesy there.

@c    7:13. But prophesy not again any more in Bethel:  because it is the
@c    king's sanctuary, and it is the house of the kingdom.

@c    7:14. And Amos answered and said to Amasias:  I am not a prophet, nor am
@c    I the son of a prophet:  but I am a herdsman plucking wild figs.

@c    I am not a prophet. . .That is, I am not a prophet by education:  nor is
@c    prophesying my calling or profession:  but I am a herdsman, whom God was
@c    pleased to send hither to prophesy to Israel.

@c    7:15. And the Lord took me when I followed the flock, and the Lord said
@c    to me:  Go, prophesy to my people Israel.

@c    7:16. And now hear thou the word of the Lord:  Thou sayest, thou shalt
@c    not prophesy against Israel, and thou shalt not drop thy word upon the
@c    house of the idol.

@c    The house of the idol. . .Viz., of the calf worshipped in Bethel.

@c    7:17. Therefore thus saith the Lord:  Thy wife shall play the harlot in
@c    the city, and thy sons and thy daughters shall fall by the sword, and
@c    thy land shall be measured by a line:  and thou shalt die in a polluted
@c    land, and Israel shall go into captivity out of their land.



@c    Amos Chapter 8


@c    Under the figure of a hook, which bringeth down the fruit, the
@c    approaching desolation of Israel is foreshewed for their avarice and
@c    injustices.

@c    8:1. These things the Lord shewed to me:  and behold a hook to draw down
@c    the fruit.

@c    8:2. And he said:  What seest thou, Amos?  And I said:  A hook to draw
@c    down fruit.  And the Lord said to me:  The end is come upon my people
@c    Israel:  I will not again pass by them any more.

@c    8:3. And the hinges of the temple shall screak in that day, saith the
@c    Lord God:  many shall die:  silence shall be cast in every place.

@c    8:4. Hear this, you that crush the poor, and make the needy of the land
@c    to fail,

@c    8:5. Saying:  When will the month be over, and we shall sell our wares:
@c    and the sabbath, and we shall open the corn:  that we may lessen the
@c    measure, and increase the sicle, and may convey in deceitful balances,

@c    8:6. That we may possess the needy for money, and the poor for a pair
@c    of shoes, and may sell the refuse of the corn?

@c    8:7. The Lord hath sworn against the pride of Jacob:  surely I will
@c    never forget all their works.

@c    8:8. Shall not the land tremble for this, and every one mourn that
@c    dwelleth therein:  and rise up altogether as a river, and be cast out,
@c    and run down as the river of Egypt?

@c    8:9. And it shall come to pass in that day, saith the Lord God, that
@c    the sun shall go down at midday, and I will make the earth dark in the
@c    day of light:

@c    8:10. And I will turn your feasts into mourning, and all your songs
@c    into lamentation:  and I will bring up sackcloth upon every back of
@c    yours, and baldness upon every head:  and I will make it as the mourning
@c    of an only son, and the latter end thereof as a bitter day.

@c    8:11. Behold the days come, saith the Lord, and I will send forth a
@c    famine into the land:  not a famine of bread, nor a thirst of water, but
@c    of hearing the word of the Lord.

@c    8:12. And they shall move from sea to sea, and from the north to the
@c    east:  they shall go about seeking the word of the Lord, and shall not
@c    find it.

@c    8:13. In that day the fair virgins, and the young men shall faint for
@c    thirst.

@c    8:14. They that swear by the sin of Samaria, and say:  Thy God, O Dan,
@c    liveth:  and the way of Bersabee liveth:  and they shall fall, and shall
@c    rise no more.



@c    Amos Chapter 9


@c    The certainty of the desolation of Israel:  the restoring of the
@c    tabernacle of David, and the conversion of the Gentiles to the church;
@c    which shall flourish for ever.

@c    9:1. I saw the Lord standing upon the altar, and he said:  Strike the
@c    hinges, and let the lintels be shook:  for there is covetousness in the
@c    head of them all, and I will slay the last of them with the sword:
@c    there shall be no flight for them:  they shall flee, and he that shall
@c    flee of them shall not be delivered.

@c    9:2. Though they go down even to hell, thence shall my hand bring them
@c    out:  and though they climb up to heaven, thence will I bring them down.

@c    9:3. And though they be hid in the top of Carmel, I will search and
@c    take them away from thence:  and though they hide themselves from my
@c    eyes in the depth of the sea, there will I command the serpent and he
@c    shall bite them.

@c    9:4. And if they go into captivity before their enemies, there will I
@c    command the sword, and it shall kill them.  And I will set my eyes upon
@c    them for evil, and not for good.

@c    9:5. And the Lord the God of hosts is he who toucheth the earth, and it
@c    shall melt:  and all that dwell therein shall mourn:  and it shall rise
@c    up as a river, and shall run down as the river of Egypt.

@c    9:6. He that buildeth his ascension in heaven, and hath founded his
@c    bundle upon the earth:  who calleth the waters of the sea, and poureth
@c    them out upon the face of the earth, the Lord is his name.

@c    His ascension. . .That is, his high throne.--Ibid.  His bundle. . .That
@c    is, his church bound up together by the bands of one faith and communion.

@c    9:7. Are not you as the children of the Ethiopians unto me, O children
@c    of Israel, saith the Lord?  did not I bring up Israel, out of the land
@c    of Egypt:  and the Philistines out of Cappadocia, and the Syrians out of
@c    Cyrene?

@c    As the children of the Ethiopians. . .That is, as black as they, by your
@c    iniquities.

@c    9:8. Behold the eyes of the Lord God are upon the sinful kingdom, and I
@c    will destroy it from the face of the earth:  but yet I will not utterly
@c    destroy the house of Jacob, saith the Lord.

@c    9:9. For behold I will command, and I will sift the house of Israel
@c    among all nations, as corn is sifted in a sieve:  and there shall not a
@c    little stone fall to the ground.

@c    9:10. All the sinners of my people shall fall by the sword:  who say:
@c    The evils shall not approach, and shall not come upon us.

@c    9:11. In that day I will raise up the tabernacle of David, that is
@c    fallen:  and I will close up the breaches of the walls thereof, and
@c    repair what was fallen:  and I will rebuild it as in the days of old.

@c    9:12. That they may possess the remnant of Edom, and all nations,
@c    because my name is invoked upon them:  saith the Lord that doth these
@c    things.

@c    9:13. Behold the days come, saith the Lord, when the ploughman shall
@c    overtake the reaper, and the treader of grapes him that soweth seed:
@c    and the mountains shall drop sweetness, and every hill shall be tilled.

@c    Shall overtake, etc. . .By this is meant the great abundance of
@c    spiritual blessings; which, as it were, by a constant succession, shall
@c    enrich the church of Christ.

@c    9:14. And I will bring back the captivity of my people Israel:  and they
@c    shall build the abandoned cities, and inhabit them:  and they shall
@c    plant vineyards, and drink the wine of them:  and shall make gardens,
@c    and eat the fruits of them.  And I will plant them upon their own land:
@c    and I will no more pluck them out of their land which I have given
@c    them, saith the Lord thy God.
