@c    THE PROPHECY OF ABDIAS



@c    ABDIAS, whose name is interpreted THE SERVANT OF THE LORD, is believed
@c    to have prophesied about the same time as OSEE, JOEL, and AMOS:  though
@c    some of the Hebrews, who believe him to be the same with ACHAB's
@c    steward, make him much more ancient.  His prophecy is the shortest of
@c    any in number of words, but yields to none, says ST. JEROME, in the
@c    sublimity of mysteries.  It contains but one chapter.



@c    Abdias Chapter 1


@c    The destruction of Edom for their pride:  and the wrongs they did to
@c    Jacob:  the salvation and victory of Israel.

@c    1:1. The vision of Abdias.  Thus saith the Lord God to Edom:  We have
@c    heard a rumour from the Lord, and he hath sent an ambassador to the
@c    nations:  Arise, and let us rise up to battle against him.

@c    1:2. Behold I have made thee small among the nations:  thou art
@c    exceeding contemptible.

@c    1:3. The pride of thy heart hath lifted thee up, who dwellest in the
@c    clefts of the rocks, and settest up thy throne on high:  who sayest in
@c    thy heart:  Who shall bring me down to the ground?

@c    1:4. Though thou be exalted as an eagle, and though thou set thy nest
@c    among the stars:  thence will I bring thee down, saith the Lord.

@c    1:5. If thieves had gone in to thee, if robbers by night, how wouldst
@c    thou have held thy peace?  would they not have stolen till they had
@c    enough?  if the grapegatherers had come in to thee, would they not have
@c    left thee at the least a cluster?

@c    1:6. How have they searched Esau, how have they sought out his hidden
@c    things?

@c    1:7. They have sent thee out even to the border:  all the men of thy
@c    confederacy have deceived thee:  the men of thy peace have prevailed
@c    against thee:  they that eat with thee shall lay snares under thee:
@c    there is no wisdom in him.

@c    1:8. Shall not I in that day, saith the Lord, destroy the wise out of
@c    Edom, and understanding out of the mount of Esau?

@c    1:9. And thy valiant men of the south shall be afraid, that man may be
@c    cut off from the mount of Esau.

@c    1:10. For the slaughter, and for the iniquity against thy brother
@c    Jacob, confusion shall cover thee, and thou shalt perish for ever.

@c    1:11. In the day when thou stoodest against him, when strangers carried
@c    away his army captive, and foreigners entered into his gates, and cast
@c    lots upon Jerusalem:  thou also wast as one of them.

@c    1:12. But thou shalt not look on in the day of thy brother, in the day
@c    of his leaving his country:  and thou shalt not rejoice over the
@c    children of Juda, in the day of their destruction:  and thou shalt not
@c    magnify thy mouth in the day of distress.

@c    Thou shalt not look, etc. . .or, thou shouldst not, etc.  It is a
@c    reprehension for what they had done, and at the same time a declaration
@c    that these things should not pass unpunished.--Ibid.  Thou shalt not
@c    magnify thy mouth. . .That is, thou shalt not speak arrogantly against
@c    the children of Juda as insulting them in their distress.

@c    1:13. Neither shalt thou enter into the gate of my people in the day of
@c    their ruin:  neither shalt thou also look on in his evils in the day of
@c    his calamity:  and thou shalt not be sent out against his army in the
@c    day of his desolation.

@c    1:14. Neither shalt thou stand in the crossways to kill them that flee:
@c    and thou shalt not shut up them that remain of him in the day of
@c    tribulation.

@c    1:15. For the day of the Lord is at hand upon all nations:  as thou hast
@c    done, so shall it be done to thee:  he will turn thy reward upon thy own
@c    head.

@c    1:16. For as you have drunk upon my holy mountain, so all nations shall
@c    drink continually:  and they shall drink, and sup up, and they shall be
@c    as though they were not.

@c    1:17. And in mount Sion shall be salvation, and it shall be holy, and
@c    the house of Jacob shall possess those that possessed them.

@c    1:18. And the house of Jacob shall be a fire, and the house of Joseph a
@c    flame, and the house of Esau stubble:  and they shall be kindled in
@c    them, and shall devour them:  and there shall be no remains of the house
@c    of Esau, for the Lord hath spoken it.

@c    1:19. And they that are toward the south, shall inherit the mount of
@c    Esau, and they that are in the plains, the Philistines:  and they shall
@c    possess the country of Ephraim, and the country of Samaria:  and
@c    Benjamin shall possess Galaad.

@c    1:20. And the captivity of this host of the children of Israel, all the
@c    places of the Chanaanites even to Sarepta:  and the captivity of
@c    Jerusalem that is in Bosphorus, shall possess the cities of the south.

@c    1:21. And saviours shall come up into mount Sion to judge the mount of
@c    Esau:  and the kingdom shall be for the Lord.
