@c    THE PROPHECY OF AGGEUS



@c    AGGEUS was one of those that returned from the captivity of Babylon, in
@c    the first year of the reign of king Cyrus.  He was sent by the Lord, in
@c    the second year of the reign of king Darius, the son of Hystaspes, to
@c    exhort Zorobabel the prince of Juda, and Jesus the high priest, to the
@c    building of the temple; which they had begun, but left off again
@c    through the opposition of the Samaritans.  In consequence of this
@c    exhortation they proceeded in the building and finished the temple.  And
@c    the prophet was commissioned by the Lord to assure them that this
@c    second temple should be more glorious than the former, because the
@c    Messiah should honour it with his presence:  signifying withal how much
@c    the church of the New Testament should excel that of the Old Testament.



@c    Aggeus Chapter 1


@c    The people are reproved for neglecting to build the temple.  They are
@c    encouraged to set about the work.

@c    1:1. In the second year of Darius the king, in the sixth month, in the
@c    first day of the month, the word of the Lord came by the hand of Aggeus
@c    the prophet, to Zorobabel the son of Salathiel, governor of Juda, and
@c    to Jesus the son of Josedec the high priest, saying:

@c    1:2. Thus saith the Lord of hosts, saying:  This people saith:  The time
@c    is not yet come for building the house of the Lord.

@c    1:3. And the word of the Lord came by the hand of Aggeus the prophet,
@c    saying:

@c    1:4. Is it time for you to dwell in ceiled houses, and this house lie
@c    desolate?

@c    1:5. And now thus saith the Lord of hosts:  Set your hearts to consider
@c    your ways.

@c    1:6. You have sowed much, and brought in little:  you have eaten, but
@c    have not had enough:  you have drunk, but have not been filled with
@c    drink:  you have clothed yourselves, but have not been warmed:  and he
@c    that hath earned wages, put them into a bag with holes.

@c    1:7. Thus saith the Lord of hosts:  Set your hearts upon your ways:

@c    1:8. Go up to the mountain, bring timber, and build the house:  and it
@c    shall be acceptable to me, and I shall be glorified, saith the Lord.

@c    1:9. You have looked for more, and behold it became less, and you
@c    brought it home, and I blowed it away:  why, saith the Lord of hosts?
@c    because my house is desolate, and you make haste every man to his own
@c    house.

@c    1:10. Therefore the heavens over you were stayed from giving dew, and
@c    the earth was hindered from yielding her fruits:

@c    1:11. And I called for a drought upon the land, and upon the mountains,
@c    and upon the corn, and upon the wine, and upon the oil, and upon all
@c    that the ground bringeth forth, and upon men, and upon beasts, and upon
@c    all the labour of the hands.

@c    1:12. Then Zorobabel the son of Salathiel, and Jesus the son of Josedec
@c    the high priest, and all the remnant of the people hearkened to the
@c    voice of the Lord their God, and to the words of Aggeus the prophet, as
@c    the Lord their God sent him to them:  and the people feared before the
@c    Lord.

@c    1:13. And Aggeus the messenger of the Lord, as one of the messengers of
@c    the Lord, spoke, saying to the people:  I am with you, saith the Lord.

@c    1:14. And the Lord stirred up the spirit of Zorobabel the son of
@c    Salathiel governor of Juda, and the spirit of Jesus the son of Josedec
@c    the high priest, and the spirit of all the rest of the people:  and they
@c    went in, and did the work in the house of the Lord of Hosts their God.



@c    Aggeus Chapter 2


@c    Christ by his coming shall make the latter temple more glorious than
@c    the former.  The blessing of God shall reward their labour in building.
@c    God's promise to Zorobabel.

@c    2:1. In the four and twentieth day of the month, in the sixth month, in
@c    the second year of Darius the king, they began.

@c    2:2. And in the seventh month, the word of the Lord came by the hand of
@c    Aggeus the prophet, saying:

@c    2:3. Speak to Zorobabel the son of Salathiel the governor of Juda, and
@c    to Jesus the son of Josedec the high priest, and to the rest of the
@c    people, saying:

@c    2:4. Who is left among you, that saw this house in its first glory?  and
@c    how do you see it now?  is it not in comparison to that as nothing in
@c    your eyes?

@c    2:5. Yet now take courage, O Zorobabel, saith the Lord, and take
@c    courage, Jesus the son of Josedec the high priest, and take courage,
@c    all ye people of the land, saith the Lord of hosts:  and perform (for I
@c    am with you, saith the Lord of hosts)

@c    2:6. The word that I convenanted with you when you came out of the land
@c    of Egypt:  and my spirit shall be in the midst of you:  fear not.

@c    2:7. For thus saith the Lord of hosts:  Yet one little while, and I will
@c    move the heaven and the earth, and the sea, and the dry land.

@c    2:8. And I will move all nations:  AND THE DESIRED OF ALL NATIONS SHALL
@c    COME:  and I will fill this house with glory:  saith the Lord of hosts.

@c    2:9. The silver is mine, and the gold is mine, saith the Lord of hosts.

@c    2:10. Great shall be the glory of this last house more than of the
@c    first, saith the Lord of hosts:  and in this place I will give peace,
@c    saith the Lord of hosts.

@c    2:11. In the four and twentieth day of the ninth month, in the second
@c    year of Darius the king, the word of the Lord came to Aggeus the
@c    prophet, saying:

@c    2:12. Thus saith the Lord of hosts:  Ask the priests the law, saying:

@c    2:13. If a man carry sanctified flesh in the skirt of his garment, and
@c    touch with his skirt, bread, or pottage, or wine, or oil, or any meat:
@c    shall it be sanctified?  And the priests answered, and said:  No.

@c    2:14. And Aggeus said:  If one that is unclean by occasion of a soul
@c    touch any of all these things, shall it be defiled?  And the priests
@c    answered, and said:  It shall be defiled.

@c    By occasion of a soul. . .That is, by having touched the dead; in which
@c    case, according to the prescription of the law, Num. 19.13, 22, a
@c    person not only became unclean himself, but made every thing that he
@c    touched unclean.  The prophet applies all this to the people, whose
@c    souls remained unclean by neglecting the temple of God; and therefore
@c    were not sanctified by the flesh they offered in sacrifice:  but rather
@c    defiled their sacrifices by approaching to them in the state of
@c    uncleanness.

@c    2:15. And Aggeus answered, and said:  So is this people, and so is this
@c    nation before my face, saith the Lord, and so is all the work of their
@c    hands:  and all that they have offered there, shall be defiled.

@c    2:16. And now consider in your hearts, from this day and upward, before
@c    there was a stone laid upon a stone in the temple of the Lord.

@c    2:17. When you went to a heap of twenty bushels, and they became ten:
@c    and you went into the press, to press out fifty vessels, and they
@c    became twenty.

@c    2:18. I struck you with a blasting wind, and all the works of your hand
@c    with the mildew and with hail, yet there was none among you that
@c    returned to me, saith the Lord.

@c    2:19. Set your hearts from this day, and henceforward, from the four
@c    and twentieth day of the ninth month:  from the day that the foundations
@c    of the temple of the Lord were laid, and lay it up in your hearts.

@c    2:20. Is the seed as yet sprung up?  or hath the vine, and the fig tree,
@c    and the pomegranate, and the olive tree as yet flourished?  from this
@c    day I will bless you.

@c    2:21. And the word of the Lord came a second time to Aggeus in the four
@c    and twentieth day of the month, saying:

@c    2:22. Speak to Zorobabel the governor of Juda, saying:  I will move both
@c    heaven and earth.

@c    2:23. And I will overthrow the throne of kingdoms, and will destroy the
@c    strength of the kingdom of the Gentiles:  and I will overthrow the
@c    chariot, and him that rideth therein:  and the horses and their riders
@c    shall come down, every one by the sword of his brother.

@c    2:24. In that day, saith the Lord of hosts, I will take thee, O
@c    Zorobabel the son of Salathiel, my servant, saith the Lord, and will
@c    make thee as a signet, for I have chosen thee, saith the Lord of hosts.

@c    O Zorobabel. . .This promise principally relates to Christ, who was of
@c    the race of Zorobabel.
