@c    THE PROPHECY OF BARUCH



@c    BARUCH was a man of noble extraction, and learned in the law, secretary
@c    and disciple to the prophet JEREMIAS, and a sharer in his labours and
@c    persecutions:  which is the reason why the ancient fathers have
@c    considered this book as a part of the prophecy of JEREMIAS, and have
@c    usually quoted it under his name.



@c    Baruch Chapter 1


@c    The Jews of Babylon send the book of Baruch with money to Jerusalem,
@c    requesting their brethren there to offer sacrifice, and to pray for the
@c    king and for them, acknowledging their manifold sins.

@c    1:1. And these are the words of the book, which Baruch the son of
@c    Nerias, the son of Maasias, the son of Sedecias, the son of Sedei, the
@c    son Helcias, wrote in Babylonia.

@c    1:2. In the fifth year, in the seventh day of the month, at the time
@c    that the Chaldeans took Jerusalem, and burnt it with fire.

@c    1:3. And Baruch read the words of this book in the hearing of Jechonias
@c    the son of Joakim king of Juda, and in the hearing of all the people
@c    that came to hear the book.

@c    1:4. And in the hearing of the nobles, the sons of the kings, and in
@c    the hearing of the ancients, and in the hearing of the people, from the
@c    least even to the greatest of them that dwelt in Babylonia, by the
@c    river Sedi.

@c    1:5. And when they heard it they wept, and fasted, and prayed before
@c    the Lord.

@c    1:6. And they made a collection of money according to every man's
@c    power.

@c    1:7. And they sent it to Jerusalem to Joakim the priest, the son of
@c    Helcias, the son of Salom, and to the priests, and to all the people,
@c    that were found with him in Jerusalem:

@c    1:8. At the time when he received the vessels of the temple of the
@c    Lord, which had been taken away out of the temple, to return them into
@c    the land of Juda the tenth day of the month Sivan, the silver vessels,
@c    which Sedecias the son of Josias king of Juda had made,

@c    1:9. After that Nabuchodonosor the king of Babylon had carried away
@c    Jechonias, and the princes, and all the powerful men, and the people of
@c    the land from Jerusalem, and brought them bound to Babylon.

@c    1:10. And they said:  Behold we have sent you money, buy with it
@c    holocausts, and frankincense, and make meat offerings, and offerings
@c    for sin at the altar of the Lord our God:

@c    1:11. And pray ye for the life of Nabuchodonosor the king of Babylon,
@c    and for the life of Balthasar his son, that their days may be upon
@c    earth as the days of heaven:

@c    1:12. And that the Lord may give us strength, and enlighten our eyes,
@c    that we may live under the shadow of Nabuchodonosor the king of
@c    Babylon, and under the shadow of Balthasar his son, and may serve them
@c    many days, and may find favour in their sight.

@c    1:13. And pray ye for us to the Lord our God:  for we have sinned
@c    against the Lord our God, and his wrath is not turned away from us even
@c    to this day.

@c    1:14. And read ye this book, which we have sent to you to be read in
@c    the temple of the Lord, on feasts, and proper days.

@c    1:15. And you shall say:  To the Lord our God belongeth justice, but to
@c    us confusion of our face:  as it is come to pass at this day to all
@c    Juda, and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem,

@c    1:16. To our kings, and to our princes, and to our priests, and to our
@c    prophets, and to our fathers.

@c    1:17. We have sinned before the Lord our God, and have not believed
@c    him, nor put our trust in him:

@c    1:18. And we were not obedient to him, and we have not hearkened to the
@c    voice of the Lord our God, to walk in his commandments which he hath
@c    given us.

@c    1:19. From the day that he brought our fathers out of the land of
@c    Egypt, even to this day, we were disobedient to the Lord our God:  and
@c    going astray we turned away from hearing his voice.

@c    1:20. And many evils have cleaved to us, and the curses which the Lord
@c    foretold by Moses his servant:  who brought our fathers out of the land
@c    of Egypt, to give us a land flowing with milk and honey, as at this
@c    day.

@c    1:21. And we have not hearkened to the voice of the Lord our God
@c    according to all the words of the prophets whom he sent to us:

@c    1:22. And we have gone away every man after the inclinations of his own
@c    wicked heart, to serve strange gods, and to do evil in the sight of the
@c    Lord our God.



@c    Baruch Chapter 2


@c    A further confession of the sins of the people, and of the justice of
@c    God.

@c    2:1. Wherefore the Lord our God hath made good his word, that he spoke
@c    to us, and to our judges that have judged Israel, and to our kings, and
@c    to our princes, and to all Israel and Juda:

@c    2:2. That the Lord would bring upon us great evils, such as never
@c    happened under heaven, as they have come to pass in Jerusalem,
@c    according to the things that are written in the law of Moses:

@c    2:3. That a man should eat the flesh of his own son, and the flesh of
@c    his own daughter.

@c    2:4. And he hath delivered them up to be under the hand of all the
@c    kings that are round about us, to be a reproach, and desolation among
@c    all the people, among whom the Lord hath scattered us.

@c    2:5. And we are brought under, and are not uppermost:  because we have
@c    sinned against the Lord our God, by not obeying his voice.

@c    2:6. To the Lord our God belongeth justice:  but to us, and to our
@c    fathers confusion of face, as at this day.

@c    2:7. For the Lord hath pronounced against us all these evils that are
@c    come upon us:

@c    2:8. And we have not entreated the face of the Lord our God, that we
@c    might return every one of us from our most wicked ways.

@c    2:9. And the Lord hath watched over us for evil, and hath brought it
@c    upon us:  for the Lord is just in all his works which he hath commanded
@c    us:

@c    2:10. And we have not hearkened to his voice to walk in the
@c    commandments of the Lord which he hath set before us.

@c    2:11. And now, O Lord God of Israel, who hast brought thy people out of
@c    the land of Egypt with a strong hand, and with signs, and with wonders,
@c    and with thy great power, and with a mighty arm, and hast made thee a
@c    name as at this day,

@c    2:12. We have sinned, we have done wickedly, we have acted unjustly, O
@c    Lord our God, against all thy justices.

@c    2:13. Let thy wrath be turned away from us:  for we are left a few among
@c    the nations where thou hast scattered us.

@c    2:14. Hear, O Lord, our prayers, and our petitions, and deliver us for
@c    thy own sake:  and grant that we may find favour in the sight of them
@c    that have led us away:

@c    2:15. That all the earth may know that thou art the Lord our God, and
@c    that thy name is called upon Israel, and upon his posterity.

@c    2:16. Look down upon us, O Lord, from thy holy house, and incline thy
@c    ear, and hear us.

@c    2:17. Open thy eyes, and behold:  for the dead that are in hell, whose
@c    spirit is taken away from their bowels, shall not give glory and
@c    justice to the Lord:

@c    Justice, etc. . .They that are in hell shall not give justice to God;
@c    that is, they shall not acknowledge and glorify his justice as penitent
@c    sinners do upon earth.

@c    2:18. But the soul that is sorrowful for the greatness of evil she hath
@c    done, and goeth bowed down, and feeble, and the eyes that fail, and the
@c    hungry soul giveth glory and justice to thee the Lord.

@c    2:19. For it is not for the justices of our fathers that we pour out
@c    our prayers, and beg mercy in thy sight, O Lord our God:

@c    2:20. But because thou hast sent out thy wrath, and thy indignation
@c    upon us, as thou hast spoken by the hand of thy servants the prophets,
@c    saying:

@c    2:21. Thus saith the Lord:  Bow down your shoulder, and your neck, and
@c    serve the king of Babylon:  and you shall remain in the land which I
@c    have given to your fathers.

@c    2:22. But if you will not hearken to the voice of the Lord your God, to
@c    serve the king of Babylon:  I will cause you to depart out of the cities
@c    of Juda, and from without Jerusalem.

@c    2:23. And I will take away from you the voice of mirth, and the voice
@c    of joy, and the voice of the bridegroom, and the voice of the bride,
@c    and all the land shall be without any footstep of inhabitants.

@c    2:24. And they hearkened not to thy voice, to serve the king of
@c    Babylon:  and thou hast made good thy words, which thou spokest by the
@c    hands of thy servants the prophets, that the bones of our kings, and
@c    the bones of our fathers should be removed out of their place:

@c    2:25. And behold they are cast out to the heat of the sun, and to the
@c    frost of the night:  and they have died in grievous pains, by famine,
@c    and by the sword, and in banishment.

@c    2:26. And thou hast made the temple, in which thy name was called upon,
@c    as it is at this day, for the iniquity of the house of Israel, and the
@c    house of Juda.

@c    2:27. And thou hast dealt with us, O Lord our God, according to all thy
@c    goodness, and according to all that great mercy of thine:

@c    2:28. As thou spokest by the hand of thy servant Moses, in the day when
@c    thou didst command him to write thy law before the children of Israel,

@c    2:29. Saying:  If you will not hear my voice, this great multitude shall
@c    be turned into a very small number among the nations, where I will
@c    scatter them:

@c    2:30. For I know that the people will not hear me, for they are a
@c    people of a stiff neck:  but they shall turn to their heart in the land
@c    of their captivity:

@c    2:31. And they shall know that I am the Lord their God:  and I will give
@c    them a heart, and they shall understand:  and ears, and they shall hear.

@c    2:32. And they shall praise me in the land of their captivity, and
@c    shall be mindful of my name.

@c    2:33. And they shall turn away themselves from their stiff neck, and
@c    from their wicked deeds:  for they shall remember the way of their
@c    fathers, that sinned against me.

@c    2:34. And I will bring them back again into the land which I promised
@c    with an oath to their fathers, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and they
@c    shall be masters thereof:  and I will multiply them, and they shall not
@c    be diminished.

@c    2:35. And I will make with them another covenant that shall be
@c    everlasting, to be their God, and they shall be my people:  and I will
@c    no more remove my people, the children of Israel, out of the land that
@c    I have given them.



@c    Baruch Chapter 3


@c    They pray for mercy, acknowledging that they are justly punished for
@c    forsaking true wisdom.  A prophecy of Christ.

@c    3:1. And now, O Lord Almighty, the God of Israel, the soul in anguish,
@c    and the troubled spirit crieth to thee:

@c    3:2. Hear, O Lord, and have mercy, for thou art a merciful God, and
@c    have pity on us:  for we have sinned before thee.

@c    3:3. For thou remainest for ever, and shall we perish everlastingly?

@c    3:4. O Lord Almighty, the God of Israel, hear now the prayer of the
@c    dead of Israel, and of their children, that have sinned before thee,
@c    and have not hearkened to the voice of the Lord their God, wherefore
@c    evils have cleaved fast to us.

@c    3:5. Remember not the iniquities of our fathers, but think upon thy
@c    hand, and upon thy name at this time:

@c    3:6. For thou art the Lord our God, and we will praise thee, O Lord:

@c    3:7. Because for this end thou hast put thy fear in our hearts, to the
@c    intent that we should call upon thy name, and praise thee in our
@c    captivity, for we are converted from the iniquity of our fathers, who
@c    sinned before thee.

@c    3:8. And behold we are at this day in our captivity, whereby thou hast
@c    scattered us to be a reproach, and a curse, and an offence, according
@c    to all the iniquities of our fathers, who departed from thee, O Lord
@c    our God.

@c    3:9. Hear, O Israel, the commandments of life:  give ear, that thou
@c    mayst learn wisdom.

@c    3:10. How happeneth it, O Israel, that thou art in thy enemies' land?

@c    3:11. Thou art grown old in a strange country, thou art defiled with
@c    the dead:  thou art counted with them that go down into hell.

@c    3:12. Thou hast forsaken the fountain of wisdom:

@c    3:13. For if thou hadst walked in the way of God, thou hadst surely
@c    dwelt in peace for ever.

@c    3:14. Learn where is wisdom, where is strength, where is understanding:
@c    that thou mayst know also where is length of days and life, where is
@c    the light of the eyes, and peace.

@c    3:15. Who hath found out her place?  and who hath gone in to her
@c    treasures?

@c    3:16. Where are the princes of the nations, and they that rule over the
@c    beasts that are upon the earth?

@c    3:17. That take their diversion with the birds of the air.

@c    3:18. That hoard up silver and gold, wherein men trust, and there is no
@c    end of their getting?  who work in silver and are solicitous, and their
@c    works are unsearchable.

@c    3:19. They are cut off, and are gone down to hell, and others are risen
@c    up in their place.

@c    3:20. Young men have seen the light, and dwelt upon the earth:  but the
@c    way of knowledge they have not known,

@c    3:21. Nor have they understood the paths thereof, neither have their
@c    children received it, it is far from their face.

@c    3:22. It hath not been heard of in the land of Chanaan, neither hath it
@c    been seen in Theman.

@c    Theman. . .The capital city of Edom.

@c    3:23. The children of Agar also, that search after the wisdom that is
@c    of the earth, the merchants of Merrha, and of Theman, and the tellers
@c    of fables, and searchers of prudence and understanding:  but the way of
@c    wisdom they have not known, neither have they remembered her paths.

@c    Agar. . .The mother of the Ismaelites.

@c    3:24. O Israel, how great is the house of God, and how vast is the
@c    place of his possession!

@c    3:25. It is great, and hath no end:  it is high and immense.

@c    3:26. There were the giants, those renowned men that were from the
@c    beginning, of great stature, expert in war.

@c    3:27. The Lord chose not them, neither did they find the way of
@c    knowledge:  therefore did they perish.

@c    3:28. And because they had not wisdom, they perished through their
@c    folly.

@c    3:29. Who hath gone up into heaven, and taken her, and brought her down
@c    from the clouds?

@c    3:30. Who hath passed over the sea, and found her, and brought her
@c    preferably to chosen gold?

@c    3:31. There is none that is able to know her ways, nor that can search
@c    out her paths:

@c    3:32. But he that knoweth all things, knoweth her, and hath found her
@c    out with his understanding:  he that prepared the earth for evermore,
@c    and filled it with cattle and fourfooted beasts:

@c    3:33. He that sendeth forth the light, and it goeth:  and hath called
@c    it, and it obeyeth him with trembling.

@c    3:34. And the stars have given light in their watches, and rejoiced:

@c    3:35. They were called, and they said:  Here we are:  and with
@c    cheerfulness they have shined forth to him that made them.

@c    3:36. This is our God, and there shall no other be accounted of in
@c    comparison of him.

@c    3:37. He found out all the way of knowledge, and gave it to Jacob his
@c    servant, and to Israel his beloved.

@c    3:38. Afterwards he was seen upon earth, and conversed with men.

@c    Was seen upon earth, etc. . .viz., by the mystery of the incarnation, by
@c    means of which the son of God came visibly amongst us, and conversed
@c    with men.  The prophets often speak of things to come as if they were
@c    past, to express the certainty of the event of the things foretold.



@c    Baruch Chapter 4


@c    The prophet exhorts to the keeping of the law of wisdom, and encourages
@c    the people to be patient, and to hope for their deliverance.

@c    4:1. This is the book of the commandments of God, and the law, that is
@c    for ever:  all they that keep it, shall come to life:  but they that have
@c    forsaken it, to death.

@c    4:2. Return, O Jacob, and take hold of it, walk in the way by its
@c    brightness, in the presence of the light thereof.

@c    4:3. Give not thy honour to another, nor thy dignity to a strange
@c    nation.

@c    4:4. We are happy, O Israel:  because the things that are pleasing to
@c    God, are made known to us.

@c    4:5. Be of good comfort, O people of God, the memorial of Israel:

@c    4:6. You have been sold to the Gentiles, not for your destruction:  but
@c    because you provoked God to wrath, you are delivered to your
@c    adversaries.

@c    4:7. For you have provoked him who made you, the eternal God, offering
@c    sacrifice to devils, and not to God.

@c    4:8. For you have forgotten God, who brought you up, and you have
@c    grieved Jerusalem that nursed you.

@c    4:9. For she saw the wrath of God coming upon you, and she said:  Give
@c    ear, all you that dwell near Sion, for God hath brought upon me great
@c    mourning:

@c    4:10. For I have seen the captivity of my people, of my sons, and my
@c    daughters, which the Eternal hath brought upon them.

@c    4:11. For I nourished them with joy:  but I sent them away with weeping
@c    and mourning.

@c    4:12. Let no man rejoice over me, a widow, and desolate:  I am forsaken
@c    of many for the sins of my children, because they departed from the law
@c    of God.

@c    4:13. And they have not known his justices, nor walked by the ways of
@c    God's commandments, neither have they entered by the paths of his truth
@c    and justice.

@c    4:14. Let them that dwell about Sion come, and remember the captivity
@c    of my sons and daughters, which the Eternal hath brought upon them.

@c    4:15. For he hath brought a nation upon them from afar, a wicked
@c    nation, and of a strange tongue:

@c    4:16. Who have neither reverenced the ancient, nor pitied children, and
@c    have carried away the beloved of the widow, and have left me all alone
@c    without children.

@c    4:17. But as for me, what help can I give you?

@c    4:18. But he that hath brought the evils upon you, he will deliver you
@c    out of the hands of your enemies.

@c    4:19. Go your way, my children, go your way:  for I am left alone.

@c    4:20. I have put off the robe of peace, and have put upon me the
@c    sackcloth of supplication, and I will cry to the most High in my days.

@c    4:21. Be of good comfort, my children, cry to the Lord, and he will
@c    deliver you out of the hand of the princes your enemies.

@c    4:22. For my hope is in the Eternal that he will save you:  and joy is
@c    come upon me from the Holy One, because of the mercy which shall come
@c    to you from our everlasting Saviour.

@c    4:23. For I sent you forth with mourning and weeping:  but the Lord will
@c    bring you back to me with joy and gladness for ever.

@c    4:24. For as the neighbours of Sion have now seen your captivity from
@c    God:  so shall they also shortly see your salvation from God, which
@c    shall come upon you with great honour, and everlasting glory.

@c    4:25. My children, suffer patiently the wrath that is come upon you:
@c    for thy enemy hath persecuted thee, but thou shalt quickly see his
@c    destruction:  and thou shalt get up upon his neck.

@c    4:26. My delicate ones have walked rough ways, for they were taken away
@c    as a flock made a prey by the enemies.

@c    4:27. Be of good comfort, my children, and cry to the Lord:  for you
@c    shall be remembered by him that hath led you away.

@c    4:28. For as it was your mind to go astray from God; so when you return
@c    again you shall seek him ten times as much.

@c    4:29. For he that hath brought evils upon you, shall bring you
@c    everlasting joy again with your salvation.

@c    4:30. Be of good heart, O Jerusalem:  for he exhorteth thee, that named
@c    thee.

@c    4:31. The wicked that have afflicted thee, shall perish:  and they that
@c    have rejoiced at thy ruin, shall be punished.

@c    4:32. The cities which thy children have served, shall be punished:  and
@c    she that received thy sons.

@c    She that received, etc. . .viz., Babylon.

@c    4:33. For as she rejoiced at thy ruin, and was glad of thy fall:  so
@c    shall she be grieved for her own desolation.

@c    4:34. And the joy of her multitude shall be cut off:  and her gladness
@c    shall be turned to mourning.

@c    4:35. For fire shall come upon her from the Eternal, long to endure,
@c    and she shall be inhabited by devils for a great time.

@c    4:36. Look about thee, O Jerusalem, towards the east, and behold the
@c    joy that cometh to thee from God.

@c    4:37. For behold thy children come, whom thou sentest away scattered,
@c    they come gathered together from the east even to the west, at the word
@c    of the Holy One rejoicing for the honour of God.



@c    Baruch Chapter 5


@c    Jerusalem is invited to rejoice and behold the return of her children
@c    out of their captivity.

@c    5:1. Put off, O Jerusalem, the garment of thy mourning, and affliction:
@c    and put on the beauty, and honour of that everlasting glory which thou
@c    hast from God.

@c    5:2. God will clothe thee with the double garment of justice, and will
@c    set a crown on thy head of everlasting honour.

@c    5:3. For God will shew his brightness in thee, to every one under
@c    heaven.

@c    5:4. For thy name shall be named to thee by God for ever:  the peace of
@c    justice, and honour of piety.

@c    5:5. Arise, O Jerusalem, and stand on high:  and look about towards the
@c    east, and behold thy children gathered together from the rising to the
@c    setting sun, by the word of the Holy One rejoicing in the remembrance
@c    of God.

@c    5:6. For they went out from thee on foot, led by the enemies:  but the
@c    Lord will bring them to thee exalted with honour as children of the
@c    kingdom.

@c    5:7. For God hath appointed to bring down every high mountain, and the
@c    everlasting rocks, and to fill up the valleys to make them even with
@c    the ground:  that Israel may walk diligently to the honour of God.

@c    5:8. Moreover the woods, and every sweetsmelling tree have overshadowed
@c    Israel by the commandment of God.

@c    5:9. For God will bring Israel with joy in the light of his majesty,
@c    with mercy, and justice, that cometh from him.



@c    Baruch Chapter 6


@c    The epistle of Jeremias to the captives, as a preservative against
@c    idolatry.

@c    A copy of the epistle that Jeremias sent to them that were to be led
@c    away captives into Babylon, by the king of Babylon, to declare to them
@c    according to what was commanded him by God.

@c    6:1. For the sins that you have committed before God, you shall be
@c    carried away captives into Babylon by Nabuchodonosor the king of
@c    Babylon.

@c    6:2. And when you are come into Babylon, you shall be there many years,
@c    and for a long time, even to seven generations:  and after that I will
@c    bring you away from thence with peace.

@c    Seven generations. . .That is, seventy years.

@c    6:3. But now, you shall see in Babylon gods of gold, and of silver, and
@c    of stone, and of wood borne upon shoulders, causing fear to the
@c    Gentiles.

@c    6:4. Beware therefore that you imitate not the doings of others, and be
@c    afraid, and the fear of them should seize upon you.

@c    6:5. But when you see the multitude behind, and before, adoring them,
@c    say you in your hearts:  Thou oughtest to be adored, O Lord.

@c    6:6. For my angel is with you:  And I myself will demand an account of
@c    your souls.

@c    6:7. For their tongue that is polished by the craftsman, and themselves
@c    laid over with gold and silver, are false things, and they cannot
@c    speak.

@c    6:8. And as if it were for a maiden that loveth to go gay:  so do they
@c    take gold and make them up.

@c    6:9. Their gods have golden crowns upon their heads:  whereof the
@c    priests secretly convey away from them gold, and silver, and bestow it
@c    on themselves.

@c    6:10. Yea and they give thereof to prostitutes, and they dress out
@c    harlots:  and again when they receive it of the harlots, they adorn
@c    their gods.

@c    6:11. And these gods cannot defend themselves from the rust, and the
@c    moth.

@c    6:12. But when they have covered them with a purple garment, they wipe
@c    their face because of the dust of the house, which is very much among
@c    them.

@c    6:13. This holdeth a sceptre as a man, as a judge of the country, but
@c    cannot put to death one that offendeth him.

@c    6:14. And this hath in his hand a sword, or an axe, but cannot save
@c    himself from war, or from robbers, whereby be it known to you, that
@c    they are not gods.

@c    6:15. Therefore fear them not.  For as a vessel that a man uses when it
@c    is broken becometh useless, even so are their gods:

@c    6:16. When they are placed in the house, their eyes are full of dust by
@c    the feet of them that go in.

@c    6:17. And as the gates are made sure on every side upon one that hath
@c    offended the king, or like a dead man carried to the grave, so do the
@c    priests secure the doors with bars and locks, lest they be stripped by
@c    thieves.

@c    6:18. They light candles to them, and in great number, of which they
@c    cannot see one:  but they are like beams in the house.

@c    6:19. And they say that the creeping things which are of the earth,
@c    gnaw their hearts, while they eat them and their garments, and they
@c    feel it not.

@c    6:20. Their faces are black with the smoke that is made in the house.

@c    6:21. Owls, and swallows, and other birds fly upon their bodies, and
@c    upon their heads, and cats in like manner.

@c    6:22. Whereby you may know that they are no gods.  Therefore fear them
@c    not.

@c    6:23. The gold also which they have, is for shew, but except a man wipe
@c    off the rust, they will not shine:  for neither when they were molten,
@c    did they feel it.

@c    6:24. Men buy them at a high price, whereas there is no breath in them.

@c    6:25. And having not the use of feet they are carried upon shoulders,
@c    declaring to men how vile they are.  Be they confounded also that
@c    worship them.

@c    6:26. Therefore if they fall to the ground, they rise not up again of
@c    themselves, nor if a man set them upright, will they stand by
@c    themselves, but their gifts shall be set before them, as to the dead.

@c    6:27. The things that are sacrificed to them, their priests sell and
@c    abuse:  in like manner also their wives take part of them, but give
@c    nothing of it either to the sick, or to the poor.

@c    6:28. The childbearing and menstruous women touch their sacrifices:
@c    knowing, therefore, by these things that they are not gods, fear them
@c    not.

@c    6:29. For how can they be called gods?  because women set offerings
@c    before the gods of silver, and of gold, and of wood:

@c    6:30. And priests sit in their temples, having their garments rent, and
@c    their heads and beards shaven, and nothing upon their heads.

@c    6:31. And they roar and cry before their gods, as men do at the feast
@c    when one is dead.

@c    6:32. The priests take away their garments, and clothe their wives and
@c    their children.

@c    6:33. And whether it be evil that one doth unto them, or good, they are
@c    not able to recompense it:  neither can they set up a king, nor put him
@c    down:

@c    6:34. In like manner they can neither give riches, nor requite evil.  If
@c    a man make a vow to them, and perform it not:  they cannot require it.

@c    6:35. They cannot deliver a man from death, nor save the weak from the
@c    mighty.

@c    6:36. They cannot restore the blind man to his sight:  nor deliver a man
@c    from distress.

@c    36:7. They shall not pity the widow, nor do good to the fatherless.

@c    6:38. Their gods, of wood, and of stone, and of gold, and of silver,
@c    are like the stones that are hewn out of the mountains:  and they that
@c    worship them shall be confounded.

@c    6:39. How then is it to be supposed, or to be said, that they are gods?

@c    6:40. Even the Chaldeans themselves dishonor them:  who when they here
@c    of one dumb that cannot speak, they present him to Bel, entreating him,
@c    that he may speak.

@c    6:41. As though they could be sensible that have no motion themselves:
@c    and they, when they shall perceive this, will leave them:  for their
@c    gods themselves have no sense.

@c    6:42. The women also, with cords about them, sit in the ways, burning
@c    olive-stones.

@c    6:43. And when any one of them, drawn away by some passenger, lieth
@c    with him, she upbraideth her neighbor, that she was not thought as
@c    worthy as herself, nor her cord broken.

@c    6:44. But all things that are done about them, are false:  how is it
@c    then to be thought, or to be said, that they are gods?

@c    6:45. And they are made by workmen, and by goldsmiths.  They shall be
@c    nothing else but what the priests will have them to be.

@c    6:46. For the artificers themselves that make them, are of no long
@c    continuance.  Can those things then that are made by them, be gods?

@c    6:47. But they have left false things and reproach to them that come
@c    after.

@c    6:48. For when war cometh upon them , or evils:  the priests consult
@c    with themselves, where they may hide themselves with them.

@c    6:49. How then can they be thought to be gods, that can neither deliver
@c    themselves from war, nor save themselves from evils?

@c    6:50. For seeing they are but of wood, and laid over with gold, and
@c    with silver, it shall be known hereafter that they are false things, by
@c    all nations, and kings:  and it shall be manifest that they are no gods,
@c    but the work of men's hands, and that there is no work of God in them.

@c    6:51. Whence, therefore, is it known that they are not gods, but the
@c    work of men's hands, and no work of God is in them?

@c    6:52. They cannot set up a king over the land, nor give rain to men.

@c    6:53. They determine no causes, nor deliver countries from oppression:
@c    because they can do nothing, and are as daws between heaven and earth.

@c    6:54. For when fire shall fall upon the house of these gods of wood,
@c    and of silver, and of gold, their priests indeed will flee away, and be
@c    saved:  but they themselves shall be burnt in the midst like beams.

@c    6:55. And they cannot withstand a king and war.  How then can it be
@c    supposed, or admitted, that they are gods?

@c    6:56. Neither are these gods of wood, and of stone, and laid over with
@c    gold, and with silver, able to deliver themselves from thieves or
@c    robbers:  they that are stronger than them,

@c    They that are stronger than them. . .That is, robbers and thieves are
@c    stronger than these idols, being things without life or motion.

@c    6:57. Shall take from them the gold, and silver, and the raiment
@c    wherewith they are clothed, and shall go their way, neither shall they
@c    help themselves.

@c    6:58. Therefore it is better to be a king that sheweth his power:  or
@c    else a profitable vessel in the house, with which the owner thereof
@c    will be well satisfied:  or a door in the house, to keep things safe
@c    that are therein, than such false gods.

@c    6:59. The sun, and the moon, and the stars being bright, and sent forth
@c    for profitable uses, are obedient.

@c    6:60. In like manner the lightning, when it breaketh forth, is easy to
@c    be seen:  and after the same manner the wind bloweth in every country.

@c    6:61. And the clouds, when God commandeth them to go over the whole
@c    world, do that which is commanded them.

@c    6:62. The fire also being sent from above to consume mountains, and
@c    woods, doth as it is commanded.  But these neither in shew, nor in
@c    power, are alike to any one of them.

@c    6:63. Wherefore it is neither to be thought, nor to be said, that they
@c    are gods:  since they are neither able to judge causes, nor to do any
@c    good to men.

@c    6:64. Knowing, therefore, that they are not gods, fear them not.

@c    6:65. For neither can they curse kings, nor bless them.

@c    6:66. Neither do they shew signs in the heaven to the nations, nor
@c    shine as the sun, nor give light as the moon.

@c    6:67. Beasts are better than they, which can fly under a covert, and
@c    help themselves.

@c    6:68. Therefore there is no manner of appearance that they are gods:  so
@c    fear them not.

@c    6:69. For as a scarecrow in a garden of cucumbers keepeth nothing, so
@c    are their gods of wood, and of silver, and laid over with gold.

@c    6:70. They are no better than a white thorn in a garden, upon which
@c    every bird sitteth.  In like manner also their gods of wood, and laid
@c    over with gold, and with silver, are like to a dead body cast forth in
@c    the dark.

@c    6:71. By the purple also and the scarlet which are motheaten upon them,
@c    you shall know that they are not gods.  And they themselves at last are
@c    consumed, and shall be a reproach in the country.

@c    6:72. Better, therefore, is the just man that hath no idols:  for he
@c    shall be far from reproach.
