@node		papirevomoi pagbu, pamoi selsanga, pamoi pagbu, pamoi pagbu
@chapter	papirevomo'o la selsa'a pe la clomon.

@menu
* pamoi selsanga::	[Song of Solomon Chapter 1]
* remoi selsanga::	[Song of Solomon Chapter 2]
* cimoi selsanga::	[Song of Solomon Chapter 3]
* vomoi selsanga::	[Song of Solomon Chapter 4]
@end menu

@c    SOLOMON'S CANTICLE OF CANTICLES
la selsa'a pe la clomon.


@c    This Book is called the Canticle of Canticles, that is to say, the most
@c    excellent of all canticles:  because it is full of high mysteries,
@c    relating to the happy union of Christ and his spouse:  which is here
@c    begun by love; and is to be eternal in heaven.  The spouse of Christ is
@c    the church:  more especially as to the happiest part of it, viz.,
@c    perfect souls, every one of which is his beloved, but, above all
@c    others, the immaculate and ever blessed virgin mother.



@c    Canticle of Canticles Chapter 1
@node		pamoi selsanga, remoi selsanga, papirevomoi pagbu, papirevomoi pagbu
@section	papirevopipamo'o [Song of Solomon Chapter 1]

@c    The spouse aspires to an union with Christ, their mutual love for one
@c    another.

@c "This is this song of songs, which is solomon's".
@c numbers bumped to fit with the majority of bibles

@c traji: "X of Xs" is the Hebrew superlative. -phma
1:1. ni'oni'o di'e me la traji selsa'a fi'e la clomon.

@c    1:1. Let him kiss me with the kiss of his mouth:  for thy breasts are
@c    better than wine,

1:2. .e'a ko'a poi nakni ku'o cinba mi tai le cinba poi le ko'a
moklu .imu'ibo le do kamprami cu zmadu loi vanju

@c    Let him kiss me. . .The church, the spouse of Christ, prays that he may
@c    love and have peace with her, which the spouse prefers to every thing
@c    delicious:  and therefore expresses (ver. 2) that young maidens, that is
@c    the souls of the faithful, have loved thee.

@c    1:2. Smelling sweet of the best ointments.  Thy name is as oil poured
@c    out:  therefore young maidens have loved thee.

1:3. .i pluka fa le xagrai raspanci be do .i le cmene be do tai loi grasu cu
ze'o cavyfle .i .uenai lo nixli puco'i gletu do
@c help!  I don't have any idea how to get the ointment/perfume stuff in
@c there (same thing in 1:4) -jrd.
@c raspanci. lo ctile is a hydrocarbon; oils of biological origin grasu.
@c In en: the distinction is liquid vs. solid; not in jbo:. -phma

@c    1:3. Draw me:  we will run after thee to the odour of thy ointments.  The
@c    king hath brought me into his storerooms:  we will be glad and rejoice
@c    in thee, remembering thy breasts more than wine:  the rightous love
@c    thee.

1:4. .i ko lapcu mi .i mi'a ba jersi do fi'o selkla le panci be do
.i le nolraitru pu curmi lenu mi nenri le ri sipku'a .i mi'a do
gleki je salci do ca leza'i morji fi le do kamprami .enai lei vanju
.i da poi drani prenu cu prami do
@c .oi the last sentence is pretty bad... a lot of translations say more
@c along the lines of "right they are to love you", which I would imagine
@c is refering to the aformentioned virgins.  I'm not sure if it would be
@c correct to assume that meaning and go with something like "lo nixli cu
@c drani leka gletu do"... -jrd

@c    Draw me. . .That is, with thy grace:  otherwise I should not be able to
@c    come to thee.  This metaphor shews that we cannot of ourselves come to
@c    Christ our Lord, unless he draws us by his grace, which is laid up in
@c    his storerooms:  that is, in the mysteries of Faith, which God in his
@c    goodness and love for mankind hath revealed, first by his servant Moses
@c    in the Old Law in figure only, and afterwards in reality by his only
@c    begotten Son Jesus Christ.

@c jesus (no pun)!  these annotations are painful (and more likely than not
@c completely incorrect). -jrd

@c    1:4. I am black but beautiful, O ye daughters of Jerusalem, as the
@c    tents of Cedar, as the curtains of Solomon.

1:5. .i mi xekri gi'e ku'i melbi doi tixnu pe'a be la ierucalem. fi da
poi simsa le murzda pe la kedar. .e le murta pe la clomon.
@c the various translations i looked at are ambigious as to whether the
@c speaker is black in the qualities described, or beautiful in them; I went
@c with the latter because melbi has a place for it .u'i -jrd

@c    I am black but beautiful. . .That is, the church of Christ founded in
@c    humility appearing outwardly afflicted, and as it were black and
@c    contemptible; but inwardly, that is, in its doctrine and morality, fair
@c    and beautiful.

@c    1:5. Do not consider me that I am brown, because the sun hath altered
@c    my colour:  the sons of my mother have fought against me, they have made
@c    me the keeper in the vineyards:  my vineyard I have not kept.

1:6. .i ko toljundi leza'i mi xekri seja'e lenu lo solri cu skari'a mi .i le bersa
be le mi mamta cu damba mi .i gau ri mi kurji le vanfoi .iku'i le mi vanfoi na
se kurji mi

@c    1:6. Shew me, O thou whom my soul loveth, where thou feedest, where
@c    thou liest in the midday, lest I begin to wander after the flocks of
@c    thy companions.

1:7. .i ko tavba'u fi mi doi do noi le mi ruxse'i cu prami ke'a
ku'o ledu'u vi makau gau do le do terlanme cu citka loi srasu kei
.e ledu'u vi makau gau do le do terlanme cu sipna ca lo mijdo'i
.isemu'ibo paunai mu'i ma fe laza'i mi simsa lo ninmu poi dasni lo
firmu'a cu karbi le terlanme poi kansa do

@c    1:7. If thou know not thyself, O fairest among women, go forth, and
@c    follow after the steps of the flocks, and feed thy kids beside the
@c    tents of the shepherds.

1:8. .i ganai do na djuno doi do noi traji leka melbi gi ko klama
gi'e rixykansa le jamfu po'e le terlanme gi'e gasnu lenu le do kanba
re'o le murzda pe le lanli'e

@c    If thou know not thyself, etc. . .Christ encourages his spouse to follow
@c    and watch her flock:  and though she know not entirely the power at hand
@c    to assist her, he tells her, ver. 8, my company of horsemen, that is,
@c    his angels, are always watching and protecting her.  And in the
@c    following verses he reminds her of the virtues and gifts with which he
@c    has endowed her.

@c    1:8. To my company of horsemen, in Pharao's chariots, have I likened
@c    thee, O my love.

1:9. .i mi do karbi loi xirma pe le la faron xirxelkla doi do noi
mi prami ke'a

@c    1:9. Thy cheeks are beautiful as the turtledove's, thy neck as jewels.

1:10. .i le flira be do cu melbi ne'i le jmedjine .i le cnebo be do cu
go'i ne'i le bidjylinsi
@c Apparently the word תרים, which Douay translates as "turtledoves" (turturu), is
@c ambiguous and can also mean some kind of jewelry. -phma
@c Checked further. The turtledove is also called the ring-dove. The translation
@c "like turtledoves" is from כתרים; "in circlets" is בתרים, which is the MT
@c reading. -phma
@c Should the last word be {bidju}, {bidjylinsi}, or {boijmelinsi}? -phma

@c    1:10. We will make thee chains of gold, inlaid with silver.

1:11. .i mi'a ba zbasu le solji linsi poi ka rijno linji

@c    1:11. While the king was at his repose, my spikenard sent forth the
@c    odour thereof.

@c anyone know how to better fu'ivla-ify "Nardostachys jatamansi"?  Or perhaps
@c would be better to do as some translations and just say "my perfume"? -jrd
@c {nardostaxi} is enough. "stachys" is Greek, so "ch" is {x}. -phma
1:12. .i ca lenu le nolraitru pu vreta kei le mi nardostaxi cu benji
le panci be ri

@c    1:12. A bundle of myrrh is my beloved to me, he shall abide between my
@c    breasts.

1:13. .i pe'a me lo bakfu be lo molmolo fa le mi selprami .i ri ba
vreta le jbini be le'i mi tatru

@c    1:13. A cluster of cypress my love is to me, in the vineyards of
@c    Engaddi.

@c spatrsupresu is attempted fu'ivla of genus Cupressus. --jrd
@c It's not cypress, it's henna, which is כפר in Hebrew, and the LXX
@c translated it by sound as κυπρος.
1:14. .i pe'a me lo me'andi rulgri poi xabju le vanfoi be
vi la engydis fa le mi selprami

@c    1:14. Behold thou are fair, O my love, behold thou are fair, thy eyes
@c    are as those of doves.

1:15. .i ko viska leza'i do melbi doi do noi mi prami ke'a .i ko viska
leza'i do melbi .i le do klana cu simsa lo papcpi
@c papcpi? tcacpi? kolmba? -phma

@c    1:15. Behold thou art fair, my beloved, and comely.  Our bed is
@c    flourishing.

1:16. .i ko viska leza'i do melbi doi do noi mi prami ke'a ku'o gi'e cinse
trina .iji'a le mi'o ckana cu pezykai
@c other translations use "green" or "verdant".  I'm not sure if a pe'a
@c should be attached or not.. --jrd
@c Not {crino}, that would be ירק. According to CCJ, they're in a vineyard
@c with a henna hedge.
@c See http://www.hennapage.com/henna/encyclopedia/growing/songofsongs.html .

@c    1:16. The beams of our houses are of cedar, our rafters of cypress
@c    trees.

1:17. .i le mi'o zdani cu se greku lei mudri be lo ricrcedro
gi'e ve bitmu lo cidyku'u
@c Hebrew for cypress is ברותים. Greek is κυπαρισσοι. Compare henna above. -phma

@c    Canticle of Canticles Chapter 2
@node		remoi selsanga, cimoi selsanga, pamoi selsanga, papirevomoi pagbu
@section	papirevopiremo'o [Song of Solomon Chapter 2]

@c    Christ caresses his spouse:  he invites her to him.

@c    2:1. I am the flower of the field, and the lily of the valleys.

@c fu'ivla xrulrlili'u from genus Lilium.
@c The rose of Sharon is not a rose. fu'irvlagau fi le xebro.
@c {xrulrlili'u} sounds really awful. Inventing {kartujli}. -phma
2:1. ni'oni'o mi me pe'a lo xapsele pe la caron. gi'e me pe'a lo
kartujli pe lo ma'arbi'i

@c    I am the flower of the field. . .Christ professes himself the flower of
@c    mankind, yea, the Lord of all creatures:  and, ver. 2, declares the
@c    excellence of his spouse, the true church above all other societies,
@c    which are to be considered as thorns.

@c    2:2. As the lily among thorns, so is my love among the daughters.

2:2. .i tu'a lo kartujli be ne'i loi kiljimca cu simsa le se
prami be mi bei ne'i pe'a loi nixli

@c    2:3. As the apple tree among the trees of the woods, so is my beloved
@c    among the sons.  I sat down under his shadow, whom I desired:  and his
@c    fruit was sweet to my palate.

2:3. .i tu'a lo plisytricu be ne'i loi tricu pe lo ricfoi cu simsa
le se prami be mi bei ne'i pe'a loi nanla .i mi pu cfatse le ctino
be ko'a goi le se djica be mi .ijeza'a le ko'a grute pe'a cu se
vrusi leka titla

@c    2:4. He brought me into the cellar of wine, he set in order charity in
@c    me.

2:4. .i ko'a se rixykansa mi fi'o selkla le citka kumfa .ije le
ko'a lanci poi gapru mi ku'o kamprami

@c    2:5. Stay me up with flowers, compass me about with apples:  because I
@c    languish with love.

2:5. .i gau ko mi tsali sepi'o lo xrula .i gau ko mi kufra sepi'o
lo plise .imu'ibo mi bilma pe'a fi le kamprami

@c    2:6. His left hand is under my head, and his right hand shall embrace
@c    me.

2:6. .i le ko'a zunle xance cu cnita le mi stedu .ije le ko'a pritu
xance cu birjai mi

@c    2:7. I adjure you, O ye daughters of Jerusalem, by the roes, and the
@c    harts of the field, that you stir not up, nor make the beloved to
@c    awake, till she please.

2:7. .i mi minde do doi tixnu pe'a be la .ierucalem. ca'i le dorkada
ja mirli pe le foldi lenu do na gasnu lenu le kamprami cu
cikna kei pu leza'i ri djica

@c    2:8. The voice of my beloved, behold he cometh leaping upon the
@c    mountains, skipping over the hills.

2:8. .i voksa be ko'a .i ko zgana lenu ko'a klama ta'i lenu plipe
vi le barda cmama kei .e le kelpi'e fo le ga'u mo'ipa'o cmama'a

@c    The voice of my beloved:  that is, the preaching of the gospel
@c    surmounting difficulties figuratively here expressed by mountains and
@c    little hills.

@c    2:9. My beloved is like a roe, or a young hart.  Behold he standeth
@c    behind our wall, looking through the windows, looking through the
@c    lattices.

2:9. .i le mi selprami cu simsa lo dorkada .a lo citno je nakni
mirli .i za'a ko'a sanli ti'a le mi'a bitmu gi'e catlu pa'o le canko
gi'e viska pa'o le julne

@c    2:10. Behold my beloved speaketh to me:  Arise, make haste, my love, my
@c    dove, my beautiful one, and come.

2:10. .i ko zgana .i le mi selprami cu cusku fi mi fe lu ko ckali'a
.i ko sutra doi le mi selprami do'u doi melbi gi'e klama

@c    2:11. For winter is now past, the rain is over and gone.

2:11. .imu'ibo le dunra cu mulno .ijebo le carvi cu fanmo

@c    2:12. The flowers have appeared in our land, the time of pruning is
@c    come:  the voice of the turtle is heard in our land:

2:12. .i le xrula cu tolcanci le tumla .i le temci pe le puvysanga cu cabna
.i le voksa be lo turturu cu ka'e tirna ne'i le tumla

@c    2:13. The fig tree hath put forth her green figs:  the vines in flower
@c    yield their sweet smell.  Arise, my love, my beautiful one, and come:

2:13. .i lo figytricu cu sabji le ri lirfigre .i le parspa noi
ca se xrula cu se panci leka titla .i ko ckali'a doi le mi
selprami do'u doi melbi gi'e klama li'u
@c Should {parspa} be {vanspa}? It is a vineyard.

@c    2:14. My dove in the clefts of the rock, in the hollow places of the
@c    wall, shew me thy face, let thy voice sound in my ears:  for thy voice
@c    is sweet, and thy face comely.

2:14. .i doi papcpi noi jbini lei rokci vi le mipri pagbu be le cmana
ku'o ko jarco le flira be do mi .i mi tirna le voksa
be ko sepi'o le kerlo be mi .imu'ibo le voksa be do cu titla .ijebo
le flira be do cu melbi

@c    2:15. Catch us the little foxes that destroy the vines:  for our
@c    vineyard hath flourished.

2:15. .i ko kavbu le cmalu lorxu poi jai daspo le parspa .imu'ibo
le mi'o vanju foldi cu bevri le kukte vanjba

@c    Catch us the little foxes. . .Christ commands his pastors to catch false
@c    teachers, by holding forth their fallacy and erroneous doctrine, which
@c    like foxes would bite and destroy the vines.

@c    2:16. My beloved to me, and I to him who feedeth among the lilies,

2:16. .i mi prami ko'a .ije ko'a prami mi .i le ko'a terlanme cu citka
vi lo kartujli

@c    2:17. Till the day break, and the shadows retire.  Return:  be like, my
@c    beloved, to a roe, or to a young hart upon the mountains of Bether.

2:17. .i pu'o leza'i le djedi cu cfari gi'e lei ctino cu cliva .i
ko carna doi le mi selprami .i ko simsa lo dorkada ja citno
mirli be ga'u le cmana pe la beter.


@c    Canticle of Canticles Chapter 3
@node		cimoi selsanga, vomoi selsanga, remoi selsanga, papirevomoi pagbu
@section	papirevopiremo'o [Song of Solomon Chapter 3]

@c    The spouse seeks Christ.  The glory of his humanity.

@c    3:1. In my bed by night I sought him whom my soul loveth:  I sought him,
@c    and found him not.

3:1. ni'oni'o ca leza'i cpana le mi ckana kei mi sisku da poi le
mi pruxi cu prami ku'o gi'e na facki ri

@c    In my bed by night, etc. . .The Gentiles as in the dark, and seeking in
@c    heathen delusion what they could not find, the true God, until Christ
@c    revealed his doctrine to them by his watchmen, (ver. 3,) that is, by
@c    the apostles, and teachers by whom they were converted to the true
@c    faith; and holding that faith firmly, the spouse (the Catholic Church)
@c    declares, ver. 4, That she will not let him go, till she bring him into
@c    her mother's house, etc., that is, till at last, the Jews also shall
@c    find him.

@c    3:2. I will rise, and will go about the city:  in the streets and the
@c    broad ways I will seek him whom my soul loveth:  I sought him, and I
@c    found him not.

3:2. .i mi ba ckali'a gi'e litru le vi'a tcadu .i vi'a le klaji .e
le ganra dargu mi ba sisku da poi le mi pruxi cu prami .i mi pu
sisku gi'e na tolcri ri

@c    3:3. The watchmen who keep the city, found me:  Have you seen him, whom
@c    my soul loveth?

3:3. .i le pulji poi kurji le tcadu cu tolcri mi .i mi cusku fi ri
fe lu xu do viska da poi le mi pruxi cu prami li'u

@c    3:4. When I had a little passed by them, I found him whom my soul
@c    loveth:  I held him:  and I will not let him go, till I bring him into my
@c    mother's house, and into the chamber of her that bore me.

3:4. .i ba'o lenu mi pagre vi le pulji kei mi tolcri ko'a poi le mi
pruxi cu prami .i mi birjai ko'a gi'e na sisti pu'o lenu mi lidne
ko'a fi'o selkla le zdani pe le mi mamta ne'i le sipku'a pe da poi
mi jbena ke'a

@c    3:5. I adjure you, O daughters of Jerusalem, by the roes and the harts
@c    of the fields, that you stir not up, nor awake my beloved, till she
@c    please.

3:5. .i mi minde do doi tixnu pe'a be la .ierucalem. ca'i le dorkada
ja mirli pe le foldi lenu do na gasnu lenu le kamprami cu
cikna kei pu leza'i ri djica

@c    3:6. Who is she that goeth up by the desert, as a pillar of smoke of
@c    aromatical spices, of myrrh, and frankincense, and of all the powders
@c    of the perfumer?

3:6. .i ma klama fi le sudyfoi tai lo danmo kamju pe lo molmolo .e lo
.albona .e ro le purmo pe le vecnu

@c    3:7. Behold threescore valiant ones of the most valiant of Israel,
@c    surrounded the bed of Solomon?

3:7. .i za'a le beicka pe la clomon. .i cino le vrirai nanmu
pe la .israEL.

@c    3:8. All holding swords, and most expert in war:  every man's sword upon
@c    his thigh, because of fears in the night.

3:8. .i ro ri bevri le tordakyxa'i poi jorne le galtu'e ku'o gi'e
certu le nundamba .imu'ibo le se terpa cu nicte

@c    3:9. King Solomon hath made him a litter of the wood of Libanus:

3:9. .i la clomon. noi nolraitru cu zbasu le beicka le mudri
pe la lubnygug.

@c    3:10. The pillars thereof he made of silver, the seat of gold, the
@c    going up of purple:  the midst he covered with charity for the daughters
@c    of Jerusalem.

3:10. le kamju pe ri cu se zbasu fi le rijno .ije le loldi cu se
zbasu fi le solji .ije le stizu cu zirpu .i le midju cu selgai pe'a
le prami be le tixnu pe'a be la .ierucalem.

@c    3:11. Go forth, ye daughters of Sion, and see king Solomon in the
@c    diadem, wherewith his mother crowned him in the day of the joy of his
@c    heart.

3:11. .i ko klama doi tixnu pe'a be la tsion. gi'e viska ko'a goi
la clomon. noi nolraitru .e le slosedyta'u poi le ko'a mamta cu
dunda ko'a ca le djedi pe le specfari'i pe ko'a ca le djedi pe lenu
ko'a gleki


@c    Canticle of Canticles Chapter 4
@node		vomoi selsanga, , cimoi selsanga, papirevomoi pagbu
@section	papirevopiremo'o [Song of Solomon Chapter 4]

@c    Christ sets forth the graces of his spouse:  and declares his love for
@c    her.

@c    4:1. How beautiful art thou, my love, how beautiful art thou! thy eyes
@c    are doves' eyes, besides what is hid within.  Thy hair is as flocks of
@c    goats, which come up from mount Galaad.

@c    How beautiful art thou. . .Christ again praises the beauties of his
@c    church, which through the whole of this chapter are exemplified by a
@c    variety of metaphors, setting forth her purity, her simplicity, and her
@c    stability.

@c    4:2. Thy teeth as flocks of sheep, that are shorn, which come up from
@c    the washing, all with twins, and there is none barren among them.

@c    4:3. Thy lips are as a scarlet lace:  and thy speech sweet.  Thy cheeks
@c    are as a piece of a pomegranate, besides that which lieth hid within.

@c    4:4. Thy neck, is as the tower of David, which is built with bulwarks:
@c    a thousand bucklers hang upon it, all the armour of valiant men.

@c    4:5. Thy two breasts like two young roes that are twins, which feed
@c    among the lilies.

@c    Thy two breasts, etc. . .Mystically to be understood:  the love of God
@c    and the love of our neighbour, which are so united as twins which feed
@c    among the lilies:  that is, the love of God and our neighbour, feeds on
@c    the divine mysteries and the holy sacraments, left by Christ to his
@c    spouse to feed and nourish her children.

@c    4:6. Till the day break, and the shadows retire, I will go to the
@c    mountain of myrrh, and to the hill of frankincense.

@c    4:7. Thou art all fair, O my love, and there is not a spot in thee.

@c    4:8. Come from Libanus, my spouse, come from Libanus, come:  thou shalt
@c    be crowned from the top of Amana, from the top of Sanir and Hermon,
@c    from the dens of the lions, from the mountains of the leopards.

@c    4:9. Thou hast wounded my heart, my sister, my spouse, thou hast
@c    wounded my heart with one of thy eyes, and with one hair of thy neck.

@c    4:10. How beautiful are thy breasts, my sister, my spouse! thy breasts
@c    are more beautiful than wine, and the sweet smell of thy ointments
@c    above all aromatical spices.

@c    4:11. Thy lips, my spouse, are as a dropping honeycomb, honey and milk
@c    are under thy tongue; and the smell of thy garments, as the smell of
@c    frankincense.

@c    4:12. My sister, my spouse, is a garden enclosed, a garden enclosed, a
@c    fountain sealed up.

@c    My sister, etc., a garden enclosed. . .Figuratively the church is
@c    enclosed, containing only the faithful.  A fountain sealed up. . .That
@c    none can drink of its waters, that is, the graces and spiritual
@c    benefits of the holy sacraments, but those who are within its walls.

@c    4:13. Thy plants are a paradise of pomegranates with the fruits of the
@c    orchard.  Cypress with spikenard.

@c    4:14. Spikenard and saffron, sweet cane and cinnamon, with all the
@c    trees of Libanus, myrrh and aloes with all the chief perfumes.

@c    4:15. The fountain of gardens:  the well of living waters, which run
@c    with a strong stream from Libanus.

@c    4:16. Arise, O north wind, and come, O south wind, blow through my
@c    garden, and let the aromatical spices thereof flow.



@c    Canticle of Canticles Chapter 5


@c    Christ calls his spouse:  she languishes with love:  and describes him by
@c    his graces.

@c    5:1. Let my beloved come into his garden, and eat the fruit of his
@c    apple trees.  I am come into my garden, O my sister, my spouse, I have
@c    gathered my myrrh, with my aromatical spices:  I have eaten the
@c    honeycomb with my honey, I have drunk my wine with my milk:  eat, O
@c    friends, and drink, and be inebriated, my dearly beloved.

@c    Let my beloved come into his garden, etc. . .Garden, mystically the
@c    church of Christ, abounding with fruit, that is, the good works of the
@c    elect.

@c    5:2. I sleep, and my heart watcheth:  the voice of my beloved knocking:
@c    Open to me, my sister, my love, my dove, my undefiled:  for my head is
@c    full of dew, and my locks of the drops of the nights.

@c    5:3. I have put off my garment, how shall I put it on?  I have washed my
@c    feet, how shall I defile them?

@c    5:4. My beloved put his hand through the key hole, and my bowels were
@c    moved at his touch.

@c    My beloved put his hand through the key hole, etc. . .The spouse of
@c    Christ, his church, at times as it were penned up by its persecutors,
@c    and in fears, expecting the divine assistance, here signified by his
@c    hand:  and ver. 6, but he had turned aside and was gone, that is, Christ
@c    permitting a further trial of suffering:  and again, ver. 7, the
@c    keepers, etc., signifying the violent and cruel persecutors of the
@c    church taking her veil, despoiling the church of its places of worship
@c    and ornaments for the divine service.

@c    5:5. I arose up to open to my beloved:  my hands dropped with myrrh, and
@c    my fingers were full of the choicest myrrh.

@c    5:6. I opened the bolt of my door to my beloved:  but he had turned
@c    aside, and was gone.  My soul melted when he spoke:  I sought him, and
@c    found him not:  I called, and he did not answer me.

@c    5:7. The keepers that go about the city found me:  they struck me:  and
@c    wounded me:  the keepers of the walls took away my veil from me.

@c    5:8. I adjure you, O daughters of Jerusalem, if you find my beloved,
@c    that you tell him that I languish with love.

@c    5:9. What manner of one is thy beloved of the beloved, O thou most
@c    beautiful among women?  what manner of one is thy beloved of the
@c    beloved, that thou hast so adjured us?

@c    5:10. My beloved is white and ruddy, chosen out of thousands.

@c    My beloved, etc. . .In this and the following verses, the church
@c    mystically describes Christ to those who know him not, that is, to
@c    infidels in order to convert them to the true faith.

@c    5:11. His head is as the finest gold:  his locks as branches of palm
@c    trees, black as a raven.

@c    5:12. His eyes as doves upon brooks of waters, which are washed with
@c    milk, and sit beside the plentiful streams.

@c    5:13. His cheeks are as beds of aromatical spices set by the perfumers.
@c    His lips are as lilies dropping choice myrrh.

@c    5:14. His hands are turned and as of gold, full of hyacinths.  His belly
@c    as of ivory, set with sapphires.

@c    5:15. His legs as pillars of marble, that are set upon bases of gold.
@c    His form as of Libanus, excellent as the cedars.

@c    5:16. His throat most sweet, and he is all lovely:  such is my beloved,
@c    and he is my friend, O ye daughters of Jerusalem.

@c    5:17. Whither is thy beloved gone, O thou most beautiful among women?
@c    whither is thy beloved turned aside, and we will seek him with thee?



@c    Canticle of Canticles Chapter 6


@c    The spouse of Christ is but one:  she is fair and terrible.

@c    6:1. My beloved is gone down into his garden, to the bed of aromatical
@c    spices, to feed in the gardens, and to gather lilies.

@c    My beloved is gone down into his garden. . .Christ, pleased with the
@c    good works of his holy and devout servants labouring in his garden, is
@c    always present with them:  but the words is gone down, are to be
@c    understood, that after trying his Church by permitting persecution, he
@c    comes to her assistance and she rejoices at his coming.

@c    6:2. I to my beloved, and my beloved to me, who feedeth among the
@c    lilies.

@c    6:3. Thou art beautiful, O my love, sweet and comely as Jerusalem
@c    terrible as an army set in array.

@c    6:4. Turn away thy eyes from me, for they have made me flee away.  Thy
@c    hair is as a flock of goats, that appear from Galaad.

@c    6:5. Thy teeth as a flock of sheep, which come up from the washing, all
@c    with twins, and there is none barren among them.

@c    6:6. Thy cheeks are as the bark of a pomegranate, beside what is hidden
@c    within thee.

@c    6:7. There are threescore queens, and fourscore concubines, and young
@c    maidens without number.

@c    6:8. One is my dove, my perfect one is but one, she is the only one of
@c    her mother, the chosen of her that bore her.  The daughters saw her, and
@c    declared her most blessed:  the queens and concubines, and they praised
@c    her.

@c    One is my dove, etc. . .That is, my church is one, and she only is
@c    perfect and blessed.

@c    6:9. Who is she that cometh forth as the morning rising, fair as the
@c    moon, bright as the sun, terrible as an army set in array?

@c    Who is she, etc. . .Here is a beautiful metaphor describing the church
@c    from the beginning.  As, the morning rising, signifying the church
@c    before the written law; fair as the moon, shewing her under the light
@c    of the gospel:  and terrible as an army, the power of Christ's church
@c    against its enemies.

@c    6:10. I went down into the garden of nuts, to see the fruits of the
@c    valleys, and to look if the vineyard had flourished, and the
@c    pomegranates budded.

@c    6:11. I knew not:  my soul troubled me for the chariots of Aminadab.

@c    6:12. Return, return, O Sulamitess:  return, return that we may behold
@c    thee.



@c    Canticle of Canticles Chapter 7


@c    A further description of the graces of the church the spouse of Christ.

@c    7:1. What shalt thou see in the Sulamitess but the companies of camps?
@c    How beautiful are thy steps in shoes, O prince's daughter!  The joints
@c    of thy thighs are like jewels, that are made by the hand of a skilful
@c    workman.

@c    How beautiful are thy steps, etc. . .By these metaphors are signified
@c    the power and mission of the church in propagating the true faith.

@c    7:2. Thy navel is like a round bowl never wanting cups.  Thy belly is
@c    like a heap of wheat, set about with lilies.

@c    7:3. Thy two breasts are like two young roes that are twins.

@c    7:4. Thy neck as a tower of ivory.  Thy eyes like the fishpools in
@c    Hesebon, which are in the gate of the daughter of the multitude.  Thy
@c    nose is as the tower of Libanus, that looketh toward Damascus.

@c    7:5. Thy head is like Carmel:  and the hairs of thy head as the purple
@c    of the king bound in the channels.

@c    Thy head is like Carmel. . .Christ, the invisible head of his church, is
@c    here signified.

@c    7:6. How beautiful art thou, and how comely, my dearest, in delights!

@c    7:7. Thy stature is like to a palm tree, and thy breasts to clusters of
@c    grapes.

@c    7:8. I said:  I will go up into the palm tree, and will take hold of the
@c    fruit thereof:  and thy breasts shall be as the clusters of the vine:
@c    and the odour of thy mouth like apples.

@c    7:9. Thy throat like the best wine, worthy for my beloved to drink, and
@c    for his lips and his teeth to ruminate.

@c    7:10. I to my beloved, and his turning is towards me.

@c    7:11. Come, my beloved, let us go forth into the field, let us abide in
@c    the villages.

@c    7:12. Let us get up early to the vineyards, let us see if the vineyard
@c    flourish, if the flowers be ready to bring forth fruits, if the
@c    pomegranates flourish:  there will I give thee my breasts.

@c    7:13. The mandrakes give a smell.  In our gates are all fruits:  the new
@c    and the old, my beloved, I have kept for thee.



@c    Canticle of Canticles Chapter 8


@c    The love of the church to Christ:  his love to her.

@c    8:1. Who shall give thee to me for my brother, sucking the breasts of
@c    my mother, that I may find thee without, and kiss thee, and now no man
@c    may despise me?

@c    8:2. I will take hold of thee, and bring thee into my mother's house:
@c    there thou shalt teach me, and I will give thee a cup of spiced wine
@c    and new wine of my pomegranates.

@c    8:3. His left hand under my head, and his right hand shall embrace me.

@c    His left hand, etc. . .Words of the church to Christ.  His left hand,
@c    signifying the Old Testament, and his right hand, the New.

@c    8:4. I adjure you, O daughters of Jerusalem, that you stir not up, nor
@c    awake my love till she please.

@c    8:5. Who is this that cometh up from the desert, flowing with delights,
@c    leaning upon her beloved?  Under the apple tree I raised thee up:  there
@c    thy mother was corrupted, there she was defloured that bore thee.

@c    Who is this, etc. . .The angels with admiration behold the Gentiles
@c    converted to the faith:  coming up from the desert, that is, coming from
@c    heathenism and false worship:  flowing with delights, that is, abounding
@c    with good works which are pleasing to God:  leaning on her beloved, on
@c    the promise of Christ to his Church, that the gates of hell should not
@c    prevail against it; and supported by his grace conferred by the
@c    sacraments.  Under the apple tree I raised thee up; that is, that Christ
@c    redeemed the Gentiles at the foot of the cross, where the synagogue of
@c    the Jews (the mother church) was corrupted by their denying him, and
@c    crucifying him.

@c    8:6. Put me as a seal upon thy heart, as a seal upon thy arm, for love
@c    is strong as death, jealousy as hard as hell, the lamps thereof are
@c    fire and flames.

@c    8:7. Many waters cannot quench charity, neither can the floods drown
@c    it:  if a man should give all the substance of his house for love, he
@c    shall despise it as nothing.

@c    8:8. Our sister is little, and hath no breasts.  What shall we do to our
@c    sister in the day when she is to be spoken to?

@c    Our sister is little, etc. . .Mystically signifies the Jews, who are to
@c    be spoken to:  that is, converted towards the end of the world:  and then
@c    shall become a wall, that is, a part of the building, the church of
@c    Christ.

@c    8:9. If she be a wall:  let us build upon it bulwarks of silver:  if she
@c    be a door, let us join it together with boards of cedar.

@c    8:10. I am a wall:  and my breasts are as a tower since I am become in
@c    his presence as one finding peace.

@c    8:11. The peaceable had a vineyard, in that which hath people:  he let
@c    out the same to keepers, every man bringeth for the fruit thereof a
@c    thousand pieces of silver.

@c    8:12. My vineyard is before me.  A thousand are for thee, the peaceable,
@c    and two hundred for them that keep the fruit thereof.

@c    8:13. Thou that dwellest in the gardens, the friends hearken:  make me
@c    hear thy voice.

@c    8:14. Flee away, O my beloved, and be like to the roe, and to the young
@c    hart upon the mountains of aromatical spices.
