@c    THE PROPHECY OF DANIEL



@c    DANIEL, whose name signifies THE JUDGMENT OF GOD, was of the royal
@c    blood of the kings of Juda:  and one of those that were first of all
@c    carried away into captivity.  He was so renowned for wisdom and
@c    knowledge, that it became a proverb among the Babylonians, AS WISE AS
@c    DANIEL (Ezech. 28.3).  And his holiness was so great from his very
@c    childhood, that at the time when he was as yet but a young man, he is
@c    joined by the SPIRIT of GOD with NOE and JOB, as three persons most
@c    eminent for virtue and sanctity, Ezech. 14.  He is not commonly numbered
@c    by the Hebrews among THE PROPHETS:  because he lived at court, and in
@c    high station in the world:  but if we consider his many clear
@c    predictions of things to come, we shall find that no one better
@c    deserves the name and title of A PROPHET:  which also has been given him
@c    by the SON of GOD himself, Matt. 24, Mark 13., Luke 21.



@c    Daniel Chapter 1


@c    Daniel and his companions are taken into the palace of the king of
@c    Babylon:  they abstain from his meat and wine, and succeed better with
@c    pulse and water.  Their excellence and wisdom.

@c    1:1. In the third year of the reign of Joakim, king of Juda,
@c    Nabuchodonosor, king of Babylon, came to Jerusalem, and beseiged it.

@c    1:2. And the Lord delivered into his hands Joakim, the king of Juda,
@c    and part of the vessels of the house of God:  and he carried them away
@c    into the land of Sennaar, to the house of his god, and the vessels he
@c    brought into the treasure house of his god.

@c    His god. . .Bel or Belus, the principal idol of the Chaldeans.

@c    1:3. And the king spoke to Asphenez, the master of the eunuchs, that he
@c    should bring in some of the children of Israel, and of the king's seed,
@c    and of the princes,

@c    1:4. Children in whom there was no blemish, well favoured, and skilful
@c    in all wisdom, acute in knowledge, and instructed in science, and such
@c    as might stand in the king's palace, that he might teach them the
@c    learning, and tongue of the Chaldeans.

@c    1:5. And the king appointed them a daily provision, of his own meat,
@c    and of the wine of which he drank himself, that being nourished three
@c    years, afterwards they might stand before the king.

@c    1:6. Now there was among them of the children of Juda, Daniel, Ananias,
@c    Misael, and Azarias.

@c    1:7. And the master of the eunuchs gave them names:  to Daniel,
@c    Baltassar:  to Ananias, Sidrach:  to Misael, Misach:  and to Azarias,
@c    Abdenago.

@c    1:8. But Daniel purposed in his heart that he would not be defiled with
@c    the king's table, nor with the wine which he drank:  and he requested
@c    the master of the eunuchs that he might not be defiled.

@c    Be defiled, etc. . .Viz., either by eating meat forbidden by the law, or
@c    which had before been offered to idols.

@c    1:9. And God gave to Daniel grace and mercy in the sight of the prince
@c    of the eunuchs.

@c    1:10. And the prince of the eunuchs said to Daniel:  I fear my lord, the
@c    king, who hath appointed you meat and drink:  who if he should see your
@c    faces leaner than those of the other youths, your equals, you shall
@c    endanger my head to the king.

@c    1:11. And Daniel said to Malasar, whom the prince of the eunuchs had
@c    appointed over Daniel, Ananias, Misael, and Azarias:

@c    1:12. Try, I beseech thee, thy servants for ten days, and let pulse be
@c    given us to eat, and water to drink:

@c    Pulse. . .That is, pease, beans, and such like.

@c    1:13. And look upon our faces, and the faces of the children that eat
@c    of the king's meat:  and as thou shalt see, deal with thy servants.

@c    1:14. And when he had heard these words, he tried them for ten days.

@c    1:15. And after ten days, their faces appeared fairer and fatter than
@c    all the children that ate of the king's meat.

@c    1:16. So Malasar took their portions, and the wine that they should
@c    drink:  and he gave them pulse.

@c    1:17. And to these children God gave knowledge, and understanding in
@c    every book, and wisdom:  but to Daniel the understanding also of all
@c    visions and dreams.

@c    1:18. And when the days were ended, after which the king had ordered
@c    they should be brought in:  the prince of the eunuchs brought them in
@c    before Nabuchodonosor.

@c    1:19. And when the king had spoken to them, there were not found among
@c    them all such as Daniel, Ananias, Misael, and Azarias:  and they stood
@c    in the king's presence.

@c    1:20. And in all matters of wisdom and understanding, that the king
@c    enquired of them, he found them ten times better than all the diviners,
@c    and wise men, that were in all his kingdom.

@c    1:21. And Daniel continued even to the first year of king Cyrus.



@c    Daniel Chapter 2


@c    Daniel, by divine revelation, declares the dream of Nabuchodonosor, and
@c    the interpretation of it.  He is highly honoured by the king.

@c    2:1. In the second year of the reign of Nabuchodonosor, Nabuchodonosor
@c    had a dream, and his spirit was terrified, and his dream went out of
@c    his mind.

@c    The second year. . .Viz., from the death of his father Nabopolassar; for
@c    he had reigned before as partner with his father in the empire.

@c    2:2. Then the king commanded to call together the diviners and the wise
@c    men, and the magicians, and the Chaldeans:  to declare to the king his
@c    dreams:  so they came and stood before the king.

@c    The Chaldeeans. . .That is, the astrologers, that pretended to divine by
@c    stars.

@c    2:3. And the king said to them:  I saw a dream:  and being troubled in
@c    mind I know not what I saw.

@c    2:4. And the Chaldeans answered the king in Syriac:  O king, live for
@c    ever:  tell to thy servants thy dream, and we will declare the
@c    interpretation thereof.

@c    2:5. And the king, answering, said to the Chaldeans:  The thing is gone
@c    out of my mind:  unless you tell me the dream, and the meaning thereof,
@c    you shall be put to death, and your houses shall be confiscated.

@c    2:6. but if you tell the dream, and the meaning of it, you shall
@c    receive of me rewards, and gifts, and great honour:  therefore, tell me
@c    the dream, and the interpretation thereof.

@c    2:7. They answered again and said:  Let the king tell his servants the
@c    dream, and we will declare the interpretation of it.

@c    2:8. The king answered and said:  I know for certain, that you seek to
@c    gain time, since you know that the thing is gone from me.

@c    2:9. If, therefore, you tell me not the dream, there is one sentence
@c    concerning you, that you have also framed a lying interpretation, and
@c    full of deceit, to speak before me till the time pass away.  Tell me,
@c    therefore, the dream, that I may know that you also give a true
@c    interpretation thereof.

@c    2:10. Then the Chaldeans answered before the king, and said:  There is
@c    no man upon earth, that can accomplish thy word, O king; neither doth
@c    any king, though great and mighty, ask such a thing of any diviner, or
@c    wise man, or Chaldean.

@c    2:11. For the thing that thou asketh, O king, is difficult:  nor can any
@c    one be found that can shew it before the king, except the gods, whose
@c    conversation is not with men.

@c    2:12. Upon hearing this, the king in fury, and in great wrath,
@c    commanded that all the wise men of Babylon should be put to death.

@c    2:13. And the decree being gone forth, the wise men were slain:  and
@c    Daniel and his companions were sought for, to be put to death.

@c    2:14. Then Daniel inquired concerning the law and the sentence, of
@c    Arioch, the general of the king's army, who was gone forth to kill the
@c    wise men of Babylon.

@c    2:15. And he asked him that had received the orders of the king, why so
@c    cruel a sentence was gone forth from the face of the king.  And when
@c    Arioch had told the matter to Daniel,

@c    2:16. Daniel went in, and desired of the king, that he would give him
@c    time to resolve the question, and declare it to the king.

@c    2:17. And he went into his house, and told the matter to Ananias, and
@c    Misael, and Azarias, his companions:

@c    2:18. To the end that they should ask mercy at the face of the God of
@c    heaven, concerning this secret, and that Daniel and his companions
@c    might not perish with the rest of the wise men of Babylon.

@c    2:19. Then was the mystery revealed to Daniel by a vision in the night:
@c    and Daniel blessed the God of heaven,

@c    2:20. And speaking, he said:  Blessed be the name of the Lord from
@c    eternity and for evermore:  for wisdom and fortitude are his.

@c    2:21. And he changeth times and ages:  taketh away kingdoms, and
@c    establisheth them:  giveth wisdom to the wise, and knowledge to them
@c    that have understanding:

@c    2:22. He revealeth deep and hidden things, and knoweth what is in
@c    darkness:  and light is with him.

@c    2:23. To thee, O God of our fathers, I give thanks, and I praise thee:
@c    because thou hast given me wisdom and strength:  and now thou hast shewn
@c    me what we desired of thee, for thou hast made known to us the king's
@c    discourse.

@c    2:24. After this Daniel went in to Arioch, to whom the king had given
@c    orders to destroy the wise men of Babylon, and he spoke thus to him:
@c    Destroy not the wise men of Babylon:  bring me in before the king, and I
@c    will tell the solution to the king.

@c    2:25. Then Arioch in haste brought in Daniel to the king, and said to
@c    him:  I have found a man of the children of the captivity of Juda, that
@c    will resolve the question to the king.

@c    2:26. The king answered, and said to Daniel, whose name was Baltassar:
@c    Thinkest thou indeed that thou canst tell me the dream that I saw, and
@c    the interpretation thereof?

@c    2:27. And Daniel made answer before the king, and said:  The secret that
@c    the king desireth to know, none of the wise men, or the philosophers,
@c    or the diviners, or the soothsayers, can declare to the king.

@c    2:28. But there is a God in heaven that revealeth mysteries, who hath
@c    shewn to thee, O king Nabuchodonosor, what is to come to pass in the
@c    latter times.  Thy dream, and the visions of thy head upon thy bed, are
@c    these:

@c    2:29. Thou, O king, didst begin to think in thy bed, what should come
@c    to pass hereafter:  and he that revealeth mysteries shewed thee what
@c    shall come to pass.

@c    2:30. To me also this secret is revealed, not by any wisdom that I have
@c    more than all men alive:  but that the interpretation might be made
@c    manifest to the king, and thou mightest know the thought of thy mind.

@c    2:31. Thou, O king, sawest, and behold there was as it were a great
@c    statue:  this statue, which was great and high, tall of stature, stood
@c    before thee, and the look thereof was terrible.

@c    2:32. The head of this statue was of fine gold, but the breast and the
@c    arms of silver, and the belly and the thighs of brass.

@c    2:33. And the legs of iron, the feet part of iron and part of clay.

@c    2:34. Thus thou sawest, till a stone was cut out of a mountain without
@c    hands:  and it struck the statue upon the feet thereof that were of iron
@c    and clay, and broke them in pieces.

@c    2:35. Then was the iron, the clay, the brass, the silver, and the gold
@c    broken to pieces together, and became like the chaff of a summer's
@c    threshing floor, and they were carried away by the wind:  and there was
@c    no place found for them:  but the stone that struck the statue became a
@c    great mountain, and filled the whole earth.

@c    2:36. This is the dream:  we will also tell the interpretation thereof
@c    before thee, O king.

@c    2:37. Thou art a king of kings:  and the God of heaven hath given thee a
@c    kingdom, and strength, and power, and glory:

@c    2:38. And all places wherein the children of men, and the beasts of the
@c    field do dwell:  he hath also given the birds of the air into thy hand,
@c    and hath put all things under thy power:  thou, therefore, art the head
@c    of gold.

@c    2:39. And after thee shall rise up another kingdom, inferior to thee,
@c    of silver:  and another third kingdom of brass, which shall rule over
@c    all the world.

@c    Another kingdom. . .Viz., that of the Medes and Persians.  Ibid.  Third
@c    kingdom. . .Viz., that of Alexander the Great.

@c    2:40. And the fourth kingdom shall be as iron.  As iron breaketh into
@c    pieces, and subdueth all things, so shall that break, and destroy all
@c    these.

@c    The fourth kingdom, etc. . .Some understand this of the successors of
@c    Alexander, the kings of Syria and Egypt, others of the Roman empire,
@c    and its civil wars.

@c    2:41. And whereas thou sawest the feet, and the toes, part of potter's
@c    clay, and part of iron:  the kingdom shall be divided, but yet it shall
@c    take its origin from the iron, according as thou sawest the iron mixed
@c    with the miry clay.

@c    2:42. And as the toes of the feet were part of iron, and part of clay:
@c    the kingdom shall be partly strong, and partly broken.

@c    2:43. And whereas thou sawest the iron mixed with miry clay, they shall
@c    be mingled indeed together with the seed of man, but they shall not
@c    stick fast one to another, as iron cannot be mixed with clay.

@c    2:44. But in the days of those kingdoms, the God of heaven will set up
@c    a kingdom that shall never by destroyed, and his kingdom shall not be
@c    delivered up to another people:  and it shall break in pieces, and shall
@c    consume all these kingdoms:  and itself shall stand for ever.

@c    A kingdom. . .Viz., the kingdom of Christ in the Catholic Church which
@c    cannot be destroyed.

@c    2:45. According as thou sawest, that the stone was cut out of the
@c    mountain without hands, and broke in pieces the clay and the iron, and
@c    the brass, and the silver, and the gold, the great God hath shewn the
@c    king what shall come to pass hereafter, and the dream is true, and the
@c    interpretation thereof is faithful.

@c    2:46. Then king Nabuchodonosor fell on his face, and worshipped Daniel,
@c    and commanded that they should offer in sacrifice to him victims and
@c    incense.

@c    2:47. And the king spoke to Daniel, and said:  Verily, your God is the
@c    God of gods, and Lord of kings, and a revealer of hidden things:  seeing
@c    thou couldst discover this secret.

@c    2:48. Then the king advanced Daniel to a high station, and gave him
@c    many and great gifts:  and he made him governor over all the provinces
@c    of Babylon:  and chief of the magistrates over all the wise men of
@c    Babylon.

@c    2:49. And Daniel requested of the king, and he appointed Sidrach,
@c    Misach, and Abdenago, over the works of the province of Babylon:  but
@c    Daniel himself was in the king's palace.



@c    Daniel Chapter 3


@c    Nabuchodonosor set up a golden statue; which he commands all to adore:
@c    the three children for refusing to do it are cast into the fiery
@c    furnace; but are not hurt by the flames.  Their prayer and canticle of
@c    praise.

@c    3:1. King Nabuchodonosor made a statue of gold, of sixty cubits high,
@c    and six cubits broad, and he set it up in the plain of Dura, of the
@c    province of Babylon.

@c    3:2. Then Nabuchodonosor, the king, sent to call together the nobles,
@c    the magistrates, and the judges, the captains, the rulers, and
@c    governors, and all the chief men of the provinces, to come to the
@c    dedication of the statue which king Nabuchodonosor had set up.

@c    3:3. Then the nobles, the magistrates, and the judges, the captains,
@c    and rulers, and the great men that were placed in authority, and all
@c    the princes of the provinces, were gathered together to come to the
@c    dedication of the statue, which king Nabuchodonosor had set up.  And
@c    they stood before the statue which king Nabuchodonosor had set up.

@c    3:4. Then a herald cried with a strong voice:  To you it is commanded, O
@c    nations, tribes and languages:

@c    3:5. That in the hour that you shall hear the sound of the trumpet, and
@c    of the flute, and of the harp, of the sackbut, and of the psaltery, and
@c    of the symphony, and of all kind of music, ye fall down and adore the
@c    golden statue which king Nabuchodonosor hath set up.

@c    3:6. But if any man shall not fall down and adore, he shall the same
@c    hour be cast into a furnace of burning fire.

@c    3:7. Upon this, therefore, at the time when all the people heard the
@c    sound of the trumpet, the flute, and the harp, of the sackbut, and the
@c    psaltery, of the symphony, and of all kind of music, all the nations,
@c    tribes, and languages fell down and adored the golden statue which king
@c    Nabuchodonosor had set up.

@c    3:8. And presently at that very time some Chaldeans came and accused
@c    the Jews,

@c    3:9. And said to king Nabuchodonosor:  O king, live for ever:

@c    3:10. Thou, O king, hast made a decree, that every man that shall hear
@c    the sound of the trumpet, the flute, and the harp, of the sackbut, and
@c    the psaltery, of the symphony, and of all kind of music, shall
@c    prostrate himself, and adore the golden statue:

@c    3:11. And that if any man shall not fall down and adore, he should be
@c    cast into a furnace of burning fire.

@c    3:12. Now there are certain Jews, whom thou hast set over the works of
@c    the province of Babylon, Sidrach, Misach, and Abdenago:  these men, O
@c    king, have slighted thy decree:  they worship not thy gods, nor do they
@c    adore the golden statue which thou hast set up.

@c    3:13. Then Nabuchodonosor in fury, and in wrath, commanded that
@c    Sidrach, Misach, ad Abdenago should be brought:  who immediately were
@c    brought before the king.

@c    3:14. And Nabuchodonosor, the king, spoke to them, and said:  Is it
@c    true, O Sidrach, Misach, and Abdenago, that you do not worship my gods,
@c    nor adore the golden statue that I have set up?

@c    3:15. Now, therefore, if you be ready, at what hour soever, you shall
@c    hear the sound of the trumpet, flute, harp, sackbut, and psaltery, and
@c    symphony, and of all kind of music, prostrate yourselves, and adore the
@c    statue which I have made:  but if you do not adore, you shall be cast
@c    the same hour into the furnace of burning fire:  and who is the God that
@c    shall deliver you out of my hand?

@c    3:16. Sidrach, Misach, and Abdenago, answered, and said to king
@c    Nabuchodonosor:  We have no occasion to answer thee concerning this
@c    matter.

@c    3:17. For behold our God, whom we worship, is able to save us from the
@c    furnace of burning fire, and to deliver us out of thy hands, O king.

@c    3:18. But if he will not, be it known to thee, O king, that we will not
@c    worship thy gods, nor adore the golden statue which thou hast set up.

@c    3:19. Then was Nabuchodonosor filled with fury:  and the countenance of
@c    his face was changed against Sidrach, Misach, and Abdenago, and he
@c    commanded that the furnace should be heated seven times more than it
@c    had been accustomed to be heated.

@c    3:20. And he commanded the strongest men that were in his army, to bind
@c    the feet of Sidrach, Misach, and Abdenago, and to cast them into the
@c    furnace of burning fire.

@c    3:21. And immediately these men were bound, and were cast into the
@c    furnace of burning fire, with their coats, and their caps, and their
@c    shoes, and their garments.

@c    3:22. For the king's commandment was urgent, and the furnace was heated
@c    exceedingly.  And the flame of the fire slew those men that had cast in
@c    Sidrach, Misach, and Abdenago.

@c    3:23. But these three men, that is, Sidrach, Misach, and Abdenago, fell
@c    down bound in the midst of the furnace of burning fire.

@c    3:24. And they walked in the midst of the flame, praising God, and
@c    blessing the Lord.

@c    And they walked, etc. . .Here St. Jerome takes notice, that from this
@c    verse, to ver. 91, was not in the Hebrew in his time.  But as it was in
@c    all the Greek Bibles, (which were originally translated from the
@c    Hebrew,) it is more than probable that it had been formerly in the
@c    Hebrew or rather in the Chaldaic, in which the book of Daniel was
@c    written.  But this is certain:  that it is, and has been of old, received
@c    by the church, and read as canonical scripture in her liturgy, and
@c    divine offices.

@c    3:25. Then Azarias standing up, prayed in this manner, and opening his
@c    mouth in the midst of the fire, he said:

@c    3:26. Blessed art thou, O Lord, the God of our fathers, and thy name is
@c    worthy of praise, and glorious for ever:

@c    3:27. For thou art just in all that thou hast done to us, and all thy
@c    works are true, and thy ways right, and all thy judgments true.

@c    3:28. For thou hast executed true judgments in all the things that thou
@c    hast brought upon us, and upon Jerusalem, the holy city of our fathers:
@c    for according to truth and judgment, thou hast brought all these things
@c    upon us for our sins.

@c    3:29. For we have sinned, and committed iniquity, departing from thee:
@c    and we have trespassed in all things:

@c    3:30. And we have not hearkened to thy commandments, nor have we
@c    observed nor done as thou hadst commanded us, that it might go well
@c    with us.

@c    3:31. Wherefore, all that thou hast brought upon us, and every thing
@c    that thou hast done to us, thou hast done in true judgment:

@c    3:32. And thou hast delivered us into the hands of our enemies that are
@c    unjust, and most wicked, and prevaricators, and to a king unjust, and
@c    most wicked beyond all that are upon the earth.

@c    3:33. And now we cannot open our mouths:  we are become a shame, and a
@c    reproach to thy servants, and to them that worship thee.

@c    3:34. Deliver us not up for ever, we beseech thee, for thy name's sake,
@c    and abolish not thy covenant.

@c    3:35. And take not away thy mercy from us, for the sake of Abraham, thy
@c    beloved, and Isaac, thy servant, and Israel, thy holy one:

@c    3:36. To whom thou hast spoken, promising that thou wouldst multiply
@c    their seed as the stars of heaven, and as the sand that is on the sea
@c    shore.

@c    3:37. For we, O Lord, are diminished more than any nation, and are
@c    brought low in all the earth this day for our sins.

@c    3:38. Neither is there at this time prince, or leader, or prophet, or
@c    holocaust, or sacrifice, or oblation, or incense, or place of first
@c    fruits before thee,

@c    3:39. That we may find thy mercy:  nevertheless, in a contrite heart and
@c    humble spirit let us be accepted.

@c    3:40. As in holocausts of rams, and bullocks, and as in thousands of
@c    fat lambs:  so let our sacrifice be made in thy sight this day, that it
@c    may please thee:  for there is no confusion to them that trust in thee.

@c    3:41. And now we follow thee with all our heart, and we fear thee, and
@c    seek thy face.

@c    3:42. Put us not to confusion, but deal with us according to thy
@c    meekness, and according to the multitude of thy mercies.

@c    3:43. And deliver us, according to thy wonderful works, and give glory
@c    to thy name, O Lord:

@c    3:44. And let all them be confounded that shew evils to thy servants,
@c    let them be confounded in all thy might, and let their strength be
@c    broken:

@c    3:45. And let them know that thou art the Lord, the only God, and
@c    glorious over all the world.

@c    3:46. Now the king's servants that had cast them in, ceased not to heat
@c    the furnace with brimstone and tow, and pitch, and dry sticks,

@c    3:47. And the flame mounted up above the furnace nine and forth cubits:

@c    3:48. And it broke forth, and burnt such of the Chaldeans as it found
@c    near the furnace.

@c    3:49. But the angel of the Lord went down with Azarias and his
@c    companions into the furnace:  and he drove the flame of the fire out of
@c    the furnace,

@c    3:50. And made the midst of the furnace like the blowing of a wind
@c    bringing dew, and the fire touched them not at all, nor troubled them,
@c    nor did them any harm.

@c    3:51. Then these three, as with one mouth, praised and glorified and
@c    blessed God, in the furnace, saying:

@c    3:52. Blessed art thou, O Lord, the God of our fathers; and worthy to
@c    be praised, and glorified, and exalted above all for ever:  and blessed
@c    is the holy name of thy glory:  and worthy to be praised and exalted
@c    above all, in all ages.

@c    3:53. Blessed art thou in the holy temple of thy glory:  and exceedingly
@c    to be praised and exalted above all for ever.

@c    3:55. Blessed art thou that beholdest the depths, and sittest upon the
@c    cherubims:  and worthy to be praised and exalted above all for ever.

@c    3:56. Blessed art thou in the firmament of heaven:  and worthy of
@c    praise, and glorious for ever.

@c    3:57. All ye works of the Lord, bless the Lord:  praise and exalt him
@c    above all for ever.

@c    3:58. O ye angels of the Lord, bless the Lord:  praise and exalt him
@c    above all for ever.

@c    3:59. O ye heavens, bless the Lord:  praise and exalt him above all for
@c    ever.

@c    3:60. O all ye waters that are above the heavens, bless the Lord:
@c    praise and exalt him above all for ever.

@c    3:61. O all ye powers of the Lord, bless the Lord:  praise and exalt him
@c    above all for ever.

@c    3:62. O ye sun and moon, bless the Lord:  praise and exalt him above all
@c    for ever.

@c    3:63. O ye stars of heaven, bless the Lord:  praise and exalt him above
@c    all for ever.

@c    3:64. O every shower and dew, bless ye the Lord:  praise and exalt him
@c    above all for ever.

@c    3:65. O all ye spirits of God, bless the Lord:  praise and exalt him
@c    above all for ever.

@c    3:66. O ye fire and heat, bless the Lord:  praise and exalt him above
@c    all for ever.

@c    3:67. O ye cold and heat, bless the Lord, praise and exalt him above
@c    all for ever.

@c    3:68. O ye dews and hoar frost, bless the Lord:  praise and exalt him
@c    above all for ever.

@c    3:69. O ye frost and cold, bless the Lord:  praise and exalt him above
@c    all for ever.

@c    3:70. O ye ice and snow, bless the Lord:  praise and exalt him above all
@c    for ever.

@c    3:71. O ye nights and days, bless the Lord:  praise and exalt him above
@c    all for ever.

@c    3:72. O ye light and darkness, bless the Lord:  praise and exalt him
@c    above all for ever.

@c    3:73. O ye lightnings and clouds, bless the Lord:  praise and exalt him
@c    above all for ever.

@c    3:74. O let the earth bless the Lord:  let it praise and exalt him above
@c    all for ever.

@c    3:76. O all ye things that spring up in the earth, bless the Lord:
@c    praise and exalt him above all for ever.

@c    3:77. O ye fountains, bless the Lord:  praise and exalt him above all
@c    for ever.

@c    3:78. O ye seas and rivers, bless the Lord:  praise and exalt him above
@c    all for ever.

@c    3:79. O ye whales, and all that move in the waters, bless the Lord:
@c    praise and exalt him above all for ever.

@c    3:80. O all ye fowls of the air, bless the Lord:  praise and exalt him
@c    above all for ever.

@c    3:81. O all ye beasts and cattle, bless the Lord:  praise and exalt him
@c    above all for ever.

@c    3:82. O ye sons of men, bless the Lord:  praise and exalt him above all
@c    for ever.

@c    3:83. O let Israel bless the Lord:  let them praise and exalt him above
@c    all for ever.

@c    3:84. O ye priests of the Lord, bless the Lord:  praise and exalt him
@c    above all for ever.

@c    3:85. O ye servants of the Lord, bless the Lord:  praise and exalt him
@c    above all for ever.

@c    3:86. O ye spirits and souls of the just, bless the Lord:  praise and
@c    exalt him above all for ever.

@c    3:87. O ye holy and humble of heart, bless the Lord:  praise and exalt
@c    him above all for ever.

@c    3:88. O Ananias, Azarias, Misael, bless ye the Lord:  praise and exalt
@c    him above all for ever.  For he hath delivered us from hell, ad saved us
@c    out of the hand of death, and delivered us out of the midst of the
@c    burning flame, and saved us out of the midst of the fire.

@c    3:89. O give thanks to the Lord, because he is good:  because his mercy
@c    endureth for ever and ever.

@c    3:90. O all ye religious, bless the Lord, the God of gods:  praise him,
@c    and give him thanks, because his mercy endureth for ever and ever.

@c    3:91. Then Nabuchodonosor, the king, was astonished, and rose up in
@c    haste, and said to his nobles:  Did we not cast three men bound into the
@c    midst of the fire?  They answered the king, and said:  True, O king.

@c    3:92. He answered, and said:  Behold, I see four men loose, and walking
@c    in the midst of the fire, and there is no hurt in them, and the form of
@c    the fourth is like the son of God.

@c    3:93. Then Nabuchodonosor came to the door of the burning fiery
@c    furnace, and said:  Sidrach, Misach, and Abdenago, ye servants of the
@c    most high God, go ye forth, and come.  And immediately Sidrach, Misach,
@c    and Abdenago, went out from the midst of the fire.

@c    3:94. And the nobles, and the magistrates, and the judges, and the
@c    great men of the king, being gathered together, considered these men,
@c    that the fire had no power on their bodies, and that not a hair of
@c    their head had been singed, nor their garments altered, nor the smell
@c    of the fire had passed on them.

@c    3:95. Then Nabuchodonosor breaking forth, said:  Blessed be the God of
@c    them, to wit, of Sidrach, Misach, and Abdenago, who hath sent his
@c    angel, and delivered his servants that believed in him:  and they
@c    changed the king's word, and delivered up their bodies, that they might
@c    not serve nor adore any god except their own God.

@c    3:96. By me, therefore, this decree is made:  That every people, tribe,
@c    and tongue, which shall speak blasphemy against the God of Sidrach,
@c    Misach, and Abdenago, shall be destroyed, and their houses laid waste:
@c    for there is no other God that can save in this manner.

@c    3:97. Then the king promoted Sidrach, Misach, and Abdenago, in the
@c    province of Babylon.

@c    3:98. Nabuchodonosor, the king, to all peoples, nations, and tongues,
@c    that dwell in all the earth, peace be multiplied unto you.

@c    Nabuchodonosor, etc. . .These last three verses are a kind of preface to
@c    the following chapter, which is written in the style of an epistle from
@c    the king.

@c    3:99. The most high God hath wrought signs and wonders towards me.  It
@c    hath seemed good to me, therefore, to publish

@c    3:100. His signs, because they are great:  and his wonders, because they
@c    are mighty:  and his kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, and his power to
@c    all generations.



@c    Daniel Chapter 4


@c    Nabuchodonosor's dream, by which the judgments of God are denounced
@c    against him for his pride, is interpreted by Daniel, and verified by
@c    the event.

@c    4:1. I, Nabuchodonosor, was at rest in my house, and flourishing in my
@c    palace:

@c    4:2. I saw a dream that affrighted me:  and my thoughts in my bed, and
@c    the visions of my head, troubled me.

@c    4:3. Then I set forth a decree, that all the wise men of Babylon should
@c    be brought in before me, and that they should shew me the
@c    interpretation of the dream.

@c    4:4. Then came in the diviners, the wise men, the Chaldeans, and the
@c    soothsayers, and I told the dream before them:  but they did not shew me
@c    the interpretation thereof.

@c    4:5. Till their colleague, Daniel, came in before me, whose name is
@c    Baltassar, according to the name of my god, who hath in him the spirit
@c    of the holy gods:  and I told the dream before him.

@c    Baltassar, according to the name of my god. . .He says this, because the
@c    name of Baltassar, or Belteshazzar, is derived from the name of Bel,
@c    the chief god of the Babylonians.

@c    4:6. Baltassar, prince of the diviners, because I know that thou hast
@c    in thee the spirit of the holy gods, and that no secret is impossible
@c    to thee, tell me the visions of my dreams that I have seen, and the
@c    interpretation of them?

@c    4:7. This was the vision of my head in my bed:  I saw, and behold a tree
@c    in the midst of the earth, and the height thereof was exceeding great.

@c    4:8. The tree was great and strong, and the height thereof reached unto
@c    heaven:  the sight thereof was even to the ends of all the earth.

@c    4:9. Its leaves were most beautiful, and its fruit exceeding much:  and
@c    in it was food for all:  under it dwelt cattle and beasts, and in the
@c    branches thereof the fowls of the air had their abode:  and all flesh
@c    did eat of it.

@c    4:10. I saw in the vision of my head upon my bed, and behold a watcher,
@c    and a holy one came down from heaven.

@c    A watcher. . .A vigilant angel, perhaps the guardian of Israel.

@c    4:11. He cried aloud, and said thus:  Cut down the tree, and chop off
@c    the branches thereof:  shake off its leaves, and scatter its fruits:  let
@c    the beasts fly away that are under it, and the birds from its branches.

@c    4:12. Nevertheless, leave the stump of its roots in the earth, and let
@c    it be tied with a band of iron and of brass, among the grass, that is
@c    without, and let it be wet with the dew of heaven, and let its portion
@c    be with the wild beasts in the grass of the earth.

@c    4:13. Let his heart be changed from man's, and let a beast's heart be
@c    given him:  and let seven times pass over him.

@c    Let his heart be changed, etc. . .It does not appear by scripture that
@c    Nabuchodonosor was changed from human shape; much less that he was
@c    changed into an ox; but only that he lost his reason, and became mad;
@c    and in this condition remained abroad in the company of beasts, eating
@c    grass like an ox, till his hair grew in such manner as to resemble the
@c    feathers of eagles, and his nails to be like birds' claws.

@c    4:14. This is the decree by the sentence of the watchers, and the word
@c    and demand of the holy ones:  till the living know, that the most High
@c    ruleth in the kingdom of men:  and he will give it to whomsoever it
@c    shall please him, and he will appoint the basest man over it.

@c    4:15. I, king Nabuchodonosor, saw this dream:  thou, therefore, O
@c    Baltassar, tell me quickly the interpretation:  for all the wise men of
@c    my kingdom are not able to declare the meaning of it to me:  but thou
@c    art able, because the spirit of the holy gods is in thee.

@c    4:16. Then Daniel, whose name was Baltassar, began silently to think
@c    within himself for about one hour:  and his thought troubled him.  But
@c    the king answering, said:  Baltassar, let not the dream and the
@c    interpretation thereof trouble thee.  Baltassar answered, and said:  My
@c    lord, the dream be to them that hate thee, and the interpretation
@c    thereof to thy enemies.

@c    4:17. The tree which thou sawest, which was high and strong, whose
@c    height reached to the skies, and the sight thereof into all the earth:

@c    4:18. And the branches thereof were most beautiful, and its fruit
@c    exceeding much, and in it was food for all, under which the beasts of
@c    the field dwelt, and the birds of the air had their abode in its
@c    branches.

@c    4:19. It is thou, O king, who art grown great, and become mighty:  for
@c    thy greatness hath grown, and hath reached to heaven, and thy power
@c    unto the ends of the earth.

@c    4:20. And whereas the king saw a watcher, and a holy one come down from
@c    heaven, and say:  Cut down the tree, and destroy it, but leave the stump
@c    of the roots thereof in the earth, and let it be bound with iron and
@c    brass, among the grass without, and let it be sprinkled with the dew of
@c    heaven, and let his feeding be with the wild beasts, till seven times
@c    pass over him.

@c    4:21. This is the interpretation of the sentence of the most High,
@c    which is come upon my lord, the king.

@c    4:22. They shall cast thee out from among men, and thy dwelling shall
@c    be with cattle, and with wild beasts, and thou shalt eat grass, as an
@c    ox, and shalt be wet with the dew of heaven:  and seven times shall pass
@c    over thee, till thou know that the most High ruleth over the kingdom of
@c    men, and giveth it to whomsoever he will.

@c    4:23. But whereas he commanded, that the stump of the roots thereof,
@c    that is, of the tree, should be left:  thy kingdom shall remain to thee,
@c    after thou shalt have known that power is from heaven.

@c    4:24. Wherefore, O king, let my counsel be acceptable to thee, and
@c    redeem thou thy sins with alms, and thy iniquities with works of mercy
@c    to the poor:  perhaps he will forgive thy offences.

@c    4:25. All these things came upon king Nabuchodonosor.

@c    4:26. At the end of twelve months he was walking in the palace of
@c    Babylon.

@c    4:27. And the king answered, and said:  Is not this the great Babylon,
@c    which I have built, to be the seat of the kingdom, by the strength of
@c    my power, and in the glory of my excellence?

@c    4:28. And while the word was yet in the king's mouth, a voice came down
@c    from heaven:  To thee, O king Nabuchodonosor, it is said:  Thy kingdom
@c    shall pass from thee.

@c    4:29. And they shall cast thee out from among men, and thy dwelling
@c    shall be with cattle and wild beasts:  thou shalt eat grass like an ox,
@c    and seven times shall pass over thee, till thou know that the most High
@c    ruleth in the kingdom of men, and giveth it to whomsoever he will.

@c    4:30. The same hour the word was fulfilled upon Nabuchodonosor, and he
@c    was driven away from among men, and did eat grass, like an ox, and his
@c    body was wet with the dew of heaven:  till his hairs grew like the
@c    feathers of eagles, and his nails like birds' claws.

@c    4:31. Now at the end of the days, I, Nabuchodonosor, lifted up my eyes
@c    to heaven, and my sense was restored to me:  and I blessed the most
@c    High, and I praised and glorified him that liveth for ever:  for his
@c    power is an everlasting power, and his kingdom is to all generations.

@c    4:32. And all the inhabitants of the earth are reputed as nothing
@c    before him:  for he doth according to his will, as well with the powers
@c    of heaven, as among the inhabitants of the earth:  and there is none
@c    that can resist his hand, and say to him:  Why hast thou done it?

@c    4:33. At the same time my sense returned to me, and I came to the
@c    honour and glory of my kingdom:  and my shape returned to me:  and my
@c    nobles, and my magistrates, sought for me, and I was restored to my
@c    kingdom:  and greater majesty was added to me.

@c    4:34. Therefore I, Nabuchodonosor, do now praise, and magnify, and
@c    glorify the King of heaven:  because all his works are true, and his
@c    ways judgments, and them that walk in pride he is able to abase.

@c    I, Nabuchodonosor, do now, etc. . .From this place some commentators
@c    infer that this king became a true convert, and dying not long after,
@c    was probably saved.



@c    Daniel Chapter 5


@c    Baltasar's profane banquet:  his sentence is denounced by a handwriting
@c    on the wall, which Daniel reads and interprets.

@c    5:1. Baltasar, the king, made a great feast for a thousand of his
@c    nobles:  and every one drank according to his age.

@c    Baltasar. . .He is believed to be the same as Nabonydus, the last of the
@c    Chaldean kings, grandson to Nabuchodonosor.  He is called his son, ver.
@c    2, 11, etc., according to the style of the scriptures, because he was a
@c    descendant from him.

@c    5:2. And being now drunk, he commanded that they should bring the
@c    vessels of gold and silver, which Nabuchodonosor, his father, had
@c    brought away out of the temple, that was in Jerusalem, that the king
@c    and his nobles, and his wives, and his concubines, might drink in them.

@c    5:3. Then were the golden and silver vessels brought, which he had
@c    brought away out of the temple that was in Jerusalem:  and the king and
@c    his nobles, his wives, and his concubines, drank in them.

@c    5:4. They drank wine, and praised their gods of gold, and of silver, of
@c    brass, of iron, and of wood, and of stone.

@c    5:5. In the same hour there appeared fingers, as it were of the hand of
@c    a man, writing over against the candlestick, upon the surface of the
@c    wall of the king's palace:  and the king beheld the joints of the hand
@c    that wrote.

@c    5:6. Then was the king's countenance changed, and his thoughts troubled
@c    him:  and the joints of his loins were loosed, and his knees struck one
@c    against the other.

@c    5:7. And the king cried out aloud to bring in the wise men, the
@c    Chaldeans, and the soothsayers.  And the king spoke, and said to the
@c    wise men of Babylon:  Whosoever shall read this writing, and shall make
@c    known to me the interpretation thereof, shall be clothed with purple,
@c    and shall have a golden chain on his neck, and shall be the third man
@c    in my kingdom.

@c    5:8. Then came in all the king's wise men, but they could neither read
@c    the writing, nor declare the interpretation to the king.

@c    5:9. Wherewith king Baltasar was much troubled, and his countenance was
@c    changed:  and his nobles also were troubled.

@c    5:10. Then the queen, on occasion of what had happened to the king, and
@c    his nobles, came into the banquet-house:  and she spoke, and said:  O
@c    king, live for ever:  let not thy thoughts trouble thee, neither let thy
@c    countenance be changed.

@c    The queen. . .Not the wife, but the mother of the king.

@c    5:11. There is a man in thy kingdom that hath the spirit of the holy
@c    gods in him:  and in the days of thy father knowledge and wisdom were
@c    found in him:  for king Nabuchodonosor, thy father, appointed him prince
@c    of the wise men, enchanters, Chaldeans, and soothsayers, thy father, I
@c    say, O king:

@c    5:12. Because a greater spirit, and knowledge, and understanding, and
@c    interpretation of dreams, and shewing of secrets, and resolving of
@c    difficult things, were found in him, that is, in Daniel:  whom the king
@c    named Baltassar.  Now, therefore, let Daniel be called for, and he will
@c    tell the interpretation.

@c    5:13. Then Daniel was brought in before the king.  And the king spoke,
@c    and said to him:  Art thou Daniel, of the children of the captivity of
@c    Juda, whom my father, the king, brought out of Judea?

@c    5:14. I have heard of thee, that thou hast the spirit of the gods, and
@c    excellent knowledge, and understanding, and wisdom are found in thee.

@c    5:15. And now the wise men, the magicians, have come in before me, to
@c    read this writing, and shew me the interpretation thereof; and they
@c    could not declare to me the meaning of this writing.

@c    5:16. But I have heard of thee, that thou canst interpret obscure
@c    things, and resolve difficult things:  now if thou art able to read the
@c    writing, and to shew me the interpretation thereof, thou shalt be
@c    clothed with purple, and shalt have a chain of gold about thy neck, and
@c    shalt be the third prince in my kingdom.

@c    5:17. To which Daniel made answer, and said before the king:  thy
@c    rewards be to thyself, and the gifts of thy house give to another:  but
@c    the writing I will read to thee, O king, and shew thee the
@c    interpretation thereof.

@c    5:18. O king, the most high God gave to Nabuchodonosor, thy father, a
@c    kingdom, and greatness, and glory, and honour.

@c    5:19. And for the greatness that he gave to him, all people, tribes,
@c    and languages trembled, and were afraid of him:  whom he would, he slew:
@c    and whom he would, he destroyed:  and whom he would, he set up:  and whom
@c    he would, he brought down.

@c    5:20. But when his heart was lifted up, and his spirit hardened unto
@c    pride, he was put down from the throne of his kingdom, and his glory
@c    was taken away.

@c    5:21. And he was driven out from the sons of men, and his heart was
@c    made like the beasts, and his dwelling was with the wild asses, and he
@c    did eat grass like an ox, and his body was wet with the dew of heaven:
@c    till he knew that the most High ruled in the kingdom of men, and that
@c    he will set over it whomsoever it shall please him.

@c    5:22. Thou also, his son, O Baltasar, hast not humbled thy heart,
@c    whereas thou knewest all these things:

@c    5:23. But hast lifted thyself up against the Lord of heaven:  and the
@c    vessels of his house have been brought before thee:  and thou, and thy
@c    nobles, and thy wives, and thy concubines, have drunk wine in them:  and
@c    thou hast praised the gods of silver, and of gold, and of brass, of
@c    iron, and of wood, and of stone, that neither see, nor hear, nor feel:
@c    but the God who hath thy breath in his hand, and all thy ways, thou
@c    hast not glorified.

@c    5:24. Wherefore, he hath sent the part of the hand which hath written
@c    this that is set down.

@c    5:25. And this is the writing that is written:  MANE, THECEL, PHARES.

@c    5:26. And this is the interpretation of the word.  MANE:  God hath
@c    numbered thy kingdom, and hath finished it.

@c    5:27. THECEL:  thou art weighed in the balance, and art found wanting.

@c    5:28. PHARES:  thy kingdom is divided, and is given to the Medes and
@c    Persians.

@c    5:29. Then by the king's command, Daniel was clothed with purple, and a
@c    chain of gold was put about his neck:  and it was proclaimed of him that
@c    he had power as the third man in the kingdom.

@c    5:30. The same night Baltasar, the Chaldean king, was slain.

@c    5:31. And Darius, the Mede, succeeded to the kingdom, being threescore
@c    and two years old.

@c    Darius. . .He is called Cyaxares by the historians; and was the son of
@c    Astyages, and uncle to Cyrus.



@c    Daniel Chapter 6


@c    Daniel is promoted by Darius:  his enemies procure a law forbidding
@c    prayer; for the transgression of this law Daniel is cast into the
@c    lions' den:  but miraculously delivered.

@c    6:1. It seemed good to Darius, and he appointed over the kingdom a
@c    hundred and twenty governors, to be over his whole kingdom.

@c    6:2. And three princes over them of whom Daniel was one:  that the
@c    governors might give an account to them, and the king might have no
@c    trouble.

@c    6:3. And Daniel excelled all the princes, and governors:  because a
@c    greater spirit of God was in him.

@c    6:4. And the king thought to set him over all the kingdom; whereupon
@c    the princes, and the governors, sought to find occasion against Daniel,
@c    with regard to the king:  and they could find no cause, nor suspicion,
@c    because he was faithful, and no fault, nor suspicion was found in him.

@c    6:5. Then these men said:  We shall not find any occasion against this
@c    Daniel, unless perhaps concerning the law of his God.

@c    6:6. Then the princes, and the governors, craftily suggested to the
@c    king, and spoke thus unto him:  King Darius, live for ever:

@c    6:7. All the princes of the kingdom, the magistrates, and governors,
@c    the senators, and judges, have consulted together, that an imperial
@c    decree, and an edict be published:  That whosoever shall ask any
@c    petition of any god, or man, for thirty days, but of thee, O king,
@c    shall be cast into the den of the lions.

@c    6:8. Now, therefore, O king, confirm the sentence, and sign the decree:
@c    that what is decreed by the Medes and Persians may not be altered, nor
@c    any man be allowed to transgress it.

@c    6:9. So king Darius set forth the decree, and established it.

@c    6:10. Now, when Daniel knew this, that is to say, that the law was
@c    made, he went into his house:  and opening the windows in his upper
@c    chamber towards Jerusalem, he knelt down three times a day, and adored
@c    and gave thanks before his God, as he had been accustomed to do before.

@c    6:11. Wherefore those men carefully watching him, found Daniel praying
@c    and making supplication to his God.

@c    6:12. And they came and spoke to the king concerning the edict:  O king,
@c    hast thou not decreed, that every man that should make a request to any
@c    of the gods, or men, for thirty days, but to thyself, O king, should be
@c    cast into the den of the lions?  And the king answered them, saying:  The
@c    word is true, according to the decree of the Medes and Persians, which
@c    it is not lawful to violate.

@c    6:13. Then they answered, and said before the king:  Daniel, who is of
@c    the children of the captivity of Juda, hath not regarded thy law, nor
@c    the decree that thou hast made:  but three times a day he maketh his
@c    prayer.

@c    6:14. Now when the king had heard these words, he was very much
@c    grieved, and in behalf of Daniel he set his heart to deliver him, and
@c    even till sunset he laboured to save him.

@c    6:15. But those men perceiving the king's design, said to him:  Know
@c    thou, O king, that the law of the Medes and Persians is, that no decree
@c    which the king hath made, may be altered.

@c    6:16. Then the king commanded, and they brought Daniel, and cast him
@c    into the den of the lions.  And the king said to Daniel:  Thy God, whom
@c    thou always servest, he will deliver thee.

@c    6:17. And a stone was brought, and laid upon the mouth of the den:
@c    which the king sealed with his own ring, and with the ring of his
@c    nobles, that nothing should be done against Daniel.

@c    6:18. And the king went away to his house, and laid himself down
@c    without taking supper, and meat was not set before him, and even sleep
@c    departed from him.

@c    6:19. Then the king rising very early in the morning, went in haste to
@c    the lions' den:

@c    6:20. And coming near to the den, cried with a lamentable voice to
@c    Daniel, and said to him:  Daniel, servant of the living God, hath thy
@c    God, whom thou servest always, been able, thinkest thou, to deliver
@c    thee from the lions?

@c    6:21. And Daniel answering the king, said:  O king, live for ever:

@c    6:22. My God hath sent his angel, and hath shut up the mouths of the
@c    lions, and they have not hurt me:  forasmuch as before him justice hath
@c    been found in me:  yea, and before thee, O king, I have done no offence.

@c    6:23. Then was the king exceeding glad for him, and he commanded that
@c    Daniel should be taken out of the den:  and Daniel was taken out of the
@c    den, and no hurt was found in him, because he believed in his God.

@c    6:24. And by the king's commandment, those men were brought that had
@c    accused Daniel:  and they were cast into the lions' den, they and their
@c    children, and their wives:  and they did not reach the bottom of the
@c    den, before the lions caught them, and broke all their bones in pieces.

@c    6:25. Then king Darius wrote to all people, tribes, and languages,
@c    dwelling in the whole earth:  PEACE be multiplied unto you.

@c    6:26. It is decreed by me, that in all my empire and my kingdom, all
@c    men dread and fear the God of Daniel.  For he is the living and eternal
@c    God for ever:  and his kingdom shall not be destroyed, and his power
@c    shall be for ever.

@c    6:27. He is the deliverer, and saviour, doing signs and wonders in
@c    heaven, and in earth:  who hath delivered Daniel out of the lions' den.

@c    6:28. Now Daniel continued unto the reign of Darius, and the reign of
@c    Cyrus, the Persian.



@c    Daniel Chapter 7


@c    Daniel's vision of the four beasts, signifying four kingdoms:  of God
@c    sitting on his throne:  and of the opposite kingdoms of Christ and
@c    Antichrist.

@c    7:1. In the first year of Baltasar, king of Babylon, Daniel saw a
@c    dream:  and the vision of his head was upon his bed:  and writing the
@c    dream, he comprehended it in a few words:  and relating the sum of it in
@c    short, he said:

@c    7:2. I saw in my vision by night, and behold the four winds of the
@c    heavens strove upon the great sea.

@c    7:3. And four great beasts, different one from another, came up out of
@c    the sea.

@c    Four great beasts. . .Viz., the Chaldean, Persian, Grecian, and Roman
@c    empires.  But some rather choose to understand the fourth beast of the
@c    successors of Alexander the Great, more especially of them that reigned
@c    in Asia and Syria.

@c    7:4. The first was like a lioness, and had the wings of an eagle:  I
@c    beheld till her wings were plucked off, and she was lifted up from the
@c    earth, and stood upon her feet as a man, and the heart of a man was
@c    given to her.

@c    7:5. And behold another beast, like a bear, stood up on one side:  and
@c    there were three rows in the mouth thereof, and in the teeth thereof,
@c    and thus they said to it:  Arise, devour much flesh.

@c    7:6. After this I beheld, and lo, another like a leopard, and it had
@c    upon it four wings, as of a fowl, and the beast had four heads, and
@c    power was given to it.

@c    7:7. After this I beheld in the vision of the night, and lo, a fourth
@c    beast, terrible and wonderful, and exceeding strong, it had great iron
@c    teeth, eating and breaking in pieces, and treading down the rest with
@c    his feet:  and it was unlike to the other beasts which I had seen before
@c    it, and had ten horns.

@c    Ten horns. . .That is, ten kingdoms, (as Apoc. 17.12,) among which the
@c    empire of the fourth beast shall be parcelled.  Or ten kings of the
@c    number of the successors of Alexander; as figures of such as shall be
@c    about the time of Antichrist.

@c    7:8. I considered the horns, and behold another little horn sprung out
@c    of the midst of them:  and three of the first horns were plucked up at
@c    the presence thereof:  and behold eyes like the eyes of a man were in
@c    this horn, and a mouth speaking great things.

@c    Another little horn. . .This is commonly understood of Antichrist.  It
@c    may also be applied to that great persecutor Antiochus Epiphanes, as a
@c    figure of Antichrist.

@c    7:9. I beheld till thrones were placed, and the ancient of days sat:
@c    his garment was white as snow, and the hair of his head like clean
@c    wool:  his throne like flames of fire:  the wheels of it like a burning
@c    fire.

@c    7:10. A swift stream of fire issued forth from before him:  thousands of
@c    thousands ministered to him, and ten thousand times a hundred thousand
@c    stood before him:  the judgment sat, and the books were opened.

@c    7:11. I beheld, because of the voice of the great words which that horn
@c    spoke:  and I saw that the beast was slain, and the body thereof was
@c    destroyed, and given to the fire to be burnt:

@c    7:12. And that the power of the other beasts was taken away:  and that
@c    times of life were appointed them for a time, and a time.

@c    7:13. I beheld, therefore, in the vision of the night, and lo, one like
@c    the Son of man came with the clouds of heaven, and he came even to the
@c    ancient of days:  and they presented him before him.

@c    7:14. And he gave him power, and glory, and a kingdom:  and all peoples,
@c    tribes, and tongues shall serve him:  his power is an everlasting power
@c    that shall not be taken away:  and his kingdom that shall not be
@c    destroyed.

@c    7:15. My spirit trembled; I, Daniel, was affrighted at these things,
@c    and the visions of my head troubled me.

@c    7:16. I went near to one of them that stood by, and asked the truth of
@c    him concerning all these things, and he told me the interpretation of
@c    the words, and instructed me:

@c    7:17. These four great beasts, are four kingdoms, which shall arise out
@c    of the earth.

@c    7:18. But the saints of the most high God shall take the kingdom:  and
@c    they shall possess the kingdom for ever and ever.

@c    7:19. After this I would diligently learn concerning the fourth beast,
@c    which was very different from all, and exceeding terrible:  his teeth
@c    and claws were of iron:  he devoured and broke in pieces, and the rest
@c    he stamped upon with his feet:

@c    7:20. And concerning the ten horns that he had on his head:  and
@c    concerning the other that came up, before which three horns fell:  and
@c    of that horn that had eyes, and a mouth speaking great things, and was
@c    greater than the rest.

@c    7:21. I beheld, and lo, that horn made war against the saints, and
@c    prevailed over them,

@c    7:22. Till the ancient of days came and gave judgment to the saints of
@c    the most High, and the time came, and the saints obtained the kingdom.

@c    7:23. And thus he said:  The fourth beast shall be the fourth kingdom
@c    upon earth, which shall be greater than all the kingdoms, and shall
@c    devour the whole earth, and shall tread it down, and break it in
@c    pieces.

@c    7:24. And the ten horns of the same kingdom, shall be ten kings:  and
@c    another shall rise up after them, and he shall be mightier than the
@c    former, and he shall bring down three kings.

@c    7:25. And he shall speak words against the High One, and shall crush
@c    the saints of the most High:  and he shall think himself able to change
@c    times and laws, and they shall be delivered into his hand until a time,
@c    and times, and half a time.

@c    A time, and times, and half a time. . .That is, three years and a half;
@c    which is supposed to be the length of the duration of the persecution
@c    of Antichrist.

@c    7:26. And a judgment shall sit, that his power may be taken away, and
@c    be broken in pieces, and perish even to the end.

@c    7:27. And that the kingdom, and power, and the greatness of the
@c    kingdom, under the whole heaven, may be given to the people of the
@c    saints of the most High:  whose kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, and
@c    all kings shall serve him, and shall obey him.

@c    7:28. Hitherto is the end of the word.  I, Daniel, was much troubled
@c    with my thoughts, and my countenance was changed in me:  but I kept the
@c    word in my heart.



@c    Daniel Chapter 8


@c    Daniel's vision of the ram and the he goat interpreted by the angel
@c    Gabriel.

@c    8:1. In the third year of the reign of king Baltasar, a vision appeared
@c    to me.  I, Daniel, after what I had seen in the beginning,

@c    8:2. Saw in my vision when I was in the castle of Susa, which is in the
@c    province of Elam:  and I saw in the vision that I was over the gate of
@c    Ulai.

@c    8:3. And I lifted up my eyes, and saw:  and behold a ram stood before
@c    the water, having two high horns, and one higher than the other, and
@c    growing up.  Afterward

@c    A ram. . .The empire of the Medes and Persians.

@c    8:4. I saw the ram pushing with his horns against the west, and against
@c    the north, and against the south:  and no beasts could withstand him,
@c    nor be delivered out of his hand:  and he did according to his own will,
@c    and became great.

@c    8:5. And I understood:  and behold a he goat came from the west on the
@c    face of the whole earth, and he touched not the ground, and the he goat
@c    had a notable horn between his eyes.

@c    A he goat. . .The empire of the Greeks, or Macedonians.  Ibid.  He
@c    touched not the ground. . .He conquered all before him, with so much
@c    rapidity, that he seemed rather to fly, than to walk upon the
@c    earth.--Ibid.  A notable horn. . .Alexander the Great.

@c    8:6. And he went up to the ram that had the horns, which I had seen
@c    standing before the gate, and he ran towards him in the force of his
@c    strength.

@c    8:7. And when he was come near the ram, he was enraged against him, and
@c    struck the ram:  and broke his two horns, and the ram could not
@c    withstand him:  and when he had cast him down on the ground, he stamped
@c    upon him, and none could deliver the ram out of his hand.

@c    8:8. And the he goat became exceeding great:  and when he was grown, the
@c    great horn was broken, and there came up four horns under it towards
@c    the four winds of heaven.

@c    Four horns. . .Seleucus, Antigonus, Philip, and Ptolemeus, the
@c    successors of Alexander, who divided his empire among them.

@c    8:9. And out of one of them came forth a little horn:  and it became
@c    great against the south, and against the east, and against the
@c    strength.

@c    A little horn. . .Antiochus Epiphanes, a descendant of Seleucus.  He grew
@c    against the south, and the east, by his victories over the kings of
@c    Egypt and Armenia:  and against the strength, that is, against Jerusalem
@c    and the people of God.

@c    8:10. And it was magnified even unto the strength of heaven:  and it
@c    threw down of the strength, and of the stars, and trod upon them.

@c    Unto the strength of heaven. . .or, against the strength of heaven.  So
@c    are here called the army of the Jews, the people of God.

@c    8:11. And it was magnified even to the prince of the strength:  and it
@c    took away from him the continual sacrifice, and cast down the place of
@c    his sanctuary.

@c    8:12. And strength was given him against the continual sacrifice,
@c    because of sins:  and truth shall be cast down on the ground, and he
@c    shall do and shall prosper.

@c    8:13. And I heard one of the saints speaking, and one saint said to
@c    another I know not to whom, that was speaking:  How long shall be the
@c    vision, concerning the continual sacrifice, and the sin of the
@c    desolation that is made:  and the sanctuary, and the strength be trodden
@c    under foot?

@c    8:14. And he said to him:  Unto evening and morning two thousand three
@c    hundred days:  and the sanctuary shall be cleansed.

@c    Unto evening and morning two thousand three hundred days. . .That is,
@c    six years and almost four months:  which was the whole time from the
@c    beginning of the persecution of Antiochus till his death.

@c    8:15. And it came to pass when I, Daniel, saw the vision, and sought
@c    the meaning, that behold there stood before me as it were the
@c    appearance of a man.

@c    8:16. And I heard the voice of a man between Ulai:  and he called, and
@c    said:  Gabriel, make this man to understand the vision.

@c    8:17. And he came, and stood near where I stood:  and when he was come,
@c    I fell on my face, trembling, and he said to me:  Understand, O son of
@c    man, for in the time of the end the vision shall be fulfilled.

@c    8:18. And when he spoke to me, I fell flat on the ground:  and he
@c    touched me, and set me upright.

@c    8:19. And he said to me:  I will shew thee what things are to come to
@c    pass in the end of the malediction:  for the time hath its end.

@c    8:20. The ram, which thou sawest with horns, is the king of the Medes
@c    and Persians.

@c    8:21. And the he goat, is the king of the Greeks, and the great horn
@c    that was between his eyes, the same is the first king.

@c    8:22. But whereas when that was broken, there arose up four for it,
@c    four kings shall rise up of his nation, but not with his strength.

@c    8:23. And after their reign, when iniquities shall be grown up, there
@c    shall arise a king of a shameless face, and understanding dark
@c    sentences.

@c    8:24. And his power shall be strengthened, but not by his own force:
@c    and he shall lay all things waste, and shall prosper, and do more than
@c    can be believed.  And he shall destroy the mighty, and the people of the
@c    saints,

@c    8:25. According to his will, and craft shall be successful in his hand:
@c    and his heart shall be puffed up, and in the abundance of all things he
@c    shall kill many:  and he shall rise up against the prince of princes,
@c    and shall be broken without hand.

@c    8:26. And the vision of the evening and the morning, which was told, is
@c    true:  thou, therefore, seal up the vision, because it shall come to
@c    pass after many days.

@c    8:27. And I, Daniel, languished, and was sick for some days:  and when I
@c    was risen up, I did the king's business, and I was astonished at the
@c    vision, and there was none that could interpret it.



@c    Daniel Chapter 9


@c    Daniel's confession and prayer:  Gabriel informs him concerning the
@c    seventy weeks to the coming of Christ.

@c    9:1. In the first year of Darius, the son of Assuerus, of the seed of
@c    the Medes, who reigned over the kingdom of the Chaldeans:

@c    9:2. The first year of his reign I, Daniel, understood by books the
@c    number of the years, concerning which the word of the Lord came to
@c    Jeremias, the prophet, that seventy years should be accomplished of the
@c    desolation of Jerusalem.

@c    9:3. And I set my face to the Lord, my God, to pray and make
@c    supplication with fasting, and sackcloth, and ashes.

@c    9:4. And I prayed to the Lord, my God, and I made my confession, and
@c    said:  I beseech thee, O Lord God, great and terrible, who keepest the
@c    covenant, and mercy to them that love thee, and keep thy commandments.

@c    9:5. We have sinned, we have committed iniquity, we have done wickedly,
@c    and have revolted:  and we have gone aside from thy commandments, and
@c    thy judgments.

@c    9:6. We have not hearkened to thy servants, the prophets, that have
@c    spoken in thy name to our kings, to our princes, to our fathers, and to
@c    all the people of the land.

@c    9:7. To thee, O Lord, justice:  but to us confusion of face, as at this
@c    day to the men of Juda, and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and to all
@c    Israel, to them that are near, and to them that are far off, in all the
@c    countries whither thou hast driven them, for their iniquities, by which
@c    they have sinned against thee.

@c    9:8. O Lord, to us belongeth confusion of face, to our princes, and to
@c    our fathers, that have sinned.

@c    9:9. But to thee, the Lord our God, mercy and forgiveness, for we have
@c    departed from thee:

@c    9:10. And we have not hearkened to the voice of the Lord, our God, to
@c    walk in his law, which he set before us by his servants, the prophets.

@c    9:11. And all Israel have transgressed thy law, and have turned away
@c    from hearing thy voice, and the malediction, and the curse, which is
@c    written in the book of Moses, the servant of God, is fallen upon us,
@c    because we have sinned against him.

@c    9:12. And he hath confirmed his words which he spoke against us, and
@c    against our princes that judged us, that he would bring in upon us a
@c    great evil, such as never was under all the heaven, according to that
@c    which hath been done in Jerusalem.

@c    9:13. As it is written in the law of Moses, all this evil is come upon
@c    us:  and we entreated not thy face, O Lord our God, that we might turn
@c    from our iniquities, and think on thy truth.

@c    9:14. And the Lord hath watched upon the evil, and hath brought it upon
@c    us:  the Lord, our God, is just in all his works which he hath done:  for
@c    we have not hearkened to his voice.

@c    9:15. And now, O Lord, our God, who hast brought forth thy people out
@c    of the land of Egypt, with a strong hand, and hast made thee a name as
@c    at this day:  we have sinned, we have committed iniquity,

@c    9:16. O Lord, against all thy justice:  let thy wrath and thy
@c    indignation be turned away, I beseech thee, from thy city, Jerusalem,
@c    and from thy holy mountain.  For by reason of our sins, and the
@c    iniquities of our fathers, Jerusalem, and thy people, are a reproach to
@c    all that are round about us.

@c    9:17. Now, therefore, O our God, hear the supplication of thy servant,
@c    and his prayers:  and shew thy face upon thy sanctuary, which is
@c    desolate, for thy own sake.

@c    9:18. Incline, O my God, thy ear, and hear:  open thy eyes, and see our
@c    desolation, and the city upon which thy name is called:  for it is not
@c    for our justifications that we present our prayers before thy face, but
@c    for the multitude of thy tender mercies.

@c    9:19. O Lord, hear:  O Lord, be appeased:  hearken, and do:  delay not,
@c    for thy own sake, O my God:  because thy name is invocated upon thy
@c    city, and upon thy people.

@c    9:20. Now while I was yet speaking, and praying, and confessing my
@c    sins, and the sins of my people of Israel, and presenting my
@c    supplications in the sight of my God, for the holy mountain of my God:

@c    9:21. As I was yet speaking in prayer, behold the man, Gabriel, whom I
@c    had seen in the vision at the beginning, flying swiftly, touched me at
@c    the time of the evening sacrifice.

@c    The man Gabriel. . .The angel Gabriel in the shape of a man.

@c    9:22. And he instructed me, and spoke to me, and said:  O Daniel, I am
@c    now come forth to teach thee, and that thou mightest understand.

@c    9:23. From the beginning of thy prayers the word came forth:  and I am
@c    come to shew it to thee, because thou art a man of desires:  therefore,
@c    do thou mark the word, and understand the vision.

@c    Man of desires. . .that is, ardently praying for the Jews then in
@c    captivity.

@c    9:24. Seventy weeks are shortened upon thy people, and upon thy holy
@c    city, that transgression may be finished, and sin may have an end, and
@c    iniquity may be abolished; and everlasting justice may be brought; and
@c    vision and prophecy may be fulfilled; and the Saint of saints may be
@c    anointed.

@c    Seventy weeks. . .Viz., of years, (or seventy times seven, that is, 490
@c    years,) are shortened; that is, fixed and determined, so that the time
@c    shall be no longer.

@c    9:25. Know thou, therefore, and take notice:  that from the going forth
@c    of the word, to build up Jerusalem again, unto Christ, the prince,
@c    there shall be seven weeks, and sixty-two weeks:  and the street shall
@c    be built again, and the walls, in straitness of times.

@c    From the going forth of the word, etc. . .That is, from the twentieth
@c    year of king Artaxerxes, when by his commandment Nehemias rebuilt the
@c    walls of Jerusalem, 2 Esd. 2.  From which time, according to the best
@c    chronology, there were just sixty-nine weeks of years, that is, 483
@c    years to the baptism of Christ, when he first began to preach and
@c    execute the office of Messias.--Ibid.  In straitness of
@c    times. . .angustia temporum:  which may allude both to the difficulties
@c    and opposition they met with in building:  and to the shortness of the
@c    time in which they finished the wall, viz., fifty-two days.

@c    9:26. And after sixty-two weeks Christ shall be slain:  and the people
@c    that shall deny him shall not be his.  And a people, with their leader,
@c    that shall come, shall destroy the city, and the sanctuary:  and the end
@c    thereof shall be waste, and after the end of the war the appointed
@c    desolation.

@c    A people with their leader. . .The Romans under Titus.

@c    9:27. And he shall confirm the covenant with many, in one week:  and in
@c    the half of the week the victim and the sacrifice shall fail:  and there
@c    shall be in the temple the abomination of desolation:  and the
@c    desolation shall continue even to the consummation, and to the end.

@c    In the half of the week. . .or, in the middle of the week, etc.  Because
@c    Christ preached three years and a half:  and then by his sacrifice upon
@c    the cross abolished all the sacrifices of the law.--Ibid.  The
@c    abomination of desolation. . .Some understand this of the profanation of
@c    the temple by the crimes of the Jews, and by the bloody faction of the
@c    zealots.  Others of the bringing in thither the ensigns and standard of
@c    the pagan Romans.  Others, in fine, distinguish three different times of
@c    desolation:  viz., that under Antiochus; that when the temple was
@c    destroyed by the Romans; and the last near the end of the world under
@c    Antichrist.  To all which, as they suppose, this prophecy may have a
@c    relation.



@c    Daniel Chapter 10


@c    Daniel having humbled himself by fasting and penance seeth a vision,
@c    with which he is much terrified; but he is comforted by an angel.

@c    10:1. In the third year of Cyrus, king of the Persians, a word was
@c    revealed to Daniel, surnamed Baltassar, and a true word, and great
@c    strength:  and he understood the word:  for there is need of
@c    understanding in a vision.

@c    10:2. In those days I, Daniel, mourned the days of three weeks.

@c    10:3. I ate no desirable bread, and neither flesh, nor wine, entered
@c    into my mouth, neither was I anointed with ointment:  till the days of
@c    three weeks were accomplished.

@c    10:4. And in the four and twentieth day of the first month, I was by
@c    the great river, which is the Tigris.

@c    10:5. And I lifted up my eyes, and I saw:  and behold a man clothed in
@c    linen, and his loins were girded with the finest gold:

@c    10:6. And his body was like the chrysolite, and his face as the
@c    appearance of lightning, and his eyes as a burning lamp:  and his arms,
@c    and all downward even to the feet, like in appearance to glittering
@c    brass:  and the voice of his word like the voice of a multitude.

@c    10:7. And I, Daniel alone, saw the vision:  for the men that were with
@c    me saw it not:  but an exceeding great terror fell upon them, and they
@c    fled away, and hid themselves.

@c    10:8. And I, being left alone, saw this great vision:  and there
@c    remained no strength in me, and the appearance of my countenance was
@c    changed in me, and I fainted away, and retained no strength.

@c    10:9. And I heard the voice of his words:  and when I heard I lay in a
@c    consternation upon my face, and my face was close to the ground.

@c    10:10. And behold a hand touched me, and lifted me up upon my knees,
@c    and upon the joints of my hands.

@c    10:11. And he said to me:  Daniel, thou man of desires, understand the
@c    words that I speak to thee, and stand upright:  for I am sent now to
@c    thee.  And when he had said this word to me, I stood trembling.

@c    10:12. And he said to me:  Fear not, Daniel:  for from the first day that
@c    thou didst set thy heart to understand, to afflict thyself in the sight
@c    of thy God, thy words have been heard:  and I am come for thy words.

@c    10:13. But the prince of the kingdom of the Persians resisted me one
@c    and twenty days:  and behold Michael, one of the chief princes, came to
@c    help me, and I remained there by the king of the Persians.

@c    The prince, etc. . .That is, the angel guardian of Persia:  who according
@c    to his office, seeking the spiritual good of the Persians was desirous
@c    that many of the Jews should remain among them.

@c    10:14. But I am come to teach thee what things shall befall thy people
@c    in the latter days, for as yet the vision is for days.

@c    10:15. And when he was speaking such words to me, I cast down my
@c    countenance to the ground, and held my peace.

@c    10:16. And behold as it were the likeness of a son of man touched my
@c    lips:  then I opened my mouth and spoke, and said to him that stood
@c    before me:  O my lord, at the sight of thee my joints are loosed, and no
@c    strength hath remained in me.

@c    10:17. And how can the servant of my lord speak with my lord?  for no
@c    strength remaineth in me; moreover, my breath is stopped.

@c    10:18. Therefore, he that looked like a man, touched me again, and
@c    strengthened me.

@c    10:19. And he said:  Fear not, O man of desires, peace be to thee:  take
@c    courage, and be strong.  And when he spoke to me, I grew strong, and I
@c    said:  Speak, O my lord, for thou hast strengthened me.

@c    10:20. And he said:  Dost thou know wherefore I am come to thee?  And now
@c    I will return, to fight against the prince of the Persians.  When I went
@c    forth, there appeared the prince of the Greeks coming.

@c    10:21. But I will tell thee what is set down in the scripture of truth:
@c    and none is my helper in all these things, but Michael your prince.

@c    Michael your prince. . .The guardian general of the church of God.



@c    Daniel Chapter 11


@c    The angel declares to Daniel many things to come, with regard to the
@c    Persian and Grecian kings:  more especially with regard to Antiochus as
@c    a figure of Antichrist.

@c    11:1. And from the first year of Darius, the Mede, I stood up, that he
@c    might be strengthened, and confirmed.

@c    11:2. And now I will shew thee the truth.  Behold, there shall stand yet
@c    three kings in Persia, and the fourth shall be enriched exceedingly
@c    above them all:  and when he shall be grown mighty by his riches, he
@c    shall stir up all against the kingdom of Greece.

@c    Three kings. . .Viz., Cambyses, Smerdes Magus, and Darius, the son of
@c    Hystaspes.--Ibid.  The fourth. . .Xerxes.

@c    11:3. But there shall rise up a strong king, and shall rule with great
@c    power:  and he shall do what he pleaseth.

@c    A strong king. . .Alexander.

@c    11:4. And when he shall come to his height, his kingdom shall be
@c    broken, and it shall be divided towards the four winds of the heaven:
@c    but not to his posterity, nor according to his power with which he
@c    ruled.  For his kingdom shall be rent in peices, even for strangers,
@c    besides these.

@c    11:5. And the king of the south shall be strengthened, and one of his
@c    princes shall prevail over him, and he shall rule with great power:  for
@c    his dominions shall be great.

@c    The king of the south. . .Ptolemeus the son of Lagus, king of Egypt,
@c    which lies south of Jerusalem.--Ibid.  One of his princes. . .that is,
@c    one of Alexander's princes, shall prevail over him:  that is, shall be
@c    stronger than the king of Egypt.  He speaks of Seleucus Nicator, king of
@c    Asia and Syria, whose successors are here called the kings of the
@c    north, because their dominions lay to the north in respect to
@c    Jerusalem.

@c    11:6. And after the end of years they shall be in league together:  and
@c    the daughter of the king of the south shall come to the king of the
@c    north to make friendship, but she shall not obtain the strength of the
@c    arm, neither shall her seed stand:  and she shall be given up, and her
@c    young men that brought her, and they that strengthened her in these
@c    times.

@c    The daughter of the king of the south. . .Viz., Berenice, daughter of
@c    Ptolemeus Philadelphus, given in marriage to Antiochus Theos, grandson
@c    of Seleucus.

@c    11:7. And a plant of the bud of her roots shall stand up:  and he shall
@c    come with an army, and shall enter into the province of the king of the
@c    north:  and he shall abuse them, and shall prevail.

@c    A plant, etc. . .Ptolemeus Evergetes, the son of Philadelphus.

@c    11:8. And he shall also carry away captive into Egypt their gods, and
@c    their graven things, and their precious vessels of gold and silver:  he
@c    shall prevail against the king of the north.

@c    The king of the north. . .Seleucus Callinicus.

@c    11:9. And the king of the south shall enter into the kingdom, and shall
@c    return to his own land.

@c    11:10. And his sons shall be provoked, and they shall assemble a
@c    multitude of great forces:  and he shall come with haste like a flood:
@c    and he shall return, and be stirred up, and he shall join battle with
@c    his force.

@c    His sons. . .Seleucus Ceraunius, and Antiochus the Great, the sons of
@c    Callinicus.--Ibid.  He shall come. . .Viz., Antiochus the Great.

@c    11:11. And the king of the south being provoked, shall go forth, and
@c    shall fight against the king of the north, and shall prepare an
@c    exceeding great multitude, and a multitude shall be given into his
@c    hands.

@c    The king of the south. . .Ptolemeus Philopator, son of Evergetes.

@c    11:12. And he shall take a multitude, and his heart shall be lifted up,
@c    and he shall cast down many thousands:  but he shall not prevail.

@c    11:13. For the king of the north shall return, and shall prepare a
@c    multitude much greater than before:  and in the end of times, and years,
@c    he shall come in haste with a great army, and much riches.

@c    11:14. And in those times many shall rise up against the king of the
@c    south, and the children of prevaricators of thy people shall lift up
@c    themselves to fulfil the vision, and they shall fall.

@c    11:15. And the king of the north shall come, and shall cast up a mount,
@c    and shall take the best fenced cities:  and the arms of the south shall
@c    not withstand, and his chosen ones shall rise up to resist, and they
@c    shall not have strength.

@c    11:16. And he shall come upon him, and do according to his pleasure,
@c    and there shall be none to stand against his face:  and he shall stand
@c    in the glorious land, and it shall be consumed by his hand.

@c    He shall come upon him. . .Viz., Antiochus shall come upon the king of
@c    the south.--Ibid.  The glorious land. . .Judea.

@c    11:17. And he shall set his face to come to possess all his kingdom,
@c    and he shall make upright conditions with him:  and he shall give him a
@c    daughter of women, to overthrow it:  and she shall not stand, neither
@c    shall she be for him.

@c    All his kingdom. . .Viz., all the kingdom of Ptolemeus Epiphanes, son of
@c    Philopator.--Ibid.  A daughter of women. . .That is, a most beautiful
@c    woman, viz., his daughter Cleopatra.--Ibid.  To overthrow it. . .Viz.,
@c    the kingdom of Epiphanes:  but his policy shall not succeed; for
@c    Cleopatra shall take more to heart the interest of her husband, than that
@c    of her father.

@c    11:18. And he shall turn his face to the islands, and shall take many:
@c    and he shall cause the prince of his reproach to cease, and his
@c    reproach shall be turned upon him.

@c    The prince of his reproach. . .Seipio the Roman general, called the
@c    prince of his reproach, because he overthrew Antiochus, and obliged him
@c    to submit to very dishonourable terms, before he would cease from the
@c    war.

@c    11:19. And he shall turn his face to the empire of his own land, and he
@c    shall stumble, and fall, ans shall not be found.

@c    11:20. And there shall stand up in his place one most vile, and
@c    unworthy of kingly honour:  and in a few days he shall be destroyed, not
@c    in rage nor in battle.

@c    One most vile. . .Seleucus Philopator, who sent Heliodorus to plunder
@c    the temple:  and was shortly after slain by the same Heliodorus.

@c    11:21. And there shall stand up in his place one despised, and the
@c    kingly honour shall not be given him:  and he shall come privately, and
@c    shall obtain the kingdom by fraud.

@c    One despised. . .Viz., Antiochus Epiphanes, who at first was despised
@c    and not received for king.  What is here said of this prince, is
@c    accommodated by St. Jerome and others to Antichrist; of whom this
@c    Antiochus was a figure.

@c    11:22. And the arms of the fighter shall be overcome before his face,
@c    and shall be broken:  yea, also the prince of the covenant.

@c    Of the fighter. . .That is, of them that shall oppose him, and shall
@c    fight against him.--Ibid.  The prince of the covenant. . .or, of the
@c    league.  The chief of them that conspired against him:  or the king of
@c    Egypt his most powerful adversary.

@c    11:23. And after friendships, he will deal deceitfully with him:  and he
@c    shall go up, and shall overcome with a small people.

@c    11:24. And he shall enter into rich and plentiful cities:  and he shall
@c    do that which his fathers never did, nor his fathers' fathers:  he shall
@c    scatter their spoils, and their prey, and their riches, and shall
@c    forecast devices against the best fenced places:  and this until a time.

@c    11:25. And his strength, and his heart, shall be stirred up against the
@c    king of the south, with a great army:  and the king of the south shall
@c    be stirred up to battle with many and very strong succours:  and they
@c    shall not stand, for they shall form designs against him.

@c    The king. . .Ptolemeus Philometor.

@c    11:26. And they that eat bread with him, shall destroy him, and his
@c    army shall be overthrown:  and many shall fall down slain.

@c    11:27. And the heart of the two kings shall be to do evil, and they
@c    shall speak lies at one table, and they shall not prosper:  because as
@c    yet the end is unto another time.

@c    11:28. And he shall return into his land with much riches:  and his
@c    heart shall be against the holy covenant, and he shall succeed, and
@c    shall return into his own land.

@c    11:29. At the time appointed he shall return, and he shall come to the
@c    south, but the latter time shall not be like the former.

@c    11:30. And the galleys and the Romans shall come upon him, and he shall
@c    be struck, and shall return, and shall have indignation against the
@c    covenant of the sanctuary, and he shall succeed:  and he shall return,
@c    and shall devise against them that have forsaken the covenant of the
@c    sanctuary.

@c    The galleys and the Romans. . .Popilius, and the other Roman
@c    ambassadors, who came in galleys, and obliged him to depart from Egypt.

@c    11:31. And arms shall stand on his part, and they shall defile the
@c    sanctuary of strength, and shall take away the continual sacrifice:  and
@c    they shall place there the abomination unto desolation.

@c    They shall place there the abomination, etc. . .The idol of Jupiter
@c    Olympius, which Antiochus ordered to be set up in the sanctuary of the
@c    temple:  which is here called the sanctuary of strength, from the
@c    Almighty that was worshipped there.

@c    11:32. And such as deal wickedly against the covenant shall deceitfully
@c    dissemble:  but the people that know their God shall prevail and
@c    succeed.

@c    11:33. And they that are learned among the people shall teach many:  and
@c    they shall fall by the sword, and by fire, and by captivity, and by
@c    spoil for many days.

@c    11:34. And when they shall have fallen, they shall be relieved with a
@c    small help:  and many shall be joined to them deceitfully.

@c    11:35. And some of the learned shall fall, that they may be tried, and
@c    may be chosen, and made white, even to the appointed time:  because yet
@c    there shall be another time.

@c    11:36. And the king shall do according to his will, and he shall be
@c    lifted up, and shall magnify himself against every god:  and he shall
@c    speak great things against the God of gods, and shall prosper, till the
@c    wrath be accomplished.  For the determination is made.

@c    11:37. And he shall make no account of the God of his fathers:  and he
@c    shall follow the lust of women, and he shall not regard any gods:  for
@c    he shall rise up against all things.

@c    11:38. But he shall worship the god Maozim, in his place:  and a god
@c    whom his fathers knew not, he shall worship with gold, and silver, and
@c    precious stones, and things of great price.

@c    The god Maozim. . .That is, the god of forces or strong holds.

@c    11:39. And he shall do this to fortify Maozim with a strange god, whom
@c    he hath acknowledged, and he shall increase glory, and shall give them
@c    power over many, and shall divide the land gratis.

@c    And he shall increase glory, etc. . .He shall bestow honours, riches and
@c    lands, upon them that shall worship his god.

@c    11:40. And at the time prefixed the king of the south shall fight
@c    against him, and the king of the north shall come against him like a
@c    tempest, with chariots, and with horsemen, and with a great navy, and
@c    he shall enter into the countries, and shall destroy, and pass through.

@c    11:41. And he shall enter into the glorious land, and many shall fall:
@c    and these only shall be saved out of his hand, Edom, and Moab, and the
@c    principality of the children of Ammon.

@c    11:42. And he shall lay his hand upon the lands:  and the land of Egypt
@c    shall not escape.

@c    11:43. And he shall have power over the treasures of gold, and of
@c    silver, and all the precious things of Egypt:  and he shall pass through
@c    Lybia, and Ethiopia.

@c    11:44. And tidings out of the east, and out of the north, shall trouble
@c    him:  and he shall come with a great multitude to destroy and slay many.

@c    11:45. And he shall fix his tabernacle, Apadno, between the seas, upon
@c    a glorious and holy mountain:  and he shall come even to the top
@c    thereof, and none shall help him.

@c    Apadno. . .Some take it for the proper name of a place:  others, from the
@c    Hebrew, translate it his palace.



@c    Daniel Chapter 12


@c    Michael shall stand up for the people of God:  with other things
@c    relating to Antichrist, and the end of the world.

@c    12:1. But at that time shall Michael rise up, the great prince, who
@c    standeth for the children of thy people:  and a time shall come, such as
@c    never was from the time that nations began, even until that time.  And
@c    at that time shall thy people be saved, every one that shall be found
@c    written in the book.

@c    12:2. And many of those that sleep in the dust of the earth, shall
@c    awake:  some unto life everlasting, and others unto reproach, to see it
@c    always.

@c    12:3. But they that are learned, shall shine as the brightness of the
@c    firmament:  and they that instruct many to justice, as stars for all
@c    eternity.

@c    Learned. . .Viz., in the law of God and true wisdom, which consists in
@c    knowing and loving God.

@c    12:4. But thou, O Daniel, shut up the words, and seal the book, even to
@c    the time appointed:  many shall pass over, and knowledge shall be
@c    manifold.

@c    12:5. And I, Daniel, looked, and behold as it were two others stood:
@c    one on this side upon the bank of the river, and another on that side,
@c    on the other bank of the river.

@c    12:6. And I said to the man that was clothed in linen, that stood upon
@c    the waters of the river:  How long shall it be to the end of these
@c    wonders?

@c    12:7. And I heard the man that was clothed in linen, that stood upon
@c    the waters of the river, when he had lifted up his right hand, and his
@c    left hand to heaven, and had sworn by him that liveth for ever, that it
@c    should be unto a time, and times, and half a time.  And when the
@c    scattering of the band of the holy people shall be accomplished, all
@c    these things shall be finished.

@c    12:8. And I heard, and understood not.  And I said:  O my lord, what
@c    shall be after these things?

@c    12:9. And he said:  Go, Daniel, because the words are shut up, and
@c    sealed until the appointed time.

@c    12:10. Many shall be chosen, and made white, and shall be tried as
@c    fire:  and the wicked shall deal wickedly, and none of the wicked shall
@c    understand, but the learned shall understand.

@c    12:11. And from the time when the continual sacrifice shall be taken
@c    away, and the abomination unto desolation shall be set up, there shall
@c    be a thousand two hundred ninety days.

@c    12:12. Blessed is he that waiteth, and cometh unto a thousand three
@c    hundred thirty-five days.

@c    12:13. But go thou thy ways until the time appointed:  and thou shalt
@c    rest, and stand in thy lot unto the end of the days.



@c    Daniel Chapter 13


@c    The history of Susanna and the two elders.

@c    This history of Susanna, in all the ancient Greek and Latin Bibles, was
@c    placed in the beginning of the book of Daniel:  till St. Jerome, in his
@c    translation, detached it from thence; because he did not find it in the
@c    Hebrew:  which is also the case of the history of Bel and the Dragon.
@c    But both the one and the other are received by the Catholic Church:  and
@c    were from the very beginning a part of the Christian Bible.

@c    13:1. Now there was a man that dwelt in Babylon, and his name was
@c    Joakim:

@c    13:2. And he took a wife, whose name was Susanna, the daughter of
@c    Helcias, a very beautiful woman, and one that feared God.

@c    13:3. For her parents being just, had instructed their daughter
@c    according to the law of Moses.

@c    13:4. Now Joakim was very rich, and had an orchard near his house:  and
@c    the Jews resorted to him, because he was the most honourable of them
@c    all.

@c    13:5. And there were two of the ancients of the people appointed judges
@c    that year, of whom the Lord said:  That iniquity came out from Babylon,
@c    from the ancient judges, that seemed to govern the people.

@c    13:6. These men frequented the house of Joakim, and all that hand any
@c    matters of judgment came to them.

@c    13:7. And when the people departed away at noon, Susanna went in, and
@c    walked in her husband's orchard.

@c    13:8. And the old men saw her going in every day, and walking:  and they
@c    were inflamed with lust towards her:

@c    13:9. And they perverted their own mind, and turned away their eyes,
@c    that they might not look unto heaven, nor remember just judgments.

@c    13:10. So they were both wounded with the love of her, yet they did not
@c    make known their grief one to the other.

@c    13:11. For they were ashamed to declare to one another their lust,
@c    being desirous to have to do with her:

@c    13:12. And they watched carefully every day to see her.  And one said to
@c    the other:

@c    13:13. Let us now go home, for it is dinner time.  So going out, they
@c    departed one from another.

@c    13:14. And turning back again, they came both to the same place:  and
@c    asking one another the cause, they acknowledged their lust:  and then
@c    they agreed together upon a time, when they might find her alone.

@c    13:15. And it fell out, as they watched a fit day, she went in on a
@c    time, as yesterday and the day before, with two maids only, and was
@c    desirous to wash herself in the orchard:  for it was hot weather.

@c    13:16. And there was nobody there, but the two old men that had hid
@c    themselves, and were beholding her.

@c    13:17. So she said to the maids:  Bring me oil, and washing balls, and
@c    shut the doors of the orchard, that I may wash me.

@c    13:18. And they did as she bade them:  and they shut the doors of the
@c    orchard, and went out by a back door to fetch what she had commanded
@c    them, and they knew not that the elders were hid within.

@c    13:19. Now when the maids were gone forth, the two elders arose, and
@c    ran to her, and said:

@c    13:20. Behold the doors of the orchard are shut, and nobody seeth us,
@c    and we are in love with thee:  wherefore consent to us, and lie with us.

@c    13:21. But if thou wilt not, we will bear witness against thee, that a
@c    young man was with thee, and therefore thou didst send away thy maids
@c    form thee.

@c    13:22. Susanna sighed, and said:  I am straitened on every side:  for if
@c    I do this thing, it is death to me:  and if I do it not, I shall not
@c    escape your hands.

@c    13:23. But it is better for me to fall into your hands without doing
@c    it, than to sin in the sight of the Lord.

@c    13:24. With that Susanna cried out with a loud voice:  and the elders
@c    also cried out against her.

@c    13:25. And one of them ran to the door of the orchard, and opened it.

@c    13:26. So when the servants of the house heard the cry in the orchard,
@c    they rushed in by the back door, to see what was the matter.

@c    13:27. But after the old men had spoken, the servants were greatly
@c    ashamed:  for never had there been any such word said of Susanna.  And on
@c    the next day,

@c    13:28. When the people were come to Joakim, her husband, the two elders
@c    also came full of wicked device against Susanna, to put her to death.

@c    13:29. And they said before the people:  Send to Susanna, daughter of
@c    Helcias, the wife of Joakim.  And presently they sent.

@c    13:30. And she came with her parents, and children and all her kindred.

@c    13:31. Now Susanna was exceeding delicate, and beautiful to behold.

@c    13:32. But those wicked men commanded that her face should be
@c    uncovered, (for she was covered) that so at least they might be
@c    satisfied with her beauty.

@c    13:33. Therefore her friends, and all her acquaintance wept.

@c    13:34. But the two elders rising up in the midst of the people, laid
@c    their hands upon her head.

@c    13:35. And she weeping, looked up to heaven, for her heart had
@c    confidence in the Lord.

@c    13:36. And the elders said:  As we walked in the orchard alone, this
@c    woman came in with two maids, and shut the doors of the orchard, ans
@c    sent away the maids from her.

@c    13:37. Then a young man that was there hid came to her, and lay with
@c    her.

@c    13:38. But we that were in a corner of the orchard, seeing this
@c    wickedness, ran up to them, and we saw them lie together.

@c    13:39. And him indeed we could not take, because he was stronger than
@c    us, and opening the doors, he leaped out:

@c    13:40. But having taken this woman, we asked who the young man was, but
@c    she would not tell us:  of this thing we are witnesses.

@c    13:41. The multitude believed them, as being the elders, and the judges
@c    of the people, and they condemned her to death.

@c    13:42. Then Susanna cried out with a loud voice, and said:  O eternal
@c    God, who knowest hidden things, who knowest all things before they come
@c    to pass,

@c    13:43. Thou knowest that they have borne false witness against me:  and
@c    behold I must die, whereas I have done none of these things, which
@c    these men have maliciously forged against me.

@c    13:44. And the Lord heard her voice.

@c    13:45. And when she was led to be put to death, the Lord raised up the
@c    holy spirit of a young boy, whose name was Daniel:

@c    13:46. And he cried out with a loud voice:  I am clear from the blood of
@c    this woman.

@c    13:47. Then all the people turning themselves towards him, said:  What
@c    meaneth this word that thou hast spoken?

@c    13:48. But he standing in the midst of them, said:  Are ye so foolish,
@c    ye children of Israel, that without examination or knowledge of the
@c    truth, you have condemned a daughter of Israel?

@c    13:49. Return to judgment, for they have borne false witness against
@c    her.

@c    13:50. So all the people turned again in haste, and the old men said to
@c    him:  Come, and sit thou down among us, and shew it us:  seeing God hath
@c    given thee the honour of old age.

@c    13:51. And Daniel said to the people:  Separate these two far from one
@c    another, and I will examine them.

@c    13:52. So when they were put asunder one from the other, he called one
@c    of them, and said to him:  O thou that art grown old in evil days, now
@c    are thy sins come out, which thou hast committed before:

@c    13:53. In judging unjust judgments, oppressing the innocent, and
@c    letting the guilty to go free, whereas the Lord saith:  The innocent and
@c    the just thou shalt not kill.

@c    13:54. Now then if thou sawest her, tell me under what tree thou sawest
@c    them conversing together:  He said:  Under a mastic tree.

@c    13:55. And Daniel said:  Well hast thou lied against thy own head:  for
@c    behold the angel of God having received the sentence of him, shall cut
@c    thee in two.

@c    13:56. And having put him aside, he commanded that the other should
@c    come, and he said to him:  O thou seed of Chanaan, and not of Juda,
@c    beauty hath deceived tee, and lust hath perverted thy heart:

@c    13:57. Thus did you do to the daughters of Israel, and they for fear
@c    conversed with you:  but a daughter of Juda would not abide your
@c    wickedness.

@c    13:58. Now, therefore, tell me, under what tree didst thou take them
@c    conversing together.  And he answered:  Under a holm tree.

@c    13:59. And Daniel said to him:  Well hast thou also lied against thy own
@c    head:  for the angel of the Lord waiteth with a sword to cut thee in
@c    two, and to destroy you.

@c    13:60. With that all the assembly cried out with a loud voice, and they
@c    blessed God, who saveth them that trust in him.

@c    13:61. And they rose up against the two elders, (for Daniel had
@c    convicted them of false witness by their own mouth) and they did to
@c    them as they had maliciously dealt against their neighbour,

@c    13:62. To fulfil the law of Moses:  and they put them to death, and
@c    innocent blood was saved in that day.

@c    13:63. But Helcias, and his wife, praised God, for their daughter,
@c    Susanna, with Joakim, her husband, and all her kindred, because there
@c    was no dishonesty found in her.

@c    13:64. And Daniel became great in the sight of the people from that
@c    day, and thence forward.

@c    13:65. And king Astyages was gathered to his fathers; and Cyrus, the
@c    Persian, received his kingdom.



@c    Daniel Chapter 14


@c    The history of Bel, and of the great serpent worshipped by the
@c    Babylonians.

@c    14:1. And Daniel was the king's guest, and was honoured above all his
@c    friends.

@c    The king's guest. . .It seems most probable, that the king here spoken
@c    of was Evilmerodach, the son and successor of Nabuchodonosor, and a
@c    great favourer of the Jews.

@c    14:2. Now the Babylonians had an idol called Bel:  and there was spent
@c    upon him every day twelve great measures of fine flour, and forty
@c    sheep, and six vessels of wine.

@c    14:3. The king also worshipped him, and went every day to adore him:
@c    but Daniel adored his God.  And the king said to him:  Why dost thou not
@c    adore Bel?

@c    14:4. And he answered, and said to him:  Because I do not worship idols
@c    made with hands, but the living God, that created heaven and earth, and
@c    hath power over all flesh.

@c    14:5. And the king said to him:  Doth not Bel seem to thee to be a
@c    living god?  Seest thou not how much he eateth and drinketh every day?

@c    14:6. Then Daniel smiled, and said:  O king, be not deceived:  for this
@c    is but clay within, and brass without, neither hath he eaten at any
@c    time.

@c    14:7. And the king being angry, called for his priests, and said to
@c    them:  If you tell me not who it is that eateth up these expenses, you
@c    shall die.

@c    14:8. But if you can shew that Bel eateth these things, Daniel shall
@c    die, because he hath blasphemed against Bel.  And Daniel said to the
@c    king:  Be it done according to thy word.

@c    14:9. Now the priests of Bel were seventy, beside their wives, and
@c    little ones, and children.  And the king went with Daniel into the
@c    temple of Bel.

@c    14:10. And the priests of Bel said:  Behold, we go out:  and do thou, O
@c    king, set on the meats, and make ready the wine, and shut the door
@c    fast, and seal it with thy own ring:

@c    14:11. And when thou comest in the morning, if thou findest not that
@c    Bel hath eaten up all, we will suffer death, or else Daniel, that hath
@c    lied against us.

@c    14:12. And they little regarded it, because they had made under the
@c    table a secret entrance, and they always came in by it, and consumed
@c    those things.

@c    14:13. So it came to pass after they were gone out, the king set the
@c    meats before Bel:  and Daniel commanded his servants, and they brought
@c    ashes, and he sifted them all over the temple before the king:  and
@c    going forth, they shut the door, and having sealed it with the king's
@c    ring, they departed.

@c    14:14. But the priests went in by night, according to their custom,
@c    with their wives, and their children:  and they eat and drank up all.

@c    14:15. And the king arose early in the morning, and Daniel with him.

@c    14:16. And the king said:  Are the seals whole, Daniel?  And he answered:
@c    They are whole, O king.

@c    14:17. And as soon as he had opened the door, the king looked upon the
@c    table, and cried out with a loud voice:  Great art thou, O Bel, and
@c    there is not any deceit with thee.

@c    14:18. And Daniel laughed:  and he held the king, that he should not go
@c    in:  and he said:  Behold the pavement, mark whose footsteps these are.

@c    14:19. And the king said:  I see the footsteps of men, and women, and
@c    children.  And the king was angry.

@c    14:20. Then he took the priests, and their wives, and their children:
@c    and they shewed him the private doors by which they came in, and
@c    consumed the things that were on the table.

@c    14:21. The king, therefore, put them to death, and delivered Bel into
@c    the power of Daniel:  who destroyed him and his temple.

@c    14:22. And there was a great dragon in that place, and the Babylonians
@c    worshipped him.

@c    14:23. And the king said to Daniel:  Behold, thou canst not say now,
@c    that this is not a living god:  adore him, therefore.

@c    14:24. And Daniel said:  I adore the Lord, my God:  for he is the living
@c    God:  but that is no living god.

@c    14:25. But give me leave, O king, and I will kill this dragon without
@c    sword or club.  And the king said, I give thee leave.

@c    14:26. Then Daniel took pitch, and fat, and hair, and boiled them
@c    together:  and he made lumps, and put them into the dragon's mouth, and
@c    the dragon burst asunder.  And he said:  Behold him whom you worship.

@c    14:27. And when the Babylonians had heard this, they took great
@c    indignation:  and being gathered together against the king, they said:
@c    The king is become a Jew.  He hath destroyed Bel, he hath killed the
@c    dragon, and he hath put the priests to death.

@c    14:28. And they came to the king, and said:  Deliver us Daniel, or else
@c    we will destroy thee and thy house.

@c    14:29. And the king saw that they pressed upon him violently:  and being
@c    constrained by necessity:  he delivered Daniel to them.

@c    14:30. And they cast him into the den of lions, and he was there six
@c    days.

@c    The den of lions. . .Daniel was twice cast into the den of lions; one
@c    under Darius the Mede, because he had transgressed the king's edict, by
@c    praying three times a day:  and another time under Evilmerodach by a
@c    sedition of the people.  This time he remained six days in the lions'
@c    den; the other time only one night.

@c    14:31. And in the den there were seven lions, and they had given to
@c    them two carcasses every day, and two sheep:  but then they were not
@c    given unto them, that they might devour Daniel.

@c    14:32. Now there was in Judea a prophet called Habacuc, and he had
@c    boiled pottage, and had broken bread in a bowl:  and was going into the
@c    field, to carry it to the reapers.

@c    Habacuc. . .The same, as some think whose prophecy is found among the
@c    lesser prophets but others believe him to be different.

@c    14:33. And the angel of the Lord said to Habacuc:  Carry the dinner
@c    which thou hast into Babylon, to Daniel, who is in the lions' den.

@c    14:34. And Habacuc said:  Lord, I never saw Babylon, nor do I know the
@c    den.

@c    14:35. And the angel of the Lord took him by the top of his head, and
@c    carried him by the hair of his head, and set him in Babylon, over the
@c    den, in the force of his spirit.

@c    14:36. And Habacuc cried, saying:  O Daniel, thou servant of God, take
@c    the dinner that God hath sent thee.

@c    14:37. And Daniel said, Thou hast remembered me, O God, and thou hast
@c    not forsaken them that love thee.

@c    14:38. And Daniel arose, and eat.  And the angel of the Lord presently
@c    set Habacuc again in his own place.

@c    14:39. And upon the seventh day the king came to bewail Daniel:  and he
@c    came to the den, and looked in, and behold Daniel was sitting in the
@c    midst of the lions.

@c    14:40. And the king cried out with a loud voice, saying:  Great art
@c    thou, O Lord, the God of Daniel.  And he drew him out of the lions' den.

@c    14:41. But those that had been the cause of his destruction, he cast
@c    into the den, and they were devoured in a moment before him.

@c    14:42. Then the king said:  Let all the inhabitants of the whole earth
@c    fear the God of Daniel:  for he is the Saviour, working signs, and
@c    wonders in the earth:  who hath delivered Daniel out of the lions' den.
