@c    ECCLESIASTES



@c    This Book is called Ecclesiastes, or The Preacher, (in Hebrew,
@c    Coheleth,) because in it, Solomon, as an excellent preacher, setteth
@c    forth the vanity of the things of this world:  to withdraw the hearts
@c    and affections of men from such empty toys.



@c    Ecclesiastes Chapter 1


@c    The vanity of all temporal things.

@c    1:1. The words of Ecclesiastes, the son of David, king of Jerusalem.

@c    1:2. Vanity of vanities, said Ecclesiastes:  vanity of vanities, and all
@c    is vanity.

@c    1:3. What hath a man more of all his labour, that he taketh under the
@c    sun?

@c    1:4. One generation passeth away, and another generation cometh:  but
@c    the earth standeth for ever.

@c    1:5. The sun riseth, and goeth down, and returneth to his place:  and
@c    there rising again,

@c    1:6. Maketh his round by the south, and turneth again to the north:  the
@c    spirit goeth forward surveying all places round about, and returneth to
@c    his circuits.

@c    1:7. All the rivers run into the sea, yet the sea doth not overflow:
@c    unto the place from whence the rivers come, they return, to flow again.

@c    1:8. All things are hard:  man cannot explain them by word.  The eye is
@c    not filled with seeing, neither is the ear filled with hearing.

@c    1:9. What is it that hath been?  the same thing that shall be.  What is
@c    it that hath been done?  the same that shall be done.

@c    1:10. Nothing under the sun is new, neither is any man able to say:
@c    Behold this is new:  for it hath already gone before in the ages that
@c    were before us.

@c    1:11. There is no remembrance of former things:  nor indeed of those
@c    things which hereafter are to come, shall there be any remembrance with
@c    them that shall be in the latter end.

@c    1:12. I Ecclesiastes was king over Israel in Jerusalem,

@c    1:13. And I proposed in my mind to seek and search out wisely
@c    concerning all things that are done under the sun.  This painful
@c    occupation hath God given to the children of men, to be exercised
@c    therein.

@c    1:14. I have seen all things that are done under the sun, and behold
@c    all is vanity, and vexation of spirit.

@c    1:15. The perverse are hard to be corrected, and the number of fools is
@c    infinite.

@c    1:16. I have spoken in my heart, saying:  Behold I am become great, and
@c    have gone beyond all in wisdom, that were before me in Jerusalem:  and
@c    my mind hath contemplated many things wisely, and I have learned.

@c    1:17. And I have given my heart to know prudence, and learning, and
@c    errors, and folly:  and I have perceived that in these also there was
@c    labour, and vexation of spirit,

@c    1:18. Because in much wisdom there is much indignation:  and he that
@c    addeth knowledge, addeth also labour.



@c    Ecclesiastes Chapter 2


@c    The vanity of pleasures, riches, and worldly labours.

@c    2:1. I said in my heart:  I will go, and abound with delights, and enjoy
@c    good things.  And I saw that this also was vanity.

@c    2:2. Laughter I counted error:  and to mirth I said:  Why art thou vainly
@c    deceived?

@c    2:3. I thought in my heart, to withdraw my flesh from wine, that I
@c    might turn my mind to wisdom, and might avoid folly, till I might see
@c    what was profitable for the children of men:  and what they ought to do
@c    under the sun, all the days of their life.

@c    2:4. I made me great works, I built me houses, and planted vineyards,

@c    2:5. I made gardens, and orchards, and set them with trees of all
@c    kinds,

@c    2:6. And I made me ponds of water, to water therewith the wood of the
@c    young trees,

@c    2:7. I got me menservants, and maidservants, and had a great family:
@c    and herds of oxen, and great flocks of sheep, above all that were
@c    before me in Jerusalem:

@c    2:8. I heaped together for myself silver and gold, and the wealth of
@c    kings, and provinces:  I made me singing men, and singing women, and the
@c    delights of the sons of men, cups and vessels to serve to pour out
@c    wine:

@c    2:9. And I surpassed in riches all that were before me in Jerusalem:  my
@c    wisdom also remained with me.

@c    2:10. And whatsoever my eyes desired, I refused them not:  and I
@c    withheld not my heart from enjoying every pleasure, and delighting
@c    itself in the things which I had prepared:  and esteemed this my
@c    portion, to make use of my own labour.

@c    2:11. And when I turned myself to all the works which my hands had
@c    wrought, and to the labours wherein I had laboured in vain, I saw in
@c    all things vanity, and vexation of mind, and that nothing was lasting
@c    under the sun.

@c    2:12. I passed further to behold wisdom, and errors and folly, (What is
@c    man, said I that he can follow the King his maker?)

@c    2:13. And I saw that wisdom excelled folly, as much as light differeth
@c    from darkness.

@c    2:14. The eyes of a wise man are in his head:  the fool walketh in
@c    darkness:  and I learned that they were to die both alike.

@c    2:15. And I said in my heart:  If the death of the fool and mine shall
@c    be one, what doth it avail me, that I have applied myself more to the
@c    study of wisdom?  And speaking with my own mind, I perceived that this
@c    also was vanity.

@c    2:16. For there shall be no remembrance of the wise no more than of the
@c    fool forever, and the times to come shall cover all things together
@c    with oblivion:  the learned dieth in like manner as the unlearned.

@c    2:17. And therefore I was weary of my life, when I saw that all things
@c    under the sun are evil, and all vanity and vexation of spirit.

@c    2:18. Again I hated all my application wherewith I had earnestly
@c    laboured under the sun, being like to have an heir after me,

@c    2:19. Whom I know not whether he will be a wise man or a fool, and he
@c    shall have rule over all my labours with which I have laboured and been
@c    solicitous:  and is there anything so vain?

@c    2:20. Wherefore I left off and my heart renounced labouring anymore
@c    under the sun.

@c    2:21. For when a man laboureth in wisdom, and knowledge, and
@c    carefulness, he leaveth what he hath gotten to an idle man:  so this
@c    also is vanity, and a great evil.

@c    2:22. For what profit shall a man have of all his labour, and vexation
@c    of spirit, with which he hath been tormented under the sun?

@c    2:23. All his days are full of sorrows and miseries, even in the night
@c    he doth not rest in mind:  and is not this vanity?

@c    2:24. Is it not better to eat and drink, and to shew his soul good
@c    things of his labours?  and this is from the hand of God.

@c    2:25. Who shall so feast and abound with delights as I?

@c    2:26. God hath given to a man that is good in his sight, wisdom, and
@c    knowledge, and joy:  but to the sinner he hath given vexation, and
@c    superfluous care, to heap up and to gather together, and to give it to
@c    him that hath pleased God:  but this also is vanity, and a fruitless
@c    solicitude of the mind.



@c    Ecclesiastes Chapter 3


@c    All human things are liable to perpetual changes.  We are to rest on
@c    God's providence, and cast away fruitless cares.

@c    3:1. All things have their season, and in their times all things pass
@c    under heaven.

@c    3:2. A time to be born and a time to die.  A time to plant, and a time
@c    to pluck up that which is planted.

@c    3:3. A time to kill, and a time to heal.  A time to destroy, and a time
@c    to build.

@c    3:4. A time to weep, and a time to laugh.  A time to mourn, and a time
@c    to dance.

@c    3:5. A time to scatter stones, and a time to gather.  A time to embrace,
@c    and a time to be far from embraces.

@c    3:6. A time to get, and a time to lose.  A time to keep, and a time to
@c    cast away.

@c    3:7. A time to rend, and a time to sew.  A time to keep silence, and a
@c    time to speak.

@c    3:8. A time of love, and a time of hatred.  A time of war, and a time of
@c    peace.

@c    3:9. What hath man more of his labour?

@c    3:10. I have seen the trouble, which God hath given the sons of men to
@c    be exercised in it.

@c    3:11. He hath made all things good in their time, and hath delivered
@c    the world to their consideration, so that man cannot find out the work
@c    which God hath made from the beginning to the end.

@c    3:12. And I have known that there was no better thing than to rejoice,
@c    and to do well in this life.

@c    3:13. For every man that eateth and drinketh, and seeth good of his
@c    labour, this is the gift of God.

@c    3:14. I have learned that all the works which God hath made, continue
@c    for ever:  we cannot add any thing, nor take away from those things
@c    which God hath made that he may be feared.

@c    3:15. That which hath been made, the same continueth:  the things that
@c    shall be, have already been:  and God restoreth that which is past.

@c    3:16. I saw under the sun in the place of judgment wickedness, and in
@c    the place of justice iniquity.

@c    3:17. And I said in my heart:  God shall judge both the just and the
@c    wicked, and then shall be the time of every thing.

@c    3:18. I said in my heart concerning the sons of men, that God would
@c    prove them, and shew them to be like beasts.

@c    3:19. Therefore the death of man, and of beasts is one, and the
@c    condition of them both is equal:  as man dieth, so they also die:  all
@c    things breathe alike, and man hath nothing more than beast:  all things
@c    are subject to vanity.

@c    Man hath nothing more, etc. . .Viz., as to the life of the body.

@c    3:20. And all things go to one place:  of earth they were made, and into
@c    earth they return together.

@c    3:21. Who knoweth if the spirit of the children of Adam ascend upward,
@c    and if the spirit of the beasts descend downward?

@c    Who knoweth, etc. . .Viz., experimentally:  since no one in this life can
@c    see a spirit.  But as to the spirit of the beasts, which is merely
@c    animal, and become extinct by the death of the beast, who can tell the
@c    manner it acts so as to give life and motion, and by death to descend
@c    downward, that is, to be no more?

@c    3:22. And I have found that nothing is better than for a man to rejoice
@c    in his work, and that this is his portion.  For who shall bring him to
@c    know the things that shall be after him?



@c    Ecclesiastes Chapter 4


@c    Other instances of human miseries.

@c    4:1. I turned myself to other things, and I saw the oppressions that
@c    are done under the sun, and the tears of the innocent, and they had no
@c    comforter; and they were not able to resist their violence, being
@c    destitute of help from any.

@c    4:2. And I praised the dead rather than the living:

@c    4:3. And I judged him happier than them both, that is not yet born, nor
@c    hath seen the evils that are done under the sun.

@c    4:4. Again I considered all the labours of men, and I remarked that
@c    their industries are exposed to the envy of their neighbour:  so in this
@c    also there is vanity, and fruitless care.

@c    4:5. The fool foldeth his hands together, and eateth his own flesh,
@c    saying:

@c    4:6. Better is a handful with rest, than both hands full with labour,
@c    and vexation of mind.

@c    4:7. Considering I found also another vanity under the sun:

@c    4:8. There is but one, and he hath not a second, no child, no brother,
@c    and yet he ceaseth not to labour, neither are his eyes satisfied with
@c    riches, neither doth he reflect, saying:  For whom do I labour, and
@c    defraud my soul of good things?  in this also is vanity, and a grievous
@c    vexation.

@c    4:9. It is better therefore that two should be together, than one:  for
@c    they have the advantage of their society:

@c    4:10. If one fall he shall be supported by the other:  woe to him that
@c    is alone, for when he falleth, he hath none to lift him up.

@c    4:11. And if two lie together, they shall warm one another:  how shall
@c    one alone be warmed?

@c    4:12. And if a man prevail against one, two shall withstand him:  a
@c    threefold cord is not easily broken.

@c    4:13. Better is a child that is poor and wise, than a king that is old
@c    and foolish, who knoweth not to foresee for hereafter.

@c    4:14. Because out of prison and chains sometimes a man cometh forth to
@c    a kingdom:  and another born king is consumed with poverty.

@c    4:15. I saw all men living, that walk under the sun with the second
@c    young man, who shall rise up in his place.

@c    4:16. The number of the people, of all that were before him is
@c    infinite:  and they that shall come afterwards, shall not rejoice in
@c    him:  but this also is vanity, and vexation of spirit.

@c    4:17. Keep thy foot, when thou goest into the house of God, and draw
@c    nigh to hear.  For much better is obedience, than the victims of fools,
@c    who know not what evil they do.



@c    Ecclesiastes Chapter 5


@c    Caution in words.  Vows are to be paid.  Riches are often pernicious:
@c    the moderate use of them is the gift of God.

@c    5:1. Speak not any thing rashly, and let not thy heart be hasty to
@c    utter a word before God.  For God is in heaven, and thou upon earth:
@c    therefore let thy words be few.

@c    5:2. Dreams follow many cares:  and in many words shall be found folly.

@c    5:3. If thou hast vowed any thing to God, defer not to pay it:  for an
@c    unfaithful and foolish promise displeaseth him:  but whatsoever thou
@c    hast vowed, pay it.

@c    5:4. And it is much better not to vow, than after a vow not to perform
@c    the things promised.

@c    5:5. Give not thy mouth to cause thy flesh to sin:  and say not before
@c    the angel:  There is no providence:  lest God be angry at thy words, and
@c    destroy all the works of thy hands.

@c    5:6. Where there are many dreams, there are many vanities, and words
@c    without number:  but do thou fear God.

@c    5:7. If thou shalt see the oppressions of the poor, and violent
@c    judgments, and justice perverted in the province, wonder not at this
@c    matter:  for he that is high hath another higher, and there are others
@c    still higher than these:

@c    5:8. Moreover there is the king that reigneth over all the land subject
@c    to him.

@c    5:9. A covetous man shall not be satisfied with money:  and he that
@c    loveth riches shall reap no fruit from them:  so this also is vanity.

@c    5:10. Where there are great riches, there are also many to eat them.
@c    And what doth it profit the owner, but that he seeth the riches with
@c    his eyes?

@c    5:11. Sleep is sweet to a labouring man, whether he eat little or much:
@c    but the fulness of the rich will not suffer him to sleep.

@c    5:12. There is also another grievous evil, which I have seen under the
@c    sun:  riches kept to the hurt of the owner.

@c    5:13. For they are lost with very great affliction:  he hath begotten a
@c    son, who shall be in extremity of want.

@c    5:14. As he came forth naked from his mother's womb, so shall he
@c    return, and shall take nothing away with him of his labour.

@c    5:15. A most deplorable evil:  as he came, so shall he return.  What then
@c    doth it profit him that he hath laboured for the wind?

@c    5:16. All the days of his life he eateth in darkness, and in many
@c    cares, and in misery, and sorrow.

@c    5:17. This therefore hath seemed good to me, that a man should eat and
@c    drink, and enjoy the fruit of his labour, wherewith he hath laboured
@c    under the sun, all the days of his life, which God hath given him:  and
@c    this is his portion.

@c    5:18. And every man to whom God hath given riches, and substance, and
@c    hath given him power to eat thereof, and to enjoy his portion, and to
@c    rejoice of his labour:  this is the gift of God.

@c    5:19. For he shall not much remember the days of his life, because God
@c    entertaineth his heart with delight.



@c    Ecclesiastes Chapter 6


@c    The misery of the covetous man.

@c    6:1. There is also another evil, which I have seen under the sun, and
@c    that frequent among men:

@c    6:2. A man to whom God hath given riches, and substance, and honour,
@c    and his soul wanteth nothing of all that he desireth:  yet God doth not
@c    give him power to eat thereof, but a stranger shall eat it up.  This is
@c    vanity and a great misery.

@c    6:3. If a man beget a hundred children, and live many years, and attain
@c    to a great age, and his soul make no use of the goods of his substance,
@c    and he be without burial:  of this man I pronounce, that the untimely
@c    born is better than he.

@c    6:4. For he came in vain, and goeth to darkness, and his name shall be
@c    wholly forgotten.

@c    6:5. He hath not seen the sun, nor known the distance of good and evil:

@c    6:6. Although he lived two thousand years, and hath not enjoyed good
@c    things:  do not all make haste to one place?

@c    6:7. All the labour of man is for his mouth, but his soul shall not be
@c    filled.

@c    6:8. What hath the wise man more than the fool?  and what the poor man,
@c    but to go thither, where there is life?

@c    6:9. Better it is to see what thou mayst desire, than to desire that
@c    which thou canst not know.  But this also is vanity, and presumption of
@c    spirit.

@c    6:10. He that shall be, his name is already called:  and it is known,
@c    that he is a man, and cannot contend in judgment with him that is
@c    stronger than himself.

@c    6:11. There are many words that have much vanity in disputing.



@c    Ecclesiastes Chapter 7


@c    Prescriptions against worldly vanities:  mortification, patience, and
@c    seeking wisdom.

@c    7:1. What needeth a man to seek things that are above him, whereas he
@c    knoweth not what is profitable for him in his life, in all the days of
@c    his pilgrimage, and the time that passeth like a shadow?  Or who can
@c    tell him what shall be after him under the sun?

@c    7:2. A good name is better than precious ointments:  and the day of
@c    death than the day of one's birth.

@c    7:3. It is better to go to the house of mourning, than to the house of
@c    feasting:  for in that we are put in mind of the end of all, and the
@c    living thinketh what is to come.

@c    7:4. Anger is better than laughter:  because by the sadness of the
@c    countenance the mind of the offender is corrected.

@c    Anger. . .That is, correction, or just wrath and zeal against evil.

@c    7:5. The heart of the wise is where there is mourning, and the heart of
@c    fools where there is mirth.

@c    7:6. It is better to be rebuked by a wise man, than to be deceived by
@c    the flattery of fools.

@c    7:7. For as the crackling of thorns burning under a pot, so is the
@c    laughter of a fool:  now this also is vanity.

@c    7:8. Oppression troubleth the wise, and shall destroy the strength of
@c    his heart.

@c    7:9. Better is the end of a speech than the beginning.  Better is the
@c    patient man than the presumptuous.

@c    7:10. Be not quickly angry:  for anger resteth in the bosom of a fool.

@c    7:11. Say not:  What thinkest thou is the cause that former times were
@c    better than they are now?  for this manner of question is foolish.

@c    7:12. Wisdom with riches is more profitable, and bringeth more
@c    advantage to them that see the sun.

@c    7:13. For as wisdom is a defence, so money is a defence:  but learning
@c    and wisdom excel in this, that they give life to him that possesseth
@c    them.

@c    7:14. Consider the works of God, that no man can correct whom he hath
@c    despised.

@c    7:15. In the good day enjoy good things, and beware beforehand of the
@c    evil day:  for God hath made both the one and the other, that man may
@c    not find against him any just complaint.

@c    7:16. These things also I saw in the days of my vanity:  A just man
@c    perisheth in his justice, and a wicked man liveth a long time in his
@c    wickedness.

@c    7:17. Be not over just:  and be not more wise than is necessary, lest
@c    thou become stupid.

@c    Over just. . .Viz., By an excessive rigour in censuring the ways of God
@c    in bearing with the wicked.

@c    7:18. Be not overmuch wicked:  and be not foolish, lest thou die before
@c    thy time.

@c    Be not overmuch wicked. . .That is, lest by the greatness of your sin
@c    you leave no room for mercy.

@c    7:19. It is good that thou shouldst hold up the just, yea and from him
@c    withdraw not thy hand:  for he that feareth God, neglecteth nothing.

@c    7:20. Wisdom hath strengthened the wise more than ten princes of the
@c    city.

@c    7:21. For there is no just man upon earth, that doth good, and sinneth
@c    not.

@c    7:22. But do not apply thy heart to all words that are spoken:  lest
@c    perhaps thou hear thy servant reviling thee.

@c    7:23. For thy conscience knoweth that thou also hast often spoken evil
@c    of others.

@c    7:24. I have tried all things in wisdom.  I have said:  I will be wise:
@c    and it departed farther from me,

@c    7:25. Much more than it was:  it is a great depth, who shall find it
@c    out?

@c    7:26. I have surveyed all things with my mind, to know, and consider,
@c    and seek out wisdom and reason:  and to know the wickedness of the fool,
@c    and the error of the imprudent:

@c    7:27. And I have found a woman more bitter than death, who is the
@c    hunter's snare, and her heart is a net, and her hands are bands.  He
@c    that pleaseth God shall escape from her:  but he that is a sinner, shall
@c    be caught by her.

@c    7:28. Lo this have I found, said Ecclesiastes, weighing one thing after
@c    another, that I might find out the account,

@c    7:29. Which yet my soul seeketh, and I have not found it.  One man among
@c    a thousand I have found, a woman among them all I have not found.

@c    7:30. Only this I have found, that God made man right, and he hath
@c    entangled himself with an infinity of questions.  Who is as the wise
@c    man?  and who hath known the resolution of the word?

@c    Of the word. . .That is, of this obscure and difficult matter.



@c    Ecclesiastes Chapter 8


@c    True wisdom is to observe God's commandments.  The ways of God are
@c    unsearchable.

@c    8:1. The wisdom of a man shineth in his countenance, and the most
@c    mighty will change his face.

@c    8:2. I observe the mouth of the king, and the commandments of the oath
@c    of God.

@c    8:3. Be not hasty to depart from his face, and do not continue in an
@c    evil work:  for he will do all that pleaseth him:

@c    8:4. And his word is full of power:  neither can any man say to him:  Why
@c    dost thou so?

@c    8:5. He that keepeth the commandment, shall find no evil.  The heart of
@c    a wiser man understandeth time and answer.

@c    8:6. There is a time and opportunity for every business, and great
@c    affliction for man:

@c    8:7. Because he is ignorant of things past, and things to come he
@c    cannot know by any messenger.

@c    8:8. It is not in man's power to stop the spirit, neither hath he power
@c    in the day of death, neither is he suffered to rest when war is at
@c    hand, neither shall wickedness save the wicked.

@c    8:9. All these things I have considered, and applied my heart to all
@c    the works that are done under the sun.  Sometimes one man ruleth over
@c    another to his own hurt.

@c    8:10. I saw the wicked buried:  who also when they were yet living were
@c    in the holy place, and were praised in the city as men of just works:
@c    but this also is vanity.

@c    8:11. For because sentence is not speedily pronounced against the evil,
@c    the children of men commit evils without any fear.

@c    8:12. But though a sinner do evil a hundred times, and by patience be
@c    borne withal, I know from thence that it shall be well with them that
@c    fear God, who dread his face.

@c    8:13. But let it not be well with the wicked, neither let his days be
@c    prolonged, but as a shadow let them pass away that fear not the face of
@c    the Lord.

@c    8:14. There is also another vanity, which is done upon the earth.  There
@c    are just men to whom evils happen, as though they had done the works of
@c    the wicked:  and there are wicked men, who are as secure as though they
@c    had the deeds of the just:  but this also I judge most vain.

@c    8:15. Therefore I commended mirth, because there was no good for a man
@c    under the sun, but to eat, and drink, and be merry, and that he should
@c    take nothing else with him of his labour in the days of his life, which
@c    God hath given him under the sun.

@c    No good for a man, etc. . .Some commentators think the wise man here
@c    speaks in the person of the libertine:  representing the objections of
@c    these men against divine providence, and the inferences they draw from
@c    thence, which he takes care afterwards to refute.  But it may also be
@c    said, that his meaning is to commend the moderate use of the goods of
@c    this world, preferably to the cares and solicitudes of worldlings,
@c    their attachment to vanity and curiosity, and presumptuously diving
@c    into the unsearchable ways of divine providence.

@c    8:16. And I applied my heart to know wisdom, and to understand the
@c    distraction that is upon earth:  for there are some that day and night
@c    take no sleep with their eyes.

@c    8:17. And I understood that man can find no reason of all those works
@c    of God that are done under the sun:  and the more he shall labour to
@c    seek, so much the less shall he find:  yea, though the wise man shall
@c    say, that he knoweth it, he shall not be able to find it.



@c    Ecclesiastes Chapter 9


@c    Man knows not certainty that he is in God's grace.  After death no more
@c    work or merit.

@c    9:1. All these things have I considered in my heart, that I might
@c    carefully understand them:  there are just men and wise men, and their
@c    works are in the hand of God:  and yet man knoweth not whether he be
@c    worthy of love, or hatred:

@c    9:2. But all things are kept uncertain for the time to come, because
@c    all things equally happen to the just and to the wicked, to the good
@c    and to the evil, to the clean and to the unclean, to him that offereth
@c    victims, and to him that despiseth sacrifices.  As the good is, so also
@c    is the sinner:  as the perjured, so he also that sweareth truth.

@c    9:3. This is a very great evil among all things that are done under the
@c    sun, that the same things happen to all men:  whereby also the hearts of
@c    the children of men are filled with evil, and with contempt while they
@c    live, and afterwards they shall be brought down to hell.

@c    9:4. There is no man that liveth always, or that hopeth for this:  a
@c    living dog is better than a dead lion.

@c    9:5. For the living know that they shall die, but the dead know nothing
@c    more, neither have they a reward any more:  for the memory of them is
@c    forgotten.

@c    Know nothing more. . .Viz., as to the transactions of this world, in
@c    which they have now no part, unless it be revealed to them; neither
@c    have they any knowledge or power now of doing any thing to secure their
@c    eternal state, (if they have not taken care of it in their lifetime:)
@c    nor can they now procure themselves any good, as the living always may
@c    do, by the grace of God.

@c    9:6. Their love also, and their hatred, and their envy are all
@c    perished, neither have they any part in this world, and in the work
@c    that is done under the sun.

@c    9:7. Go then, and eat thy bread with joy, and drink thy wine with
@c    gladness:  because thy works please God.

@c    9:8. At all times let thy garments be white, and let not oil depart
@c    from thy head.

@c    9:9. Live joyfully with the wife whom thou lovest, all the days of thy
@c    unsteady life, which are given to thee under the sun, all the time of
@c    thy vanity:  for this is thy portion in life, and in thy labour
@c    wherewith thou labourest under the sun.

@c    9:10. Whatsoever thy hand is able to do, do it earnestly:  for neither
@c    work, nor reason, nor wisdom, nor knowledge shall be in hell, whither
@c    thou art hastening.

@c    9:11. I turned me to another thing, and I saw that under the sun, the
@c    race is not to the swift, nor the battle to the strong, nor bread to
@c    the wise, nor riches to the learned, nor favour to the skilful:  but
@c    time and chance in all.

@c    9:12. Man knoweth not his own end:  but as fishes are taken with the
@c    hook, and as birds are caught with the snare, so men are taken in the
@c    evil time, when it shall suddenly come upon them.

@c    9:13. This wisdom also I have seen under the sun, and it seemed to me
@c    to be very great:

@c    9:14. A little city, and few men in it:  there came against it a great
@c    king, and invested it, and built bulwarks round about it, and the siege
@c    was perfect.

@c    9:15. Now there was found in it a man poor and wise, and he delivered
@c    the city by his wisdom, and no man afterward remembered that poor man.

@c    9:16. And I said that wisdom is better than strength:  how then is the
@c    wisdom of the poor man slighted, and his words not heard?

@c    9:17. The words of the wise are heard in silence, more than the cry of
@c    a prince among fools.

@c    9:18. Better is wisdom, than weapons of war:  and he that shall offend
@c    in one, shall lose many good things.



@c    Ecclesiastes Chapter 10


@c    Observations on wisdom and folly, ambition and detraction.

@c    10:1. Dying flies spoil the sweetness of the ointment.  Wisdom and glory
@c    is more precious than a small and shortlived folly.

@c    10:2. The heart of a wise man is in his right hand, and the heart of a
@c    fool is in his left hand.

@c    10:3. Yea, and the fool when he walketh in the way, whereas he himself
@c    is a fool, esteemeth all men fools.

@c    10:4. If the spirit of him that hath power, ascend upon thee, leave not
@c    thy place:  because care will make the greatest sins to cease.

@c    10:5. There is an evil that I have seen under the sun, as it were by an
@c    error proceeding from the face of the prince:

@c    10:6. A fool set in high dignity, and the rich sitting beneath.

@c    10:7. I have seen servants upon horses:  and princes walking on the
@c    ground as servants.

@c    10:8. He that diggeth a pit, shall fall into it:  and he that breaketh a
@c    hedge, a serpent shall bite him.

@c    10:9. He that removeth stones, shall be hurt by them:  and he that
@c    cutteth trees, shall be wounded by them.

@c    10:10. If the iron be blunt, and be not as before, but be made blunt,
@c    with much labour it shall be sharpened:  and after industry shall follow
@c    wisdom.

@c    10:11. If a serpent bite in silence, he is nothing better that
@c    backbiteth secretly.

@c    10:12. The words of the mouth of a wise man are grace:  but the lips of
@c    a fool shall throw him down headlong.

@c    10:13. The beginning of his words is folly, and the end of his talk is
@c    a mischievous error.

@c    10:14. A fool multiplieth words.  A man cannot tell what hath been
@c    before him:  and what shall be after him, who can tell him?

@c    10:15. The labour of fools shall afflict them that know not how to go
@c    to the city.

@c    10:16. Woe to thee, O land, when thy king is a child, and when the
@c    princes eat in the morning.

@c    10:17. Blessed is the land, whose king is noble, and whose princes eat
@c    in due season for refreshment, and not for riotousness.

@c    10:18. By slothfulness a building shall be brought down, and through
@c    the weakness of hands, the house shall drop through.

@c    10:19. For laughter they make bread, and wine that the living may
@c    feast:  and all things obey money.

@c    10:20. Detract not the king, no not in thy thought; and speak not evil
@c    of the rich man in thy private chamber:  because even the birds of the
@c    air will carry thy voice, and he that hath wings will tell what thou
@c    hast said.



@c    Ecclesiastes Chapter 11


@c    Exhortation to works of mercy, while we have time, to diligence in
@c    good, and to the remembrance of death and judgment.

@c    11:1. Cast thy bread upon the running waters:  for after a long time
@c    thou shalt find it again.

@c    11:2. Give a portion to seven, and also to eight:  for thou knowest not
@c    what evil shall be upon the earth.

@c    11:3. If the clouds be full, they will pour out rain upon the earth.  If
@c    the tree fall to the south, or to the north, in what place soever it
@c    shall fall, there shall it be.

@c    If the tree fall, etc. . .The state of the soul is unchangeable when
@c    once she comes to heaven or hell:  and a soul that departs this life in
@c    the state of grace, shall never fall from grace:  as on the other side,
@c    a soul that dies out of the state of grace, shall never come to it.  But
@c    this does not exclude a place of temporal punishments for such souls as
@c    die in the state of grace:  yet not so as to be entirely pure:  and
@c    therefore they shall be saved, indeed, yet so as by fire.  1 Cor. 3.13,
@c    14, 15.

@c    11:4. He that observeth the wind, shall not sow:  and he that
@c    considereth the clouds, shall never reap.

@c    11:5. As thou knowest not what is the way of the spirit, nor how the
@c    bones are joined together in the womb of her that is with child:  so
@c    thou knowest not the works of God, who is the maker of all.

@c    11:6. In the morning sow thy seed, and in the evening let not thy hand
@c    cease:  for thou knowest not which may rather spring up, this or that:
@c    and if both together, it shall be the better.

@c    11:7. The light is sweet, and it is delightful for the eyes to see the
@c    sun.

@c    11:8. If a man live many years, and have rejoiced in them all, he must
@c    remember the darksome time, and the many days:  which when they shall
@c    come, the things past shall be accused of vanity.

@c    11:9. Rejoice therefore, O young man, in thy youth, and let thy heart
@c    be in that which is good in the days of thy youth, and walk in the ways
@c    of thy heart, and in the sight of thy eyes:  and know that for all these
@c    God will bring thee into judgment.

@c    11:10. Remove anger from thy heart, and put away evil from thy flesh.
@c    For youth and pleasure are vain.



@c    Ecclesiastes Chapter 12


@c    The Creator is to be remembered in the days of our youth:  all worldly
@c    things are vain:  we should fear God and keep his commandments.

@c    12:1. Remember thy Creator in the days of thy youth, before the time of
@c    affliction come, and the years draw nigh of which thou shalt say:  They
@c    please me not:

@c    12:2. Before the sun, and the light, and the moon, and the stars be
@c    darkened, and the clouds return after the rain:

@c    Before the sun, etc. . .That is, before old age:  the effects of which
@c    upon all the senses and faculties are described in the following
@c    verses, under a variety of figures.

@c    12:3. When the keepers of the house shall tremble, and the strong men
@c    shall stagger, and the grinders shall be idle in a small number, and
@c    they that look through the holes shall be darkened:

@c    12:4. And they shall shut the doors in the street, when the grinder's
@c    voice shall be low, and they shall rise up at the voice of the bird,
@c    and all the daughters of music shall grow deaf.

@c    12:5. And they shall fear high things, and they shall be afraid in the
@c    way, the almond tree shall flourish, the locust shall be made fat, and
@c    the caper tree shall be destroyed:  because man shall go into the house
@c    of his eternity, and the mourners shall go round about in the street.

@c    12:6. Before the silver cord be broken, and the golden fillet shrink
@c    back, and the pitcher be crushed at the fountain, and the wheel be
@c    broken upon the cistern,

@c    12:7. And the dust return into its earth, from whence it was, and the
@c    spirit return to God, who gave it.

@c    12:8. Vanity of vanities, said Ecclesiastes, and all things are vanity.

@c    12:9. And whereas Ecclesiastes was very wise, he taught the people, and
@c    declared the things that he had done:  and seeking out, he set forth
@c    many parables.

@c    12:10. He sought profitable words, and wrote words most right, and full
@c    of truth.

@c    12:11. The words of the wise are as goads, and as nails deeply fastened
@c    in, which by the counsel of masters are given from one shepherd.

@c    12:12. More than these, my son, require not.  Of making many books there
@c    is no end:  and much study is an affliction of the flesh.

@c    12:13. Let us all hear together the conclusion of the discourse.  Fear
@c    God, and keep his commandments:  for this is all man:

@c    All man. . .The whole business and duty of man.

@c    12:14. And all things that are done, God will bring into judgment for
@c    every error, whether it be good or evil.

@c    Error. . .Or, hidden and secret thing.
