@c    ECCLESIASTICUS



@c    This Book is so called from a Greek word that signifies a preacher:
@c    because, like an excellent preacher, it gives admirable lessons of all
@c    virtues.  The author was Jesus the son of Sirach of Jerusalem, who
@c    flourished about two hundred years before Christ.  As it was written
@c    after the time of Esdras, it is not in the Jewish canon; but is
@c    received as canonical and divine by the Catholic Church, instructed by
@c    apostolical tradition, and directed by the spirit of God.  It was first
@c    written in the Hebrew, but afterwards translated into Greek, by another
@c    Jesus, the grandson of the author, whose prologue to this book is the
@c    following:



@c    THE PROLOGUE.


@c    The knowledge of many and great things hath been shewn us by the law,
@c    and the prophets, and others that have followed them:  for which things
@c    Israel is to be commended for doctrine and wisdom, because not only
@c    they that speak must needs be skilful, but strangers also, both
@c    speaking and writing, may by their means become most learned.  My
@c    grandfather Jesus, after he had much given himself to a diligent
@c    reading of the law, and the prophets, and other books, that were
@c    delivered to us from our fathers, had a mind also to write something
@c    himself, pertaining to doctrine and wisdom; that such as are desirous
@c    to learn, and are made knowing in these things, may be more and more
@c    attentive in mind, and be strengthened to live according to the law.  I
@c    entreat you therefore to come with benevolence, and to read with
@c    attention, and to pardon us for those things wherein we may seem, while
@c    we follow the image of wisdom, to come short in the composition of
@c    words; for the Hebrew words have not the same force in them when
@c    translated into another tongue.  And not only these, but the law also
@c    itself, and the prophets, and the rest of the books, have no small
@c    difference, when they are spoken in their own language.  For in the
@c    eight and thirtieth year coming into Egypt, when Ptolemy Evergetes was
@c    king, and continuing there a long time, I found there books left, of no
@c    small nor contemptible learning.  Therefore I thought it good, and
@c    necessary for me to bestow some diligence and labour to interpret this
@c    book; and with much watching and study in some space of time, I brought
@c    the book to an end, and set it forth for the service of them that are
@c    willing to apply their mind, and to learn how they ought to conduct
@c    themselves, who purpose to lead their life according to the law of the
@c    Lord.



@c    Ecclesiasticus Chapter 1


@c    All wisdom is from God, and is given to them that fear and love God.

@c    1:1. All wisdom is from the Lord God, and hath been always with him,
@c    and is before all time.

@c    1:2. Who hath numbered the sand of the sea, and the drops of rain, and
@c    the days of the world?  Who hath measured the height of heaven, and the
@c    breadth of the earth, and the depth of the abyss?

@c    1:3. Who hath searched out the wisdom of God that goeth before all
@c    things?

@c    1:4. Wisdom hath been created before all things, and the understanding
@c    of prudence from everlasting.

@c    1:5. The word of God on high is the fountain of wisdom, and her ways
@c    are everlasting commandments.

@c    1:6. To whom hath the root of wisdom been revealed, and who hath known
@c    her wise counsels?

@c    1:7. To whom hath the discipline of wisdom been revealed and made
@c    manifest?  and who hath understood the multiplicity of her steps?

@c    1:8. There is one most high Creator Almighty, and a powerful king, and
@c    greatly to be feared, who sitteth upon his throne, and is the God of
@c    dominion.

@c    1:9. He created her in the Holy Ghost, and saw her, and numbered her,
@c    and measured her.

@c    1:10. And he poured her out upon all his works, and upon all flesh
@c    according to his gift, and hath given her to them that love him.

@c    1:11. The fear of the Lord is honour, and glory, and gladness, and a
@c    crown of joy.

@c    1:12. The fear of the Lord shall delight the heart, and shall give joy,
@c    and gladness, and length of days.

@c    1:13. With him that feareth the Lord, it shall go well in the latter
@c    end, and in the day of his death he shall be blessed.

@c    1:14. The love of God is honourable wisdom.

@c    1:15. And they to whom she shall shew herself love her by the sight,
@c    and by the knowledge of her great works.

@c    1:16. The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom, and was created
@c    with the faithful in the womb, it walketh with chosen women, and is
@c    known with the just and faithful.

@c    1:17. The fear of the Lord is the religiousness of knowledge.

@c    1:18. Religiousness shall keep and justify the heart, it shall give joy
@c    and gladness.

@c    1:19. It shall go well with him that feareth the Lord, and in the days
@c    of his end he shall be blessed.

@c    1:20. To fear God is the fulness of wisdom, and fulness is from the
@c    fruits thereof.

@c    1:21. She shall fill all her house with her increase, and the
@c    storehouses with her treasures.

@c    1:22. The fear of the Lord is a crown of wisdom, filling up peace and
@c    the fruit of salvation:

@c    1:23. And it hath seen, and numbered her:  but both are the gifts of
@c    God.

@c    1:24. Wisdom shall distribute knowledge, and understanding of prudence:
@c    and exalteth the glory of them that hold her.

@c    1:25. The root of wisdom is to fear the Lord:  and the branches thereof
@c    are long-lived.

@c    1:26. In the treasures of wisdom is understanding, and religiousness of
@c    knowledge:  but to sinners wisdom is an abomination.

@c    1:27. The fear of the Lord driveth out sin:

@c    1:28. For he that is without fear, cannot be justified:  for the wrath
@c    of his high spirits is his ruin.

@c    1:29. A patient man shall bear for a time, and afterwards joy shall be
@c    restored to him.

@c    1:30. A good understanding will hide his words for a time, and the lips
@c    of many shall declare his wisdom.

@c    1:31. In the treasures of wisdom is the signification of discipline:

@c    1:32. But the worship of God is an abomination to a sinner.

@c    1:33. Son, if thou desire wisdom, keep justice, and God will give her
@c    to thee.

@c    1:34. For the fear of the Lord is wisdom and discipline:  and that which
@c    is agreeable to him,

@c    1:35. Is faith, and meekness:  and he will fill up his treasures.

@c    1:36. Be not incredulous to the fear of the Lord:  and come not to him
@c    with a double heart.

@c    1:37. Be not a hypocrite in the sight of men, and let not thy lips be a
@c    stumblingblock to thee.

@c    1:38. Watch over them, lest thou fall, and bring dishonour upon thy
@c    soul,

@c    1:39. And God discover thy secrets, and cast thee down in the midst of
@c    the congregation.

@c    1:40. Because thou camest to the Lord wickedly, and thy heart is full
@c    of guile and deceit.



@c    Ecclesiasticus Chapter 2


@c    God's servants must look for temptations:  and must arm themselves with
@c    patience and confidence in God.

@c    2:1. Son, when thou comest to the service of God, stand in justice and
@c    in fear, and prepare thy soul for temptation.

@c    2:2. Humble thy heart, and endure:  incline thy ear, and receive the
@c    words of understanding:  and make not haste in the time of clouds.

@c    2:3. Wait on God with patience:  join thyself to God, and endure, that
@c    thy life may be increased in the latter end.

@c    2:4. Take all that shall be brought upon thee:  and in thy sorrow
@c    endure, and in thy humiliation keep patience.

@c    2:5. For gold and silver are tried in the fire, but acceptable men in
@c    the furnace of humiliation.

@c    2:6. Believe God, and he will recover thee:  and direct thy way, and
@c    trust in him.  Keep his fear, and grow old therein.

@c    2:7. Ye that fear the Lord, wait for his mercy:  and go not aside from
@c    him lest ye fall.

@c    2:8. Ye that fear the Lord, believe him:  and your reward shall not be
@c    made void.

@c    2:9. Ye that fear the Lord hope in him, and mercy shall come to you for
@c    your delight.

@c    2:10. Ye that fear the Lord, love him, and your hearts shall be
@c    enlightened.

@c    2:11. My children behold the generations of men:  and know ye that no
@c    one hath hoped in the Lord, and hath been confounded.

@c    2:12. For who hath continued in his commandment, and hath been
@c    forsaken?  or who hath called upon him, and he despised him?

@c    2:13. For God is compassionate and merciful, and will forgive sins in
@c    the day of tribulation:  and he is a protector to all that seek him in
@c    truth.

@c    2:14. Woe to them that are of a double heart and to wicked lips, and to
@c    the hands that do evil, and to the sinner that goeth on the earth two
@c    ways.

@c    2:15. Woe to them that are fainthearted, who believe not God:  and
@c    therefore they shall not be protected by him.

@c    2:16. Woe to them that have lost patience, and that have forsaken the
@c    right ways, and have gone aside into crooked ways.

@c    2:17. And what will they do, when the Lord shall begin to examine?

@c    2:18. They that fear the Lord, will not be incredulous to his word:  and
@c    they that love him, will keep his way.

@c    2:19. They that fear the Lord, will seek after the things that are well
@c    pleasing to him:  and they that love him, shall be filled with his law.

@c    2:20. They that fear the Lord, will prepare their hearts, and in his
@c    sight will sanctify their souls,

@c    2:21. They that fear the Lord, keep his commandments, and will have
@c    patience even until his visitation,

@c    2:22. Saying:  If we do not penance, we shall fall into the hands of the
@c    Lord, and not into the hands of men.

@c    2:23. For according to his greatness, so also is his mercy with him.



@c    Ecclesiasticus Chapter 3


@c    Lessons concerning the honour of parents, and humility, and avoiding
@c    curiosity.

@c    3:1. The sons of wisdom are the church of the just:  and their
@c    generation, obedience and love.

@c    3:2. Children, hear the judgment of your father, and so do that you may
@c    be saved.

@c    3:3. For God hath made the father honourable to the children:  and
@c    seeking the judgment of the mothers, hath confirmed it upon the
@c    children.

@c    3:4. He that loveth God, shall obtain pardon for his sins by prayer,
@c    and shall refrain himself from them, and shall be heard in the prayer
@c    of days.

@c    3:5. And he that honoureth his mother is as one that layeth up a
@c    treasure.

@c    3:6. He that honoureth his father shall have joy in his own children,
@c    and in the day of his prayer he shall be heard.

@c    3:7. He that honoureth his father shall enjoy a long life:  and he that
@c    obeyeth the father, shall be a comfort to his mother.

@c    3:8. He that feareth the Lord, honoureth his parents, and will serve
@c    them as his masters that brought him into the world.

@c    3:9. Honour thy father, in work and word, and all patience,

@c    3:10. That a blessing may come upon thee from him, and his blessing may
@c    remain in the latter end.

@c    3:11. The father's blessing establisheth the houses of the children:
@c    but the mother's curse rooteth up the foundation.

@c    3:12. Glory not in the dishonour of thy father:  for his shame is no
@c    glory to thee.

@c    3:13. For the glory of a man is from the honour of his father, and a
@c    father without honour is the disgrace of the son.

@c    3:14. Son, support the old age of thy father, and grieve him not in his
@c    life;

@c    3:15. And if his understanding fail, have patience with him, and
@c    despise him not when thou art in thy strength:  for the relieving of the
@c    father shall not be forgotten.

@c    3:16. For good shall be repaid to thee for the sin of thy mother.

@c    3:17. And in justice thou shalt be built up, and in the day of
@c    affliction thou shalt be remembered:  and thy sins shall melt away as
@c    the ice in the fair warm weather.

@c    3:18. Of what an evil fame is he that forsaketh his father:  and he is
@c    cursed of God that angereth his mother.

@c    3:19. My son, do thy works in meekness, and thou shalt be beloved above
@c    the glory of men.

@c    3:20. The greater thou art, the more humble thyself in all things, and
@c    thou shalt find grace before God:

@c    3:21. For great is the power of God alone, and he is honoured by the
@c    humble.

@c    3:22. Seek not the things that are too high for thee, and search not
@c    into things above thy ability:  but the things that God hath commanded
@c    thee, think on them always, and in many of his works be not curious.

@c    3:23. For it is not necessary for thee to see with thy eyes those
@c    things that are hid.

@c    3:24. In unnecessary matters be not over curious, and in many of his
@c    works thou shalt not be inquisitive.

@c    3:25. For many things are shewn to thee above the understanding of men.

@c    3:26. And the suspicion of them hath deceived many, and hath detained
@c    their minds in vanity.

@c    3:27. A hard heart shall fear evil at the last:  and he that loveth
@c    danger shall perish in it.

@c    3:28. A heart that goeth two ways shall not have success, and the
@c    perverse of heart shall be scandalized therein.

@c    3:29. A wicked heart shall be laden with sorrows, and the sinner will
@c    add sin to sin.

@c    3:30. The congregation of the proud shall not be healed:  for the plant
@c    of wickedness shall take root in them, and it shall not be perceived.

@c    3:31. The heart of the wise is understood in wisdom, and a good ear
@c    will hear wisdom with all desire.

@c    3:32. A wise heart, and which hath understanding, will abstain from
@c    sins, and in the works of justice shall have success.

@c    3:33. Water quencheth a flaming fire, and alms resisteth sins:

@c    3:34. And God provideth for him that sheweth favour:  he remembereth him
@c    afterwards, and in the time of his fall he shall find a sure stay.



@c    Ecclesiasticus Chapter 4


@c    An exhortation to works of mercy, and to the love of wisdom.

@c    4:1. Son, defraud not the poor of alms, and turn not away thy eyes from
@c    the poor.

@c    4:2. Despise not the hungry soul:  and provoke not the poor in his want.

@c    4:3. Afflict not the heart of the needy, and defer not to gibe to him
@c    that is in distress.

@c    4:4. Reject not the petition of the afflicted:  and turn not away thy
@c    face from the needy.

@c    4:5. Turn not away thy eyes from the poor for fear of anger:  and leave
@c    not to them that ask of thee to curse thee behind thy back.

@c    4:6. For the prayer of him that curseth thee in the bitterness of his
@c    soul, shall be heard, for he that made him will hear him.

@c    4:7. Make thyself affable to the congregation of the poor, and humble
@c    thy soul to the ancient, and bow thy head to a great man.

@c    4:8. Bow down thy ear cheerfully to the poor, and pay what thou owest,
@c    and answer him peaceable words with mildness.

@c    4:9. Deliver him that suffereth wrong out of the hand of the proud:  and
@c    be not fainthearted in thy soul.

@c    4:10. In judging be merciful to the fatherless as a father, and as a
@c    husband to their mother.

@c    4:11. And thou shalt be as the obedient son of the most High, and he
@c    will have mercy on thee more than a mother.

@c    4:12. Wisdom inspireth life into her children, and protecteth them that
@c    seek after her, and will go before them in the way of justice.

@c    4:13. And he that loveth her, loveth life:  and they that watch for her,
@c    shall embrace her sweetness.

@c    4:14. They that hold her fast, shall inherit life:  and whithersoever
@c    she entereth, God will give a blessing.

@c    4:15. They that serve her, shall be servants to the holy one:  and God
@c    loveth them that love her.

@c    4:16. He that hearkeneth to her, shall judge nations:  and he that
@c    looketh upon her, shall remain secure.

@c    4:17. If he trust to her, he shall inherit her, and his generation
@c    shall be in assurance.

@c    4:18. For she walketh with him in temptation, and at the first she
@c    chooseth him.

@c    In temptation, etc. . .The meaning is, that before wisdom will choose
@c    any for her favourite, she will try them by leading them through
@c    contradictions, afflictions, and temptations, the usual noviceship of
@c    the children of God.

@c    4:19. She will bring upon him fear and dread and trial:  and she will
@c    scourge him with the affliction of her discipline, till she try him by
@c    her laws, and trust his soul.

@c    4:20. Then she will strengthen him, and make a straight way to him, and
@c    give him joy,

@c    4:21. And will disclose her secrets to him, and will heap upon him
@c    treasures of knowledge and understanding of justice.

@c    4:22. But if he go astray, she will forsake him, and deliver him into
@c    the hands of his enemy.

@c    4:23. Son, observe the time, and fly from evil.

@c    4:24. For thy soul be not ashamed to say the truth.

@c    4:25. For there is a shame that bringeth sin, and there is a shame that
@c    bringeth glory and grace.

@c    4:26. Accept no person against thy own person, nor against thy soul a
@c    lie.

@c    4:27. Reverence not thy neighbour in his fall:

@c    4:28. And refrain not to speak in the time of salvation.  Hide not thy
@c    wisdom in her beauty.

@c    4:29. For by the tongue wisdom is discerned:  and understanding, and
@c    knowledge, and learning by the word of the wise, and steadfastness in
@c    the works of justice.

@c    4:30. In nowise speak against the truth, but be ashamed of the lie of
@c    thy ignorance.

@c    4:31. Be not ashamed to confess thy sins, but submit not thyself to
@c    every man for sin.

@c    4:32. Resist not against the face of the mighty, and do not strive
@c    against the stream of the river.

@c    4:33. Strive for justice for thy soul, and even unto death fight for
@c    justice, and God will overthrow thy enemies for thee.

@c    4:34. Be not hasty in thy tongue:  and slack and remiss in thy works.

@c    4:35. Be not as a lion in thy house, terrifying them of thy household,
@c    and oppressing them that are under thee.

@c    4:36. Let not thy hand be stretched out to receive, and shut when thou
@c    shouldst give.



@c    Ecclesiasticus Chapter 5


@c    We must not presume of our wealth or strength:  nor of the mercy of God,
@c    to go on in sin:  we must be steadfast in virtue and truth.

@c    5:1. Set not thy heart upon unjust possessions, and say not:  I have
@c    enough to live on:  for it shall be of no service in the time of
@c    vengeance and darkness.

@c    5:2. Follow not in thy strength the desires of thy heart:

@c    5:3. And say not:  How mighty am I?  and who shall bring me under for my
@c    deeds?  for God will surely take revenge.

@c    5:4. Say not:  I have sinned, and what harm hath befallen me?  for the
@c    most High is a patient rewarder.

@c    5:5. Be not without fear about sin forgiven, and add not sin upon sin:

@c    5:6. And say not:  The mercy of the Lord is great, he will have mercy on
@c    the multitude of my sins.

@c    5:7. For mercy and wrath quickly come from him, and his wrath looketh
@c    upon sinners.

@c    5:8. Delay not to be converted to the Lord, and defer it not from day
@c    to day.

@c    5:9. For his wrath shall come on a sudden, and in the time of vengeance
@c    he will destroy thee.

@c    5:10. Be not anxious for goods unjustly gotten:  for they shall not
@c    profit thee in the day of calamity and revenge.

@c    5:11. Winnow not with every wind, and go not into every way:  for so is
@c    every sinner proved by a double tongue.

@c    5:12. Be steadfast in the way of the Lord, and in the truth of thy
@c    judgment, and in knowledge, and let the word of peace and justice keep
@c    with thee.

@c    5:13. Be meek to hear the word, that thou mayst understand:  and return
@c    a true answer with wisdom.

@c    5:14. If thou have understanding, answer thy neighbour:  but if not, let
@c    thy hand be upon thy mouth, lest thou be surprised in an unskilful
@c    word, and be confounded.

@c    5:15. Honour and glory is in the word of the wise, but the tongue of
@c    the fool is his ruin.

@c    5:16. Be not called a whisperer, and be not taken in thy tongue, and
@c    confounded.

@c    5:17. For confusion and repentance is upon a thief, and an evil mark of
@c    disgrace upon the double tongued, but to the whisperer hatred, and
@c    enmity, and reproach.

@c    5:18. Justify alike the small and the great.



@c    Ecclesiasticus Chapter 6


@c    Of true and false friends:  and of the of the fruits of wisdom.

@c    6:1. Instead of a friend become not an enemy to thy neighbour:  for an
@c    evil man shall inherit reproach and shame, so shall every sinner that
@c    is envious and double tongued.

@c    6:2. Extol not thyself in the thoughts of thy soul like a bull:  lest
@c    thy strength be quashed by folly,

@c    6:3. And it eat up thy leaves, and destroy thy fruit, and thou be left
@c    as a dry tree in the wilderness.

@c    6:4. For a wicked soul shall destroy him that hath it, and maketh him
@c    to be a joy to his enemies, and shall lead him into the lot of the
@c    wicked.

@c    6:5. A sweet word multiplieth friends, and appeaseth enemies, and a
@c    gracious tongue in a good man aboundeth.

@c    6:6. Be in peace with many, but let one of a thousand be thy
@c    counsellor.

@c    6:7. If thou wouldst get a friend, try him before thou takest him, and
@c    do not credit him easily.

@c    6:8. For there is a friend for his own occasion, and he will not abide
@c    in the day of thy trouble.

@c    6:9. And there is a friend that turneth to enmity; and there is a
@c    friend that will disclose hatred and strife and reproaches.

@c    6:10. And there is a friend a companion at the table, and he will not
@c    abide in the day of distress.

@c    6:11. A friend if he continue steadfast, shall be to thee as thyself,
@c    and shall act with confidence among them of thy household.

@c    6:12. If he humble himself before thee, and hide himself from thy face,
@c    thou shalt have unanimous friendship for good.

@c    6:13. Separate thyself from thy enemies, and take heed of thy friends.

@c    6:14. A faithful friend is a strong defence:  and he that hath found
@c    him, hath found a treasure.

@c    6:15. Nothing can be compared to a faithful friend, and no weight of
@c    gold and silver is able to countervail the goodness of his fidelity.

@c    6:16. A faithful friend is the medicine of life and immortality:  and
@c    they that fear the Lord, shall find him.

@c    6:17. He that feareth God, shall likewise have good friendship:  because
@c    according to him shall his friend be.

@c    6:18. My son, from thy youth up receive instruction, and even to thy
@c    grey hairs thou shalt find wisdom.

@c    6:19. Come to her as one that plougheth, and soweth, and wait for her
@c    good fruits:

@c    6:20. For in working about her thou shalt labour a little, and shalt
@c    quickly eat of her fruits.

@c    6:21. How very unpleasant is wisdom to the unlearned, and the unwise
@c    will not continue with her.

@c    6:22. She shall be to them as a mighty stone of trial, and they will
@c    cast her from them before it be long.

@c    6:23. For the wisdom of doctrine is according to her name, and she is
@c    not manifest unto many, but with them to whom she is known, she
@c    continueth even to the sight of God.

@c    6:24. Give ear, my son, and take wise counsel, and cast not away my
@c    advice.

@c    6:25. Put thy feet into her fetters, and thy neck into her chains:

@c    6:26. Bow down thy shoulder, and bear her, and be not grieved with her
@c    bands.

@c    6:27. Come to her with all thy mind, and keep her ways with all thy
@c    power.

@c    6:28. Search for her, and she shall be made known to thee, and when
@c    thou hast gotten her, let her not go:

@c    6:29. For in the latter end thou shalt find rest in her, and she shall
@c    be turned to thy joy.

@c    6:30. Then shall her fetters be a strong defence for thee, and a firm
@c    foundation, and her chain a robe of glory:

@c    6:31. For in her is the beauty of life, and her bands are a healthful
@c    binding.

@c    6:32. Thou shalt put her on as a robe of glory, and thou shalt set her
@c    upon thee as a crown of joy.

@c    6:33. My son, if thou wilt attend to me, thou shalt learn:  and if thou
@c    wilt apply thy mind, thou shalt be wise.

@c    6:34. If thou wilt incline thy ear, thou shalt receive instruction:  and
@c    if thou love to hear, thou shalt be wise.

@c    6:35. Stand in the multitude of ancients that are wise, and join
@c    thyself from thy heart to their wisdom, that thou mayst hear every
@c    discourse of God, and the sayings of praise may not escape thee.

@c    6:36. And if thou see a man of understanding, go to him early in the
@c    morning, and let thy foot wear the steps of his doors.

@c    6:37. Let thy thoughts be upon the precepts of God, and meditate
@c    continually on his commandments:  and he will give thee a heart, and the
@c    desire of wisdom shall be given to thee.



@c    Ecclesiasticus Chapter 7


@c    Religious and moral duties.

@c    7:1. Do no evils, and no evils shall lay hold of thee.

@c    7:2. Depart from the unjust, and evils shall depart from thee.

@c    7:3. My son, sow not evils in the furrows of injustice, and thou shalt
@c    not reap them sevenfold.

@c    7:4. Seek not of the Lord a preeminence, nor of the king the seat of
@c    honour.

@c    7:5. Justify not thyself before God, for he knoweth the heart:  and
@c    desire not to appear wise before the king.

@c    7:6. Seek not to be made a judge, unless thou have strength enough to
@c    extirpate iniquities:  lest thou fear the person of the powerful, and
@c    lay a stumblingblock for thy integrity.

@c    7:7. Offend not against the multitude of a city, neither cast thyself
@c    in upon the people,

@c    7:8. Nor bind sin to sin:  for even in one thou shalt not be unpunished.

@c    7:9. Be not fainthearted in thy mind:

@c    7:10. Neglect not to pray, and to give alms.

@c    7:11. Say not:  God will have respect to the multitude of my gifts, and
@c    when I offer to the most high God, he will accept my offerings.

@c    7:12. Laugh no man to scorn in the bitterness of his soul:  for there is
@c    one that humbleth and exalteth, God who seeth all.

@c    7:13. Devise not a lie against thy brother:  neither do the like against
@c    thy friend.

@c    7:14. Be not willing to make any manner of lie:  for the custom thereof
@c    is not good.

@c    7:15. Be not full of words in a multitude of ancients, and repeat not
@c    the word in thy prayer.

@c    Repeat not, etc. . .Make not much babbling by repetition of words:  but
@c    aim more at fervour of heart.

@c    7:16. Hate not laborious works, nor husbandry ordained by the most
@c    High.

@c    7:17. Number not thyself among the multitude of the disorderly.

@c    7:18. Remember wrath, for it will not tarry long.

@c    7:19. Humble thy spirit very much:  for the vengeance on the flesh of
@c    the ungodly is fire and worms.

@c    7:20. Do not transgress against thy friend deferring money, nor despise
@c    thy dear brother for the sake of gold.

@c    7:21. Depart not from a wise and good wife, whom thou hast gotten in
@c    the fear of the Lord:  for the grace of her modesty is above gold.

@c    7:22. Hurt not the servant that worketh faithfully, nor the hired man
@c    that giveth thee his life.

@c    7:23. Let a wise servant be dear to thee as thy own soul, defraud him
@c    not of liberty, nor leave him needy.

@c    7:24. Hast thou cattle?  have an eye to them:  and if they be for thy
@c    profit, keep them with thee.

@c    7:25. Hast thou children?  instruct them, and bow down their neck from
@c    their childhood.

@c    7:26. Hast thou daughters?  have a care of their body, and shew not thy
@c    countenance gay towards them.

@c    7:27. Marry thy daughter well, and thou shalt do a great work, and give
@c    her to a wise man.

@c    7:28. If thou hast a wife according to thy soul, cast her not off:  and
@c    to her that is hateful, trust not thyself.  With thy whole heart,

@c    7:29. Honour thy father, and forget not the groanings of thy mother:

@c    7:30. Remember that thou hadst not been born but through them:  and make
@c    a return to them as they have done for thee.

@c    7:31. With all thy soul fear the Lord, and reverence his priests.

@c    7:32. With all thy strength love him that made thee:  and forsake not
@c    his ministers.

@c    7:33. Honour God with all thy soul and give honour to the priests, and
@c    purify thyself with thy arms.

@c    Thy arms. . .That is, with all thy power:  or else by arms (brachiis) are
@c    here signified the right shoulders of the victims, which by the law
@c    fell to the priests.  See ver. 35.

@c    7:34. Give them their portion, as it is commanded thee, of the
@c    firstfruits and of purifications:  and for thy negligences purify
@c    thyself with a few.

@c    7:35. Offer to the Lord the gift of thy shoulders, and the sacrifice of
@c    sanctification, and the firstfruits of the holy things:

@c    7:36. And stretch out thy hand to the poor, that thy expiation and thy
@c    blessing may be perfected.

@c    7:37. A gift hath grace in the sight of all the living, and restrain
@c    not grace from the dead.

@c    And restrain not grace from the dead. . .That is, withhold not from them
@c    the benefit of alms, prayers, and sacrifices.  Such was the doctrine and
@c    practice of the church of God even in the time of the Old Testament.
@c    And the same has always been continued from the days of the apostles in
@c    the church of the New Testament.

@c    7:38. Be not wanting in comforting them that weep, and walk with them
@c    that mourn.

@c    7:39. Be not slow to visit the sick:  for by these things thou shalt be
@c    confirmed in love.

@c    7:40. In all thy works remember thy last end, and thou shalt never sin.



@c    Ecclesiasticus Chapter 8


@c    Other lessons of wisdom and virtue.

@c    8:1. Strive not with a powerful man, lest thou fall into his hands.

@c    8:2. Contend not with a rich man, lest he bring an action against thee.

@c    8:3. For gold and silver hath destroyed many, and hath reached even to
@c    the heart of kings, and perverted them.

@c    8:4. Strive not with a man that is full of tongue, and heap not wood
@c    upon his fire.

@c    8:5. Communicate not with an ignorant man, lest he speak ill of thy
@c    family.

@c    8:6. Despise not a man that turneth away from sin, nor reproach him
@c    therewith:  remember that we are all worthy of reproof.

@c    8:7. Despise not a man in his old age; for we also shall become old.

@c    8:8. Rejoice not at the death of thy enemy; knowing that we all die,
@c    and are not willing that others should rejoice at our death.

@c    8:9. Despise not the discourse of them that are ancient and wise, but
@c    acquaint thyself with their proverbs.

@c    8:10. For of them thou shalt learn wisdom, and instruction of
@c    understanding, and to serve great men without blame.

@c    8:11. Let not the discourse of the ancients escape thee, for they have
@c    learned of their fathers:

@c    8:12. For of them thou shalt learn understanding, and to give an answer
@c    in time of need.

@c    8:13. Kindle not the coals of sinners by rebuking them, lest thou be
@c    burnt with the flame of the fire of their sins.

@c    8:14. Stand not against the face of an injurious person, lest he sit as
@c    a spy to entrap thee in thy words.

@c    8:15. Lend not to a man that is mightier than thyself:  and if thou
@c    lendest, count it as lost.

@c    8:16. Be not surety above thy power:  and if thou be surety, think as if
@c    thou wert to pay it.

@c    8:17. Judge not against a judge:  for he judgeth according to that which
@c    is just.

@c    8:18. Go not on the way with a bold man, lest he burden thee with his
@c    evils:  for he goeth according to his own will, and thou shalt perish
@c    together with his folly.

@c    8:19. Quarrel not with a passionate man, and go not into the desert
@c    with a bold man:  for blood is as nothing in his sight, and where there
@c    is no help he will overthrow thee.

@c    8:20. Advise not with fools, for they cannot love but such things as
@c    please them.

@c    8:21. Before a stranger do no matter of counsel:  for thou knowest not
@c    what he will bring forth.

@c    8:22. Open not thy heart to every man:  lest he repay thee with an evil
@c    turn, and speak reproachfully to thee.



@c    Ecclesiasticus Chapter 9


@c    Cautions with regard to women, and dangerous conversations.

@c    9:1. Be not jealous over the wife of thy bosom, lest she shew in thy
@c    regard the malice of a wicked lesson.

@c    9:2. Give not the power of thy soul to a woman, lest she enter upon thy
@c    strength, and thou be confounded.

@c    9:3. Look not upon a woman that hath a mind for many:  lest thou fall
@c    into her snares.

@c    9:4. Use not much the company of her that is a dancer, and hearken not
@c    to her, lest thou perish by the force of her charms.

@c    9:5. Gaze not upon a maiden, lest her beauty be a stumblingblock to
@c    thee.

@c    9:6. Give not thy soul to harlots in any point:  lest thou destroy
@c    thyself and thy inheritance.

@c    9:7. Look not round about thee in the ways of the city, nor wander up
@c    and down in the streets thereof.

@c    9:8. Turn away thy face from a woman dressed up, and gaze not about
@c    upon another's beauty.

@c    9:9. For many have perished by the beauty of a woman, and hereby lust
@c    is enkindled as a fire.

@c    9:10. Every woman that is a harlot, shall be trodden upon as dung in
@c    the way.

@c    9:11. Many by admiring the beauty of another man's wife, have become
@c    reprobate, for her conversation burneth as fire.

@c    9:12. Sit not at all with another man's wife, nor repose upon the bed
@c    with her:

@c    9:13. And strive not with her over wine, lest thy heart decline towards
@c    her and by thy blood thou fall into destruction.

@c    9:14. Forsake not an old friend, for the new will not be like to him.

@c    9:15. A new friend is as new wine:  it shall grow old, and thou shalt
@c    drink it with pleasure.

@c    9:16. Envy not the glory and riches of a sinner:  for thou knowest not
@c    what his ruin shall be.

@c    9:17. Be not pleased with the wrong done by the unjust, knowing that
@c    even to hell the wicked shall not please.

@c    9:18. Keep thee far from the man that hath power to kill, so thou shalt
@c    not suspect the fear of death.

@c    9:19. And if thou come to him, commit no fault, lest he take away thy
@c    life.

@c    9:20. Know it to be a communication with death:  for thou art going in
@c    the midst of snares, and walking upon the arms of them that are
@c    grieved.

@c    9:21. According to thy power beware of thy neighbour, and treat with
@c    the wise and prudent.

@c    9:22. Let just men be thy guests, and let thy glory be in the fear of
@c    God.

@c    9:23. And let the thought of God be in thy mind, and all thy discourse
@c    on the commandments of the Highest.

@c    9:24. Works shall be praised for the hand of the artificers, and the
@c    prince of the people for the wisdom of his speech, but the word of the
@c    ancients for the sense.

@c    9:25. A man full of tongue is terrible in his city, and he that is rash
@c    in his word shall be hateful.



@c    Ecclesiasticus Chapter 10


@c    The virtues and vices of men in power:  the great evil of pride.

@c    10:1. A wise judge shall judge his people, and the government of a
@c    prudent man shall be steady.

@c    Judge his people. . .In the Greek it is, instruct his people.

@c    10:2. As the judge of the people is himself, so also are his ministers:
@c    and what manner of man the ruler of a city is, such also are they that
@c    dwell therein.

@c    10:3. An unwise king shall be the ruin of his people:  and cities shall
@c    be inhabited through the prudence of the rulers.

@c    10:4. The power of the earth is in the hand of God, and in his time he
@c    will raise up a profitable ruler over it.

@c    10:5. The prosperity of man is in the hand of God, and upon the person
@c    of the scribe he shall lay his honour.

@c    The scribe. . .That is, the man that is wise and learned in the law.

@c    10:6. Remember not any injury done thee by thy neighbour, and do thou
@c    nothing by deeds of injury.

@c    10:7. Pride is hateful before God and men:  and all iniquity of nations
@c    is execrable.

@c    10:8. A kingdom is translated from one people to another, because of
@c    injustices, and wrongs, and injuries, and divers deceits.

@c    10:9. But nothing is more wicked than the covetous man.  Why is earth,
@c    and ashes proud?

@c    10:10. There is not a more wicked thing than to love money:  for such a
@c    one setteth even his own soul to sale:  because while he liveth he hath
@c    cast away his bowels.

@c    10:11. All power is of short life.  A long sickness is troublesome to
@c    the physician.

@c    10:12. The physician cutteth off a short sickness:  so also a king is to
@c    day, and to morrow he shall die.

@c    10:13. For when a man shall die, he shall inherit serpents, and beasts,
@c    and worms.

@c    10:14. The beginning of the pride of man, is to fall off from God:

@c    10:15. Because his heart is departed from him that made him:  for pride
@c    is the beginning of all sin:  he that holdeth it, shall be filled with
@c    maledictions, and it shall ruin him in the end.

@c    10:16. Therefore hath the Lord disgraced the assemblies of the wicked,
@c    and hath utterly destroyed them.

@c    10:17. God hath overturned the thrones of proud princes, and hath set
@c    up the meek in their stead.

@c    10:18. God hath made the roots of proud nations to wither, and hath
@c    planted the humble of these nations.

@c    10:19. The Lord hath overthrown the lands of the Gentiles, and hath
@c    destroyed them even to the foundation.

@c    10:20. He hath made some of them to wither away, and hath destroyed
@c    them, and hath made the memory of them to cease from the earth.

@c    10:21. God hath abolished the memory of the proud, and hath preserved
@c    the memory of them that are humble in mind.

@c    10:22. Pride was not made for men:  nor wrath for the race of women.

@c    10:23. That seed of men shall be honoured, which feareth God:  but that
@c    seed shall be dishonoured, which transgresseth the commandments of the
@c    Lord.

@c    10:24. In the midst of brethren their chief is honourable:  so shall
@c    they that fear the Lord, be in his eyes.

@c    10:25. The fear of God is the glory of the rich, and of the honourable,
@c    and of the poor.

@c    10:26. Despise not a just man that is poor, and do not magnify a sinful
@c    man that is rich.

@c    10:27. The great man, and the judge, and the mighty is in honour:  and
@c    there is none greater than he that feareth God.

@c    10:28. They that are free shall serve a servant that is wise:  and a man
@c    that is prudent and well instructed will not murmur when he is
@c    reproved; and he that is ignorant, shall not be honoured.

@c    10:29. Extol not thyself in doing thy work, and linger not in the time
@c    of distress;

@c    10:30. Better is he that laboureth, and aboundeth in all things, than
@c    he that boasteth himself and wanteth bread.

@c    10:31. My son, keep thy soul in meekness, and give it honour according
@c    to its desert.

@c    10:32. Who will justify him that sinneth against his own soul?  and who
@c    will honour him that dishonoureth his own soul?

@c    10:33. The poor man is glorified by his discipline and fear, and there
@c    is a man that is honoured for his wealth.

@c    10:34. But he that is glorified in poverty, how much more in wealth?
@c    and he that is glorified in wealth, let him fear poverty.



@c    Ecclesiasticus Chapter 11


@c    Lessons of humility and moderation in all things.

@c    11:1. The wisdom of the humble shall exalt his head, and shall make him
@c    sit in the midst of great men.

@c    11:2. Praise not a man for his beauty, neither despise a man for his
@c    look.

@c    11:3. The bee is small among flying things but her fruit hath the
@c    chiefest sweetness.

@c    11:4. Glory not in apparel at any time, and be not exalted in the day
@c    of thy honour:  for the works of the Highest only are wonderful, and his
@c    works are glorious, and secret, and hidden.

@c    11:5. Many tyrants have sat on the throne, and he whom no man would
@c    think on, hath worn the crown.

@c    11:6. Many mighty men have been greatly brought down, and the glorious
@c    have been delivered into the hand of others.

@c    11:7. Before thou inquire, blame no man:  and when thou hast inquired,
@c    reprove justly.

@c    11:8. Before thou hear, answer not a word:  and interrupt not others in
@c    the midst of their discourse.

@c    11:9. Strive not in a matter which doth not concern thee, and sit not
@c    in judgment with sinners.

@c    11:10. My son, meddle not with many matters:  and if thou be rich, thou
@c    shalt not be free from sin:  for if thou pursue after thou shalt not
@c    overtake; and if thou run before thou shalt not escape.

@c    11:11. There is an ungodly man that laboureth, and maketh haste, and is
@c    in sorrow, and is so much the more in want.

@c    11:12. Again, there is an inactive man that wanteth help, is very weak
@c    in ability, and full of poverty:

@c    11:13. Yet the eye of God hath looked upon him for good, and hath
@c    lifted him up from his low estate, and hath exalted his head:  and many
@c    have wondered at him, and have glorified God.

@c    11:14. Good things and evil, life and death, poverty and riches, are
@c    from God.

@c    11:15. Wisdom and discipline, and the knowledge of the law are with
@c    God.  Love and the ways of good things are with him.

@c    11:16. Error and darkness are created with sinners:  and they that glory
@c    in evil things, grow old in evil.

@c    11:17. The gift of God abideth with the just, and his advancement shall
@c    have success for ever.

@c    11:18. There is one that is enriched by living sparingly, and this is
@c    the portion of his reward.

@c    11:19. In that he saith:  I have found me rest, and now I will eat of my
@c    goods alone:

@c    11:20. And he knoweth not what time shall pass, and that death
@c    approacheth, and that he must leave all to others, and shall die.

@c    11:21. Be steadfast in thy covenant, and be conversant therein, and
@c    grow old in the work of thy commandments.

@c    11:22. Abide not in the works of sinners.  But trust in God, and stay in
@c    thy place,

@c    11:23. For it is easy in the eyes of God on a sudden to make the poor
@c    man rich.

@c    11:24. The blessing of God maketh haste to reward the just, and in a
@c    swift hour his blessing beareth fruit.

@c    11:25. Say not:  What need I, and what good shall I have by this?

@c    11:26. Say not:  I am sufficient for myself:  and what shall I be made
@c    worse by this?

@c    11:27. In the day of good things be not unmindful of evils:  and in the
@c    day of evils be not unmindful of good things:

@c    11:28. For it is easy before God in the day of death to reward every
@c    one according to his ways.

@c    11:29. The affliction of an hour maketh one forget great delights, and
@c    in the end of a man is the disclosing of his works.

@c    11:30. Praise not any man before death, for a man is known by his
@c    children.

@c    11:31. Bring not every man into thy house:  for many are the snares of
@c    the deceitful.

@c    11:32. For as corrupted bowels send forth stinking breath, and as the
@c    partridge is brought into the cage, and as the roe into the snare:  so
@c    also is the heart of the proud, and as a spy that looketh on the fall
@c    of his neighbour.

@c    11:33. For he lieth in wait and turneth good into evil, and on the
@c    elect he will lay a blot.

@c    11:34. Of one spark cometh a great fire, and of one deceitful man much
@c    blood:  and a sinful man lieth in wait for blood.

@c    11:35. Take heed to thyself of a mischievous man, for he worketh evils:
@c    lest he bring upon thee reproach for ever.

@c    11:36. Receive a stranger in, and he shall overthrow thee with a
@c    whirlwind, and shall turn thee out of thy own.



@c    Ecclesiasticus Chapter 12


@c    We are to be liberal to the just:  and not to trust the wicked.

@c    12:1. If thou do good, know to whom thou dost it, and there shall be
@c    much thanks for thy good deeds.

@c    12:2. Do good to the just, and thou shalt find great recompense:  and if
@c    not of him, assuredly of the Lord.

@c    12:3. For there is no good for him that is always occupied in evil, and
@c    that giveth no alms:  for the Highest hateth sinners, and hath mercy on
@c    the penitent.

@c    12:4. Give to the merciful and uphold not the sinner:  God will repay
@c    vengeance to the ungodly and to sinners, and keep them against the day
@c    of vengeance.

@c    12:5. Give to the good, and receive not a sinner.

@c    12:6. Do good to the humble, and give not to the ungodly:  hold back thy
@c    bread, and give it not to him, lest thereby he overmaster thee.

@c    12:7. For thou shalt receive twice as much evil for all the good thou
@c    shalt have done to him:  for the Highest also hateth sinners, and will
@c    repay vengeance to the ungodly.

@c    12:8. A friend shall not be known in prosperity, and an enemy shall not
@c    be hidden in adversity.

@c    12:9. In the prosperity of a man, his enemies are grieved:  and a friend
@c    is known in his adversity.

@c    12:10. Never trust thy enemy for as a brass pot his wickedness rusteth:

@c    12:11. Though he humble himself and go crouching, yet take good heed
@c    and beware of him.

@c    12:12. Set him not by thee, neither let him sit on thy right hand, lest
@c    he turn into thy place, and seek to take thy seat and at the last thou
@c    acknowledge my words, and be pricked with my sayings.

@c    12:13. Who will pity an enchanter struck by a serpent, or any that come
@c    near wild beasts?  so is it with him that keepeth company with a wicked
@c    man, and is involved in his sins.

@c    12:14. For an hour he will abide with thee:  but if thou begin to
@c    decline, he will not endure it.

@c    12:15. An enemy speaketh sweetly with his lips, but in his heart he
@c    lieth in wait, to throw thee into a pit.

@c    12:16. An enemy weepeth with his eyes:  but if he find an opportunity he
@c    will not be satisfied with blood:

@c    12:17. And if evils come upon thee, thou shalt find him there first.

@c    12:18. An enemy hath tears in his eyes, and while he pretendeth to help
@c    thee, will undermine thy feet.

@c    12:19. He will shake his head, and clap his hands, and whisper much,
@c    and change his countenance.



@c    Ecclesiasticus Chapter 13


@c    Cautions in the choice of company.

@c    13:1. He that toucheth pitch, shall be defiled with it:  and he that
@c    hath fellowship with the proud, shall put on pride.

@c    13:2. He shall take a burden upon him that hath fellowship with one
@c    more honourable than himself.  And have no fellowship with one that is
@c    richer than thyself.

@c    13:3. What agreement shall the earthen pot have with the kettle?  for if
@c    they knock one against the other, it shall be broken.

@c    13:4. The rich man hath done wrong, and yet he will fume:  but the poor
@c    is wronged and must hold his peace.

@c    13:5. If thou give, he will make use of thee:  and if thou have nothing,
@c    he will forsake thee.

@c    13:6. If thou have any thing, he will live with thee, and will make
@c    thee bare, and he will not be sorry for thee.

@c    13:7. If he have need of thee he will deceive thee, and smiling upon
@c    thee will put thee in hope; he will speak thee fair, and will say:  What
@c    wantest thou?

@c    13:8. And he will shame thee by his meats, till he have drawn thee dry
@c    twice or thrice, and at last he will laugh at thee:  and afterward when
@c    he seeth thee, he will forsake thee, and shake his head at thee.

@c    13:9. Humble thyself to God, and wait for his hands.

@c    13:10. Beware that thou be not deceived into folly, and be humbled.

@c    13:11. Be not lowly in thy wisdom, lest being humbled thou be deceived
@c    into folly.

@c    13:12. If thou be invited by one that is mightier, withdraw thyself:
@c    for so he will invite thee the more.

@c    13:13. Be not troublesome to him, lest thou be put back:  and keep not
@c    far from him, lest thou be forgotten.

@c    13:14. Affect not to speak with him as an equal, and believe not his
@c    many words:  for by much talk he will sift thee, and smiling will
@c    examine thee concerning thy secrets.

@c    13:15. His cruel mind will lay up thy words:  and he will not spare to
@c    do thee hurt, and to cast thee into prison.

@c    13:16. Take heed to thyself, and attend diligently to what thou
@c    hearest:  for thou walkest in danger of thy ruin.

@c    13:17. When thou hearest those things, see as it were in sleep, and
@c    thou shalt awake.

@c    13:18. Love God all thy life, and call upon him for thy salvation.

@c    13:19. Every beast loveth its like:  so also every man him that is
@c    nearest to himself.

@c    13:20. All flesh shall consort with the like to itself, and every man
@c    shall associate himself to his like.

@c    13:21. If the wolf shall at any time have fellowship with the lamb, so
@c    the sinner with the just.

@c    13:22. What fellowship hath a holy man with a dog, or what part hath
@c    the rich with the poor?

@c    13:23. The wild ass is the lion's prey in the desert:  so also the poor
@c    are devoured by the rich.

@c    13:24. And as humility is an abomination to the proud:  so also the rich
@c    man abhorreth the poor.

@c    13:25. When a rich man is shaken, he is kept up by his friends:  but
@c    when a poor man is fallen down, he is thrust away even by his
@c    acquaintance.

@c    13:26. When a rich man hath been deceived, he hath many helpers:  he
@c    hath spoken proud things, and they have justified him.

@c    13:27. The poor man was deceived, and he is rebuked also:  he hath
@c    spoken wisely, and could have no place.

@c    13:28. The rich man spoke, and all held their peace, and what he said
@c    they extol even to the clouds.

@c    13:29. The poor man spoke, and they say:  Who is this?  and if he
@c    stumble, they will overthrow him.

@c    13:30. Riches are good to him that hath no sin in his conscience:  and
@c    poverty is very wicked in the mouth of the ungodly.

@c    13:31. The heart of a man changeth his countenance, either for good, or
@c    for evil.

@c    13:32. The token of a good heart, and a good countenance thou shalt
@c    hardly find, and with labour.



@c    Ecclesiasticus Chapter 14


@c    The evil of avarice:  works of mercy are recommended, and the love of
@c    wisdom.

@c    14:1. Blessed is the man that hath not slipped by a word out of his
@c    mouth, and is not pricked with the remorse of sin.

@c    14:2. Happy is he that hath had no sadness of his mind, and who is not
@c    fallen from his hope.

@c    14:3. Riches are not comely for a covetous man and a niggard, and what
@c    should an envious man do with gold?

@c    14:4. He that gathereth together by wronging his own soul, gathereth
@c    for others, and another will squander away his goods in rioting.

@c    14:5. He that is evil to himself, to whom will he be good?  and he shall
@c    not take pleasure in his goods.

@c    14:6. There is none worse than he that envieth himself, and this is the
@c    reward of his wickedness:

@c    14:7. And if he do good, he doth it ignorantly, and unwillingly:  and at
@c    the last he discovereth his wickedness.

@c    14:8. The eye of the envious is wicked:  and he turneth away his face,
@c    and despiseth his own soul.

@c    14:9. The eye of the covetous man is insatiable in his portion of
@c    iniquity:  he will not be satisfied till he consume his own soul, drying
@c    it up.

@c    14:10. An evil eye is towards evil things:  and he shall not have his
@c    fill of bread, but shall be needy and pensive at his own table.

@c    14:11. My son, if thou have any thing, do good to thyself, and offer to
@c    God worthy offerings.

@c    14:12. Remember that death is not slow, and that the covenant of hell
@c    hath been shewn to thee:  for the covenant of this world shall surely
@c    die.

@c    Covenant of hell. . .The decree by which all are to go down to the
@c    regions of death.

@c    14:13. Do good to thy friend before thou die, and according to thy
@c    ability, stretching out thy hand give to the poor.

@c    14:14. Defraud not thyself of the good day, and let not the part of a
@c    good gift overpass thee.

@c    14:15. Shalt thou not leave to others to divide by lot thy sorrows and
@c    labours?

@c    14:16. Give and take, and justify thy soul.

@c    14:17. Before thy death work justice:  for in hell there is no finding
@c    food.

@c    14:18. All flesh shall fade as grass, and as the leaf that springeth
@c    out on a green tree.

@c    14:19. Some grow, and some fall off:  so is the generation of flesh and
@c    blood, one cometh to an end, and another is born.

@c    14:20. Every work that is corruptible shall fail in the end:  and the
@c    worker thereof shall go with it.

@c    14:21. And every excellent work shall be justified:  and the worker
@c    thereof shall be honoured therein.

@c    14:22. Blessed is the man that shall continue in wisdom, and that shall
@c    meditate in his justice, and in his mind shall think of the all seeing
@c    eye of God.

@c    14:23. He that considereth her ways in his heart, and hath
@c    understanding in her secrets, who goeth after her as one that traceth,
@c    and stayeth in her ways.

@c    14:24. He who looketh in at her windows, and hearkeneth at her door.

@c    14:25. He that lodgeth near her house, and fastening a pin in her walls
@c    shall set up his tent high unto her, where good things shall rest in
@c    his lodging for ever.

@c    14:26. He shall set his children under her shelter, and shall lodge
@c    under her branches:

@c    14:27. He shall be protected under her covering from the heat, and
@c    shall rest in her glory.



@c    Ecclesiasticus Chapter 15


@c    Wisdom embraceth them that fear God.  God is not the author of sin.

@c    15:1. He that feareth God, will do good:  and he that possesseth
@c    justice, shall lay hold on her,

@c    15:2. And she will meet him as an honourable mother, and will receive
@c    him as a wife married of a virgin.

@c    15:3. With the bread of life and understanding, she shall feed him, and
@c    give him the water of wholesome wisdom to drink:  and she shall be made
@c    strong in him, and he shall not be moved.

@c    15:4. And she shall hold him fast, and he shall not be confounded:  and
@c    she shall exalt him among his neighbours.

@c    15:5. And in the midst of the church she shall open his mouth, and
@c    shall fill him with the spirit of wisdom and understanding, and shall
@c    clothe him with a robe of glory.

@c    15:6. She shall heap upon him a treasure of joy and gladness, and shall
@c    cause him to inherit an everlasting name.

@c    15:7. But foolish men shall not obtain her, and wise men shall meet
@c    her, foolish men shall not see her:  for she is far from pride and
@c    deceit.

@c    15:8. Lying men shall be mindful of her:  but men that speak truth shall
@c    be found with her, and shall advance, even till they come to the sight
@c    of God.

@c    15:9. Praise is not seemly in the mouth of a sinner:

@c    15:10. For wisdom came forth from God:  for praise shall be with the
@c    wisdom of God, and shall abound in a faithful mouth, and the sovereign
@c    Lord will give praise unto it.

@c    15:11. Say not:  It is through God, that she is not with me:  for do not
@c    thou the things that he hateth.

@c    15:12. Say not:  He hath caused me to err:  for he hath no need of wicked
@c    men.

@c    15:13. The Lord hateth all abomination of error, and they that fear him
@c    shall not love it.

@c    15:14. God made man from the beginning, and left him in the hand of his
@c    own counsel.

@c    15:15. He added his commandments and precepts.

@c    15:16. If thou wilt keep the commandments and perform acceptable
@c    fidelity for ever, they shall preserve thee.

@c    15:17. He hath set water and fire before thee:  stretch forth thy hand
@c    to which thou wilt.

@c    15:18. Before man is life and death, good and evil, that which he shall
@c    choose shall be given him:

@c    15:19. For the wisdom of God is great, and he is strong in power,
@c    seeing all men without ceasing.

@c    15:20. The eyes of the Lord are towards them that fear him, and he
@c    knoweth al the work of man.

@c    15:21. He hath commanded no man to do wickedly, and he hath given no
@c    man license to sin;

@c    15:22. For he desireth not a multitude of faithless and unprofitable
@c    children.



@c    Ecclesiasticus Chapter 16


@c    It is better to have none than many wicked children.  Of the justice and
@c    mercy of God.  His ways are unsearchable.

@c    16:1. Rejoice not in ungodly children, if they be multiplied:  neither
@c    be delighted in them, if the fear of God be not with them.

@c    16:2. Trust not to their life, and respect not their labours.

@c    16:3. For better is one that feareth God, than a thousand ungodly
@c    children.

@c    16:4. And it is better to die without children, than to leave ungodly
@c    children.

@c    16:5. By one that is wise a country shall be inhabited, the tribe of
@c    the ungodly shall become desolate.

@c    16:6. Many such things hath my eyes seen, and greater things than these
@c    my ear hath heard.

@c    16:7. In the congregation of sinners a fire shall be kindled, and in an
@c    unbelieving nation wrath shall flame out.

@c    16:8. The ancient giants did not obtain pardon for their sins, who were
@c    destroyed trusting to their own strength:

@c    16:9. And he spared not the place where Lot sojourned, but abhorred
@c    them for the pride of their word.

@c    16:10. He had not pity on them, destroying the whole nation that
@c    extolled themselves in their sins.

@c    16:11. So did he with the six hundred thousand footmen, who were
@c    gathered together in the hardness of their heart:  and if one had been
@c    stiffnecked, it is a wonder if he had escaped unpunished:

@c    Six hundred thousand footmen, etc. . .Viz., the children of Israel, whom
@c    he sentenced to die in the wilderness.  Num. 14.

@c    16:12. For mercy and wrath are with him.  He is mighty to forgive, and
@c    to pour out indignation:

@c    16:13. According as his mercy is, so his correction judgeth a man
@c    according to his works.

@c    16:14. The sinner shall not escape in his rapines, and the patience of
@c    him that sheweth mercy shall not be put off.

@c    16:15. All mercy shall make a place for every man according to the
@c    merit of his works, and according to the wisdom of his sojournment.

@c    16:16. Say not:  I shall be hidden from God, and who shall remember me
@c    from on high?

@c    16:17. In such a multitude I shall not be known:  for what is my soul in
@c    such an immense creation?

@c    16:18. Behold the heaven, and the heavens of heavens, the deep, and all
@c    the earth, and the things that are in them, shall be moved in his
@c    sight,

@c    16:19. The mountains also, and the hills, and the foundations of the
@c    earth:  when God shall look upon them, they shall be shaken with
@c    trembling.

@c    16:20. And in all these things the heart is senseless:  and every heart
@c    is understood by him.

@c    16:21. And his ways who shall understand, and the storm, which no eye
@c    of man shall see?

@c    16:22. For many of his works are hidden, but the works of his justice
@c    who shall declare?  or who shall endure?  for the testament is far from
@c    some, and the examination of all is in the end.

@c    16:23. He that wanteth understanding thinketh vain things, and the
@c    foolish, and erring man, thinketh foolish things.

@c    16:24. Hearken to me, my son, and learn the discipline of
@c    understanding, and attend to my words in thy heart.

@c    16:25. And I will shew forth good doctrine in equity, and will seek to
@c    declare wisdom:  and attend to my words in thy heart, whilst with equity
@c    of spirit I tell thee the virtues that God hath put upon his works from
@c    the beginning, and I shew forth in truth his knowledge.

@c    16:26. The works of God are done in judgment from the beginning, and
@c    from the making of them he distinguished their parts, and their
@c    beginnings in their generations.

@c    16:27. He beautified their works for ever, they have neither hungered,
@c    nor laboured, and they have not ceased from their works.

@c    16:28. Nor shall any of them straiten his neighbour at any time.

@c    16:29. Be not thou incredulous to his word.

@c    16:30. After this God looked upon the earth, and filled it with his
@c    goods.

@c    16:31. The soul of every living thing hath shewn forth before the face
@c    thereof, and into it they return again.

@c    Shewn forth. . .Viz., the glory and power of God upon the earth.



@c    Ecclesiasticus Chapter 17


@c    The creation and favour of God to man.  An exhortation to turn to God.

@c    17:1. God created man of the earth, and made him after his own image.

@c    17:2. And he turned him into it again, and clothed him with strength
@c    according to himself.

@c    17:3. He gave him the number of his days and time, and gave him power
@c    over all things that are upon the earth.

@c    17:4. He put the fear of him upon all flesh, and he had dominion over
@c    beasts and fowls.

@c    17:5. He created of him a helpmate like to himself, he gave them
@c    counsel, and a tongue, and eyes, and ears, and a heart to devise:  and
@c    he filled them with the knowledge of understanding.

@c    17:6. He created in them the science of the spirit, he fired their
@c    heart with wisdom, and shewed them both good and evil.

@c    17:7. He set his eye upon their hearts to shew them the greatness of
@c    his works:

@c    17:8. That they might praise the name which he hath sanctified:  and
@c    glory in his wondrous act that they might declare the glorious things
@c    of his works.

@c    17:9. Moreover he gave them instructions, and the law of life for an
@c    inheritance.

@c    17:10. He made an everlasting covenant with them, and he shewed them
@c    his justice and judgments.

@c    17:11. And their eye saw the majesty of his glory, and their ears heard
@c    his glorious voice, and he said to them:  Beware of all iniquity.

@c    Their eye saw, etc. . .Viz., when he gave the law on mount Sinai.

@c    17:12. And he gave to every one of them commandment concerning his
@c    neighbour.

@c    17:13. Their ways are always before him, they are not hidden from his
@c    eyes.

@c    17:14. Over every nation he set a ruler.

@c    17:15. And Israel was made the manifest portion of God.

@c    17:16. And all their works are as the sun in the sight of God:  and his
@c    eyes are continually upon their ways.

@c    17:17. Their covenants were not hid by their iniquity, and all their
@c    iniquities are in the sight of God.

@c    17:18. The alms of a man is as a signet with him, and shall preserve
@c    the grace of a man as the apple of the eye:

@c    17:19. And afterward he shall rise up, and shall render them their
@c    reward, to every one upon their own head, and shall turn them down into
@c    the bowels of the earth.

@c    17:20. But to the penitent he hath given the way of justice, and he
@c    hath strengthened them that were fainting in patience, and hath
@c    appointed to them the lot of truth.

@c    17:21. Turn to the Lord, and forsake thy sins:

@c    17:22. Make thy prayer before the face of the Lord, and offend less.

@c    Offend less. . .Minue offendicula.  That is, remove sins and the
@c    occasions of sins.

@c    17:23. Return to the Lord, and turn away from thy injustice, and
@c    greatly hate abomination.

@c    17:24. And know the justices and judgments of God, and stand firm in
@c    the lot set before thee, and in prayer to the most high God.

@c    17:25. Go to the side of the holy age, with them that live and give
@c    praise to God.

@c    Go to the side, etc. . .Fly from the side of Satan and sin, and join
@c    with the holy ones, that follow God and godliness.

@c    17:26. Tarry not in the error of the ungodly, give glory before death.
@c    Praise perisheth from the dead as nothing.

@c    17:27. Give thanks whilst thou art living, whilst thou art alive and in
@c    health thou shalt give thanks, and shalt praise God, and shalt glory in
@c    his mercies.

@c    17:28. How great is the mercy of the Lord, and his forgiveness to them
@c    that turn to him !

@c    17:29. For all things cannot be in men, because the son of man is not
@c    immortal, and they are delighted with the vanity of evil.

@c    17:30. What is brighter than the sun; yet it shall be eclipsed.  Or what
@c    is more wicked than that which flesh and blood hath invented?  and this
@c    shall be reproved.

@c    17:31. He beholdeth the power of the height of heaven:  and all men are
@c    earth and ashes.



@c    Ecclesiasticus Chapter 18


@c    God's works are wonderful:  we must serve him, and not our lusts.

@c    18:1. He that liveth for ever created all things together.  God only
@c    shall be justified, and he remaineth an invincible king for ever.

@c    18:2. Who is able to declare his works?

@c    18:3. For who shall search out his glorious acts?

@c    18:4. And who shall show forth the power of his majesty?  or who shall
@c    be able to declare his mercy?

@c    18:5. Nothing may be taken away, nor added, neither is it possible to
@c    find out the glorious works of God.

@c    18:6. When a man hath done, then shall he begin:  and when he leaveth
@c    off, he shall be at a loss.

@c    Then shall he begin. . .God is so great and incomprehensible, that when
@c    man has done all that he can to find out his greatness and boundless
@c    perfections, he is still to begin:  for what he has found out, is but a
@c    mere nothing in comparison with his infinity.

@c    18:7. What is man, and what is his grace?  and what is his good, or what
@c    is his evil?

@c    18:8. The number of the days of men at the most are a hundred years, as
@c    a drop of water of the sea are they esteemed:  and as a pebble of the
@c    sand, so are a few years compared to eternity.

@c    18:9. Therefore God is patient in them, and poureth forth his mercy
@c    upon them.

@c    18:10. He hath seen the presumption of their heart that it is wicked,
@c    and hath known their end that it is evil.

@c    18:11. Therefore hath he filled up his mercy in their favour, and hath
@c    shewn them the way of justice.

@c    18:12. The compassion of man is toward his neighbour:  but the mercy of
@c    God is upon all flesh.

@c    18:13. He hath mercy, and teacheth, and correcteth, as a shepherd doth
@c    his flock.

@c    18:14. He hath mercy on him that receiveth the discipline of mercy, and
@c    that maketh haste in his judgments.

@c    18:15. My son, in thy good deeds, make no complaint, and when thou
@c    givest any thing, add not grief by an evil word.

@c    18:16. Shall not the dew assuage the heat?  so also the good word is
@c    better than the gift.

@c    18:17. Lo, is not a word better than a gift?  but both are with a
@c    justified man.

@c    18:18. A fool will upbraid bitterly:  and a gift of one ill taught
@c    consumeth the eyes.

@c    18:19. Before judgment prepare thee justice, and learn before thou
@c    speak.

@c    18:20. Before sickness take a medicine, and before judgment examine
@c    thyself, and thou shalt find mercy in the sight of God.

@c    18:21. Humble thyself before thou art sick, and in the time of sickness
@c    shew thy conversation.

@c    18:22. Let nothing hinder thee from praying always, and be not afraid
@c    to be justified even to death:  for the reward of God continueth for
@c    ever.

@c    18:23. Before prayer prepare thy soul:  and be not as a man that
@c    tempteth God.

@c    18:24. Remember the wrath that shall be at the last day, and the time
@c    of repaying when he shall turn away his face.

@c    18:25. Remember poverty in the time of abundance, and the necessities
@c    of poverty in the day of riches.

@c    18:26. From the morning until the evening the time shall be changed,
@c    and all these are swift in the eyes of God.

@c    18:27. A wise man will fear in every thing, and in the days of sins
@c    will beware of sloth.

@c    18:28. Every man of understanding knoweth wisdom, and will give praise
@c    to him that findeth her.

@c    18:29. They that were of good understanding in words, have also done
@c    wisely themselves:  and have understood truth and justice, and have
@c    poured forth proverbs and judgments.

@c    18:30. Go not after thy lusts, but turn away from thy own will.

@c    18:31. If thou give to thy soul her desires, she will make thee a joy
@c    to thy enemies.

@c    18:32. Take no pleasure in riotous assemblies, be they ever so small:
@c    for their concertation is continual.

@c    18:33. Make not thyself poor by borrowing to contribute to feasts when
@c    thou hast nothing in thy purse:  for thou shalt be an enemy to thy own
@c    life.



@c    Ecclesiasticus Chapter 19


@c    Admonition against sundry vices.

@c    19:1. A workman that is a drunkard shall not be rich:  and he that
@c    contemneth small things, shall fall by little and little.

@c    19:2. Wine and women make wise men fall off, and shall rebuke the
@c    prudent:

@c    19:3. And he that joineth himself to harlots, will be wicked.
@c    Rottenness and worms shall inherit him, and he shall be lifted up for a
@c    greater example, and his soul shall be taken away out of the number.

@c    19:4. He that is hasty to give credit, is light of heart, and shall be
@c    lessened:  and he that sinneth against his own soul, shall be despised.

@c    19:5. He that rejoiceth in iniquity, shall be censured, and he that
@c    hateth chastisement, shall have less life:  and he that hateth babbling,
@c    extinguisheth evil.

@c    19:6. He that sinneth against his own soul, shall repent:  and he that
@c    is delighted with wickedness, shall be condemned.

@c    19:7. Rehearse not again a wicked and harsh word, and thou shalt not
@c    fare the worse.

@c    19:8. Tell not thy mind to friend or foe:  and if there be a sin with
@c    thee, disclose it not.

@c    19:9. For he will hearken to thee, and will watch thee, and as it were
@c    defending thy sin he will hate thee, and so will he be with thee
@c    always.

@c    19:10. Hast thou heard a word against thy neighbour?  let it die within
@c    thee, trusting that it will not burst thee.

@c    19:11. At the hearing of a word the fool is in travail, as a woman
@c    groaning in the bringing forth a child.

@c    19:12. As an arrow that sticketh in a man's thigh:  so is a word in the
@c    heart of a fool.

@c    19:13. Reprove a friend, lest he may not have understood, and say:  I
@c    did it not:  or if he did it, that he may do it no more.

@c    19:14. Reprove thy neighbour, for it may be he hath not said it:  and if
@c    he hath said it, that he may not say it again.

@c    19:15. Admonish thy friend:  for there is often a fault committed.

@c    19:16. And believe not every word.  There is one, that slippeth with the
@c    tongue, but not from his heart.

@c    19:17. For who is there that hath not offended with his tongue?
@c    Admonish thy neighbour before thou threaten him.

@c    19:18. And give place to the fear of the most High:  for the fear of God
@c    is all wisdom, and therein is to fear God, and the disposition of the
@c    law is in all wisdom.

@c    19:19. But the learning of wickedness is not wisdom:  and the device of
@c    sinners is not prudence.

@c    19:20. There is a subtle wickedness, and the same is detestable:  and
@c    there is a man that is foolish, wanting in wisdom.

@c    19:21. Better is a man that hath less wisdom, and wanteth
@c    understanding, with the fear of God, than he that aboundeth in
@c    understanding, and transgresseth the law of the most High.

@c    19:22. There is an exquisite subtilty, and the same is unjust.

@c    19:23. And there is one that uttereth an exact word telling the truth.
@c    There is one that humbleth himself wickedly, and his interior is full
@c    of deceit:

@c    19:24. And there is one that submitteth himself exceedingly with a
@c    great lowliness:  and there is one that casteth down his countenance,
@c    and maketh as if he did not see that which is unknown:

@c    19:25. And if he be hindered from sinning for want of power, if he
@c    shall find opportunity to do evil, he will do it.

@c    19:26. A man is known by his look, and a wise man, when thou meetest
@c    him, is known by his countenance.

@c    19:27. The attire of the body, and the laughter of the teeth, and the
@c    gait of the man, shew what he is.

@c    19:28. There is a lying rebuke in the anger of an injurious man:  and
@c    there is a judgment that is not allowed to be good:  and there is one
@c    that holdeth his peace, he is wise.



@c    Ecclesiasticus Chapter 20


@c    Rules with regard to correction, discretion, and avoiding lies.

@c    20:1. How much better is it to reprove, than to be angry, and not to
@c    hinder him that confesseth in prayer.

@c    20:2. The lust of an eunuch shall deflour a young maiden:

@c    20:3. So is he that by violence executeth of the unwise.

@c    20:4. How good is it, when thou art reproved, to shew repentance! for
@c    so thou shalt escape wilful sin.

@c    20:5. There is one that holdeth his peace, that is found wise:  and
@c    there is another that is hateful, that is bold in speech.

@c    20:6. There is one that holdeth his peace, because he knoweth not what
@c    to say:  and there is another that holdeth his peace, knowing the proper
@c    time.

@c    20:7. A wise man will hold his peace till he see opportunity:  but a
@c    babbler, and a fool, will regard no time.

@c    20:8. He that useth many words shall hurt his own soul:  and he that
@c    taketh authority to himself unjustly shall be hated.

@c    20:9. There is success in evil things to a man without discipline, and
@c    there is a finding that turneth to loss.

@c    20:10. There is a gift that is not profitable:  and there is a gift, the
@c    recompense of which is double.

@c    20:11. There is an abasement because of glory:  and there is one that
@c    shall lift up his head from a low estate.

@c    20:12. There is that buyeth much for a small price, and restoreth the
@c    same sevenfold.

@c    20:13. A man wise in words shall make himself beloved:  but the graces
@c    of fools shall be poured out.

@c    20:14. The gift of the fool shall do thee no good:  for his eyes are
@c    sevenfold.

@c    20:15. He will give a few things, and upbraid much:  and the opening of
@c    his mouth is the kindling of a fire.

@c    20:16. To day a man lendeth, and to morrow he asketh it again:  such a
@c    man as this is hateful.

@c    20:17. A fool shall have no friend, and there shall be no thanks for
@c    his good deeds.

@c    20:18. For they that eat his bread, are of a false tongue.  How often,
@c    and how many will laugh him to scorn!

@c    20:19. For he doth not distribute with right understanding that which
@c    was to be had:  in like manner also that which was not to be had.

@c    20:20. The slipping of a false tongue is as one that falleth on the
@c    pavement:  so the fall of the wicked shall come speedily.

@c    20:21. A man without grace is as a vain fable, it shall be continually
@c    in the mouth of the unwise.

@c    20:22. A parable coming out of a fool's mouth shall be rejected:  for he
@c    doth not speak it in due season.

@c    20:23. There is that is hindered from sinning through want, and in his
@c    rest he shall be pricked.

@c    20:24. There is that will destroy his own soul through shamefacedness,
@c    and by occasion of an unwise person he will destroy it:  and by respect
@c    of person he will destroy himself.

@c    20:25. There is that for bashfulness promiseth to his friend, and
@c    maketh him his enemy for nothing.

@c    20:26. A lie is a foul blot in a man, and yet it will be continually in
@c    the mouth of men without discipline.

@c    20:27. A thief is better than a man that is always lying:  but both of
@c    them shall inherit destruction.

@c    20:28. The manners of lying men are without honour:  and their confusion
@c    is with them without ceasing.

@c    20:29. A wise man shall advance himself with his words, and a prudent
@c    man shall please the great ones.

@c    20:30. He that tilleth his land shall make a high heap of corn:  and he
@c    that worketh justice shall be exalted:  and he that pleaseth great men
@c    shall escape iniquity.

@c    20:31. Presents and gifts blind the eyes of judges, and make them dumb
@c    in the mouth, so that they cannot correct.

@c    20:32. O Wisdom that is hid, and treasure that is not seen:  what profit
@c    is there in them both?

@c    20:33. Better is he that hideth his folly, than the man that hideth his
@c    wisdom.



@c    Ecclesiasticus Chapter 21


@c    Cautions against sin in general, and some sins in particular.

@c    21:1. My son, hast thou sinned?  do so no more:  but for thy former sins
@c    also pray that they may be forgiven thee.

@c    21:2. Flee from sins as from the face of a serpent:  for if thou comest
@c    near them, they will take hold of thee.

@c    21:3. The teeth thereof are the teeth of a lion, killing the souls of
@c    men.

@c    21:4. All iniquity is like a two-edged sword, there is no remedy for
@c    the wound thereof.

@c    21:5. Injuries and wrongs will waste riches:  and the house that is very
@c    rich shall be brought to nothing by pride:  so the substance of the
@c    proud shall be rooted out.

@c    21:6. The prayer out of the mouth of the poor shall reach the ears of
@c    God, and judgment shall come for him speedily.

@c    21:7. He that hateth to be reproved walketh in the trace of a sinner:
@c    and he that feareth God will turn to his own heart.

@c    21:8. He that is mighty by a bold tongue is known afar off, but a wise
@c    man knoweth to slip by him.

@c    21:9. He that buildeth his house at other men's charges, is as he that
@c    gathereth himself stones to build in the winter.

@c    21:10. The congregation of sinners is like tow heaped together, and the
@c    end of them is a flame of fire.

@c    21:11. The way of sinners is made plain with stones, and in their end
@c    is hell, and darkness, and pains.

@c    21:12. He that keepeth justice shall get the understanding thereof.

@c    21:13. The perfection of the fear of God is wisdom and understanding.

@c    21:14. He that is not wise in good, will not be taught.

@c    21:15. But there is a wisdom that aboundeth in evil:  and there is no
@c    understanding where there is bitterness.

@c    21:16. The knowledge of a wise man shall abound like a flood, and his
@c    counsel continueth like a fountain of life.

@c    21:17. The heart of a fool is like a broken vessel, and no wisdom at
@c    all shall it hold.

@c    21:18. A man of sense will praise every wise word he shall hear, and
@c    will apply it to himself:  the luxurious man hath heard it, and it shall
@c    displease him, and he will cast it behind his back.

@c    21:19. The talking of a fool is like a burden in the way:  but in the
@c    lips of the wise, grace shall be found.

@c    21:20. The mouth of the prudent is sought after in the church, and they
@c    will think upon his words in their hearts.

@c    21:21. As a house that is destroyed, so is wisdom to a fool:  and the
@c    knowledge of the unwise is as words without sense.

@c    21:22. Doctrine to a fool is as fetters on the feet, and like manacles
@c    on the right hand.

@c    21:23. A fool lifteth up his voice in laughter:  but a wise man will
@c    scarce laugh low to himself.

@c    21:24. Learning to the prudent is as an ornament of gold, and like a
@c    bracelet upon his right arm.

@c    21:25. The foot of a fool is soon in his neighbour's house:  but a man
@c    of experience will be abashed at the person of the mighty.

@c    21:26. A fool will peep through the window into the house:  but he that
@c    is well taught will stand without.

@c    21:27. It is the folly of a man to hearken at the door:  and a wise man
@c    will be grieved with the disgrace.

@c    21:28. The lips of the unwise will be telling foolish things:  but the
@c    words of the wise shall be weighed in a balance.

@c    21:29. The heart of fools is in their mouth:  and the mouth of wise men
@c    is in their heart.

@c    21:30. While the ungodly curseth the devil, he curseth his own soul.

@c    While the ungodly, etc. . .He condemneth and curseth himself:  inasmuch
@c    as by sin he takes part with the devil, and is, as it were, his member
@c    and subject.

@c    21:31. The talebearer shall defile his own soul, and shall be hated by
@c    all:  and he that shall abide with him shall be hateful:  the silent and
@c    wise man shall be honoured.



@c    Ecclesiasticus Chapter 22


@c    Wise sayings on divers subjects.

@c    22:1. The sluggard is pelted with a dirty stone, and all men will speak
@c    of his disgrace.

@c    22:2. The sluggard is pelted with the dung of oxen:  and every one that
@c    toucheth him will shake his hands.

@c    22:3. A son ill taught is the confusion of the father:  and a foolish
@c    daughter shall be to his loss.

@c    22:4. A wise daughter shall bring an inheritance to her husband:  but
@c    she that confoundeth, becometh a disgrace to her father.

@c    22:5. She that is bold shameth both her father and husband, and will
@c    not be inferior to the ungodly:  and shall be disgraced by them both.

@c    22:6. A tale out of time is like music in mourning:  but the stripes and
@c    instruction of wisdom are never out of time.

@c    22:7. He that teacheth a fool, is like one that glueth a potsherd
@c    together.

@c    22:8. He that telleth a word to him that heareth not, is like one that
@c    waketh a man out of a deep sleep.

@c    22:9. He speaketh with one that is asleep, who uttereth wisdom to a
@c    fool:  and in the end of the discourse he saith:  Who is this?

@c    22:10. Weep for the dead, for his light hath failed:  and weep for the
@c    fool, for his understanding faileth.

@c    For the fool. . .In the language of the Holy Ghost, he is styled a fool,
@c    that turns away from God to follow vanity and sin.  And what is said by
@c    the wise man against fools is meant of such fools as these.

@c    22:11. Weep but a little for the dead, for he is at rest.

@c    22:12. For the wicked life of a wicked fool is worse than death.

@c    22:13. The mourning for the dead is seven days:  but for a fool and an
@c    ungodly man all the days of their life.

@c    22:14. Talk not much with a fool and go not with him that hath no
@c    sense.

@c    22:15. Keep thyself from him, that thou mayst not have trouble, and
@c    thou shalt not be defiled with his sin.

@c    22:16. Turn away from him, and thou shalt find rest, and shalt not be
@c    wearied out with his folly.

@c    22:17. What is heavier than lead?  and what other name hath he but fool?

@c    22:18. Sand and salt, and a mass of iron is easier to bear, than a man
@c    without sense, that is both foolish and wicked.

@c    22:19. A frame of wood bound together in the foundation of a building,
@c    shall not be loosed:  so neither shall the heart that is established by
@c    advised counsel.

@c    22:20. The thought of him that is wise at all times, shall not be
@c    depraved by fear.

@c    22:21. As pales set in high places, and plasterings made without cost,
@c    will not stand against the face of the wind:

@c    22:22. So also a fearful heart in the imagination of a fool shall not
@c    resist against the violence of fear.

@c    22:23. As a fearful heart in the thought of a fool at all times will
@c    not fear, so neither shall he that continueth always in the
@c    commandments of God.

@c    22:24. He that pricketh the eye, bringeth out tears:  and he that
@c    pricketh the heart, bringeth forth resentment.

@c    22:25. He that flingeth a stone at birds, shall drive them away:  so he
@c    that upbraideth his friend, breaketh friendship.

@c    22:26. Although thou hast drawn a sword at a friend, despair not:  for
@c    there may be a returning.  To a friend,

@c    22:27. If thou hast opened a sad mouth, fear not, for there may be a
@c    reconciliation:  except upbraiding, and reproach, and pride, and
@c    disclosing of secrets, or a treacherous wound:  for in all these cases a
@c    friend will flee away.

@c    22:28. Keep fidelity with a friend in his poverty, that in his
@c    prosperity also thou mayst rejoice.

@c    22:29. In the time of his trouble continue faithful to him, that thou
@c    mayst also be heir with him in his inheritance.

@c    22:30. As the vapour of a chimney, and the smoke of the fire goeth up
@c    before the fire:  so also injurious words, and reproaches, and threats,
@c    before blood.

@c    22:31. I will not be ashamed to salute a friend, neither will I hide
@c    myself from his face:  and if any evil happen to me by him, I will bear
@c    it.

@c    22:32. But every one that shall hear it, will beware of him.

@c    22:33. Who will set a guard before my mouth, and a sure seal upon my
@c    lips, that I fall not by them, and that my tongue destroy me not?



@c    Ecclesiasticus Chapter 23


@c    A prayer for grace to flee sin:  cautions against profane swearing and
@c    other vices.

@c    23:1. O Lord, father, and sovereign ruler of my life, leave me not to
@c    their counsel:  nor suffer me to fall by them.

@c    By them. . .Viz., the tongue and the lips, mentioned in the last verse
@c    of the foregoing chapter.

@c    23:2. Who will set scourges over my thoughts, and the discipline of
@c    wisdom over my heart, that they spare me not in their ignorances, and
@c    that their sins may not appear:

@c    That they spare me not in their ignorances, etc. . .That is, that the
@c    scourges and discipline of wisdom may restrain the ignorances, that is,
@c    the slips and offences which are usually committed by the tongue and
@c    the lips.

@c    23:3. Lest my ignorances increase, and my offences be multiplied, and
@c    my sins abound, and I fall before my adversaries, and my enemy rejoice
@c    over me?

@c    23:4. O Lord, father, and God of my life, leave me not to their
@c    devices.

@c    23:5. Give me not haughtiness of my eyes, and turn away from me all
@c    coveting.

@c    23:6. Take from me the greediness of the belly, and let not the lusts
@c    of the flesh take hold of me, and give me not over to a shameless and
@c    foolish mind.

@c    23:7. Hear, O ye children, the discipline of the mouth, and he that
@c    will keep it shall not perish by his lips, nor be brought to fall into
@c    most wicked works.

@c    23:8. A sinner is caught in his own vanity, and the proud and the evil
@c    speakers shall fall thereby.

@c    23:9. Let not thy mouth be accustomed to swearing:  for in it there are
@c    many falls.

@c    23:10. And let not the naming of God be usual in thy mouth, and meddle
@c    not with the names of saints, for thou shalt not escape free from them.

@c    23:11. For as a slave daily put to the question, is never without a
@c    blue mark:  so every one that sweareth, and nameth, shall not be wholly
@c    pure from sin.

@c    23:12. A man that sweareth much, shall be filled with iniquity, and a
@c    scourge shall not depart from his house.

@c    23:13. And if he make it void, his sin shall be upon him, and if he
@c    dissemble it, he offendeth double:

@c    23:14. And if he swear in vain, he shall not be justified:  for his
@c    house shall be filled with his punishment.

@c    23:15. There is also another speech opposite to death, let it not be
@c    found in the inheritance of Jacob.

@c    23:16. For from the merciful all these things shall be taken away, and
@c    they shall not wallow in sins.

@c    23:17. Let not thy mouth be accustomed to indiscreet speech:  for
@c    therein is the word of sin.

@c    23:18. Remember thy father and thy mother, for thou sittest in the
@c    midst of great men:

@c    23:19. Lest God forget thee in their sight, and thou, by thy daily
@c    custom be infatuated and suffer reproach:  and wish that thou hadst not
@c    been born, and curse the day of thy nativity.

@c    23:20. The man that is accustomed to opprobrious words, will never be
@c    corrected all the days of his life.

@c    23:21. Two sorts of men multiply sins, and the third bringeth wrath and
@c    destruction.

@c    23:22. A hot soul is a burning fire, it will never be quenched, till it
@c    devour some thing.

@c    23:23. And a man that is wicked in the mouth of his flesh, will not
@c    leave off till he hath kindled a fire.

@c    23:24. To a man that is a fornicator all bread is sweet, he will not be
@c    weary of sinning unto the end.

@c    23:25. Every man that passeth beyond his own bed, despising his own
@c    soul, and saying:  Who seeth me?

@c    23:26. Darkness compasseth me about, and the walls cover me, and no man
@c    seeth me:  whom do I fear?  the most High will not remember my sins.

@c    23:27. And he understandeth not that his eye seeth all things, for such
@c    a man's fear driveth him from the fear of God, and the eyes of men
@c    fearing him:

@c    23:28. And he knoweth not that the eyes of the Lord are far brighter
@c    than the sun, beholding round about all the ways of men, and the bottom
@c    of the deep, and looking into the hearts of men, into the most hidden
@c    parts.

@c    23:29. For all things were known to the Lord God, before they were
@c    created:  so also after they were perfected he beholdeth all things.

@c    23:30. This man shall be punished in the streets of the city, and he
@c    shall be chased as a colt:  and where he suspected not, he shall be
@c    taken.

@c    23:31. And he shall be in disgrace with all men, because he understood
@c    not the fear of the Lord.

@c    23:32. So every woman also that leaveth her husband, and bringeth in an
@c    heir by another:

@c    23:33. For first she hath been unfaithful to the law of the most High:
@c    and secondly, she hath offended against her husband:  thirdly, she hath
@c    fornicated in adultery, and hath gotten her children of another man.

@c    23:34. This woman shall be brought into the assembly, and inquisition
@c    shall be made of her children.

@c    23:35. Her children shall not take root, and her branches shall bring
@c    forth no fruit.

@c    23:36. She shall leave her memory to be cursed, and her infamy shall
@c    not be blotted out.

@c    23:37. And they that remain shall know, that there is nothing better
@c    than the fear of God:  and that there is nothing sweeter than to have
@c    regard to the commandments of the Lord.

@c    23:38. It is great glory to follow the Lord:  for length of days shall
@c    be received from him.



@c    Ecclesiasticus Chapter 24


@c    Wisdom praiseth herself:  her origin, her dwelling, her dignity, and her
@c    fruits.

@c    24:1. Wisdom shall praise her own self, and shall be honoured in God,
@c    and shall glory in the midst of her people,

@c    24:2. And shall open her mouth in the churches of the most High, and
@c    shall glorify herself in the sight of his power,

@c    24:3. And in the midst of her own people she shall be exalted, and
@c    shall be admired in the holy assembly.

@c    24:4. And in the multitude of the elect she shall have praise, and
@c    among the blessed she shall be blessed, saying:

@c    24:5. I came out of the mouth of the most High, the firstborn before
@c    all creatures:

@c    24:6. I made that in the heavens there should rise light that never
@c    faileth, and as a cloud I covered all the earth:

@c    24:7. I dwelt in the highest places, and my throne is in a pillar of a
@c    cloud.

@c    24:8. I alone have compassed the circuit of heaven, and have penetrated
@c    into the bottom of the deep, and have walked in the waves of the sea,

@c    24:9. And have stood in all the earth:  and in every people,

@c    24:10. And in every nation I have had the chief rule:

@c    24:11. And by my power I have trodden under my feet the hearts of all
@c    the high and low:  and in all these I sought rest, and I shall abide in
@c    the inheritance of the Lord.

@c    24:12. Then the creator of all things commanded, and said to me:  and he
@c    that made me, rested in my tabernacle,

@c    24:13. And he said to me:  Let thy dwelling be in Jacob, and thy
@c    inheritance in Israel, and take root in my elect.

@c    24:14. From the beginning, and before the world, was I created, and
@c    unto the world to come I shall not cease to be, and in the holy
@c    dwelling place I have ministered before him.

@c    24:15. And so was I established in Sion, and in the holy city likewise
@c    I rested, and my power was in Jerusalem.

@c    24:16. And I took root in an honourable people, and in the portion of
@c    my God his inheritance, and my abode is in the full assembly of saints.

@c    24:17. I was exalted like a cedar in Libanus, and as a cypress tree on
@c    mount Sion.

@c    24:18. I was exalted like a palm tree in Cades, and as a rose plant in
@c    Jericho:

@c    24:19. As a fair olive tree in the plains, and as a plane tree by the
@c    water in the streets, was I exalted.

@c    24:20. I gave a sweet smell like cinnamon, and aromatical balm:  I
@c    yielded a sweet odour like the best myrrh:

@c    24:21. And I perfumed my dwelling as storax, and galbanum, and onyx,
@c    and aloes, and as the frankincense not cut, and my odour is as the
@c    purest balm.

@c    24:22. I have stretched out my branches as the turpentine tree, and my
@c    branches are of honour and grace.

@c    24:23. As the vine I have brought forth a pleasant odour:  and my
@c    flowers are the fruit of honour and riches.

@c    24:24. I am the mother of fair love, and of fear, and of knowledge, and
@c    of holy hope.

@c    24:25. In me is all grace of the way and of the truth, in me is all
@c    hope of life and of virtue.

@c    24:26. Come over to me, all ye that desire me, and be filled with my
@c    fruits.

@c    24:27. For my spirit is sweet above honey, and my inheritance above
@c    honey and the honeycomb.

@c    24:28. My memory is unto everlasting generations.

@c    24:29. They that eat me, shall yet hunger:  and they that drink me,
@c    shall yet thirst.

@c    24:30. He that hearkeneth to me, shall not be confounded:  and they that
@c    work by me, shall not sin.

@c    24:31. They that explain me shall have life everlasting.

@c    24:32. All these things are the book of life, and the covenant of the
@c    most High, and the knowledge of truth.

@c    24:33. Moses commanded a law in the precepts of justices, and an
@c    inheritance to the house of Jacob, and the promises to Israel.

@c    24:34. He appointed to David his servant to raise up of him a most
@c    mighty king, and sitting on the throne of glory for ever.

@c    A most mighty king. . .Viz., Christ, who by his gospel, like an
@c    overflowing river, has enriched the earth with heavenly wisdom.

@c    24:35. Who filleth up wisdom as the Phison, and as the Tigris in the
@c    days of the new fruits.

@c    24:36. Who maketh understanding to abound as the Euphrates, who
@c    multiplieth it as the Jordan in the time of harvest.

@c    24:37. Who sendeth knowledge as the light, and riseth up as Gehon in
@c    the time of the vintage.

@c    24:38. Who first hath perfect knowledge of her, and a weaker shall not
@c    search her out.

@c    Who first hath perfect knowledge of her. . .Christ was the first that
@c    had perfect knowledge of heavenly wisdom.

@c    24:39. For her thoughts are more vast than the sea, and her counsels
@c    more deep than the great ocean.

@c    24:40. I, wisdom, have poured out rivers.

@c    24:41. I, like a brook out of a river of a mighty water; I, like a
@c    channel of a river, and like an aqueduct, came out of paradise.

@c    24:42. I said:  I will water my garden of plants, and I will water
@c    abundantly the fruits of my meadow.

@c    24:43. And behold my brook became a great river, and my river came near
@c    to a sea:

@c    24:44. For I make doctrine to shine forth to all as the morning light,
@c    and I will declare it afar off.

@c    24:45. I will penetrate to all the lower parts of the earth, and will
@c    behold all that sleep, and will enlighten all that hope in the Lord.

@c    24:46. I will yet pour out doctrine as prophecy, and will leave it to
@c    them that seek wisdom, and will not cease to instruct their offspring
@c    even to the holy age.

@c    24:47. See ye that I have not laboured myself only, but for all that
@c    seek out the truth.



@c    Ecclesiasticus Chapter 25


@c    Documents of wisdom on several subjects.

@c    25:1. With three things my spirit is pleased, which are approved before
@c    God and men:

@c    25:2. The concord of brethren, and the love of neighbours, and man and
@c    wife that agree well together.

@c    25:3. Three sorts my soul hateth, and I am greatly grieved at their
@c    life:

@c    25:4. A poor man that is proud:  a rich man that is a liar:  an old man
@c    that is a fool, and doting.

@c    25:5. The things that thou hast not gathered in thy youth, how shalt
@c    thou find them in thy old age?

@c    25:6. O how comely is judgment for a grey head, and for ancients to
@c    know counsel!

@c    25:7. O how comely is wisdom for the aged, and understanding and
@c    counsel to men of honour!

@c    25:8. Much experience is the crown of old men, and the fear of God is
@c    their glory.

@c    25:9. Nine things that are not to be imagined by the heart have I
@c    magnified, and the tenth I will utter to men with my tongue.

@c    25:10. A man that hath joy of his children:  and he that liveth and
@c    seeth the fall of his enemies.

@c    25:11. Blessed is he that dwelleth with a wise woman, and that hath not
@c    slipped with his tongue, and that hath not served such as are unworthy
@c    of him.

@c    25:12. Blessed is he that findeth a true friend, and that declareth
@c    justice to an ear that heareth.

@c    25:13. How great is he that findeth wisdom and knowledge! but there is
@c    none above him that feareth the Lord.

@c    25:14. The fear of God hath set itself above all things:

@c    25:15. Blessed is the man, to whom it is given to have the fear of God:
@c    he that holdeth it, to whom shall he be likened?

@c    25:16. The fear of God is the beginning of his love:  and the beginning
@c    of faith is to be fast joined unto it.

@c    25:17. The sadness of the heart is every plague:  and the wickedness of
@c    a woman is all evil.

@c    25:18. And a man will choose any plague, but the plague of the heart:

@c    25:19. And any wickedness, but the wickedness of a woman:

@c    25:20. And any affliction, but the affliction from them that hate him:

@c    25:21. And any revenge, but the revenge of enemies.

@c    25:22. There is no head worse than the head of a serpent:

@c    25:23. And there is no anger above the anger of a woman.  It will be
@c    more agreeable to abide with a lion and a dragon, than to dwell with a
@c    wicked woman.

@c    25:24. The wickedness of a woman changeth her face:  and she darkeneth
@c    her countenance as a bear:  and sheweth it like sackcloth.  In the midst
@c    of her neighbours,

@c    25:25. Her husband groaned, and hearing he sighed a little.

@c    25:26. All malice is short to the malice of a woman, let the lot of
@c    sinners fall upon her.

@c    25:27. As the climbing of a sandy way is to the feet of the aged, so is
@c    a wife full of tongue to a quiet man.

@c    25:28. Look not upon a woman's beauty, and desire not a woman for
@c    beauty.

@c    25:29. A woman's anger, and impudence, and confusion is great.

@c    25:30. A woman, if she have superiority, is contrary to her husband.

@c    25:31. A wicked woman abateth the courage, and maketh a heavy
@c    countenance, and a wounded heart.

@c    25:32. Feeble hands, and disjointed knees, a woman that doth not make
@c    her husband happy.

@c    25:33. From the woman came the beginning of sin, and by her we all die.

@c    25:34. Give no issue to thy water, no, not a little:  nor to a wicked
@c    woman liberty to gad abroad.

@c    25:35. If she walk not at thy hand, she will confound thee in the sight
@c    of thy enemies.

@c    25:36. Cut her off from thy flesh, lest she always abuse thee.



@c    Ecclesiasticus Chapter 26


@c    Of good and bad women.

@c    26:1. Happy is the husband of a good wife:  for the number of his years
@c    is double.

@c    26:2. A virtuous woman rejoiceth her husband, and shall fulfil the
@c    years of his life in peace.

@c    26:3. A good wife is a good portion, she shall be given in the portion
@c    of them that fear God, to a man for his good deeds.

@c    26:4. Rich or poor, if his heart is good, his countenance shall be
@c    cheerful at all times.

@c    26:5. Of three things my heart hath been afraid, and at the fourth my
@c    face hath trembled:

@c    26:6. The accusation of a city, and the gathering together of the
@c    people:

@c    26:7. And a false calumny, all are more grievous than death.

@c    26:8. A jealous woman is the grief and mourning of the heart.

@c    26:9. With a jealous woman is a scourge of the tongue which
@c    communicateth with all.

@c    26:10. As a yoke of oxen that is moved to and fro, so also is a wicked
@c    woman:  he that hath hold of her, is as he that taketh hold of a
@c    scorpion.

@c    26:11. A drunken woman is a great wrath:  and her reproach and shame
@c    shall not be hid.

@c    26:12. The fornication of a woman shall be known by the haughtiness of
@c    her eyes and by her eyelids.

@c    26:13. On a daughter that turneth not away herself, set a strict watch:
@c    lest finding an opportunity she abuse herself.

@c    26:14. Take heed of the impudence of her eyes, and wonder not if she
@c    slight thee.

@c    26:15. She will open her mouth as a thirsty traveller to the fountain,
@c    and will drink of every water near her, and will sit down by every
@c    hedge, and open her quiver against every arrow, until she fail.

@c    26:16. The grace of a diligent woman shall delight her husband, and
@c    shall fat his bones.

@c    26:17. Her discipline is the gift of God.

@c    26:18. Such is a wise and silent woman, and there is nothing so much
@c    worth as a well instructed soul.

@c    26:19. A holy and shamefaced woman is grace upon grace.

@c    26:20. And no price is worthy of a continent soul.

@c    26:21. As the sun when it riseth to the world in the high places of
@c    God, so is the beauty of a good wife for the ornament of her house.

@c    26:22. As the lamp shining upon the holy candlestick, so is the beauty
@c    of the face in a ripe age,

@c    26:23. As golden pillars upon bases of silver, so are the firm feet
@c    upon the soles of a steady woman.

@c    26:24. As everlasting foundations upon a solid rock, so the
@c    commandments of God in the heart of a holy woman.

@c    26:25. At two things my heart is grieved, and the third bringeth anger
@c    upon me.

@c    26:26. A man of war fainting through poverty, and a man of sense
@c    despised:

@c    26:27. And he that passeth over from justice to sin, God hath prepared
@c    such an one for the sword.

@c    26:28. Two sorts of callings have appeared to me hard and dangerous:  a
@c    merchant is hardly free from negligence:  and a huckster shall not be
@c    justified from the sins of the lips.

@c    From negligence. . .That is, from the neglect of the service of God:
@c    because the eager pursuit of the mammon of this world, is apt to make
@c    men of that calling forget the great duties of loving God above all
@c    things, and their neighbours as themselves.--Ibid.  A huckster. . .Or, a
@c    retailer of wine.  Men of that profession are both greatly exposed to
@c    danger of sin themselves, and are too often accessary to the sins of
@c    others.



@c    Ecclesiasticus Chapter 27


@c    Dangers of sin from several heads:  the fear of God is the best
@c    preservative.  He that diggeth a pit, shall fall into it.

@c    27:1. Through poverty many have sinned:  and he that seeketh to be
@c    enriched, turneth away his eye.

@c    27:2. As a stake sticketh fast in the midst of the joining of stones,
@c    so also in the midst of selling and buying, sin shall stick fast.

@c    27:3. Sin shall be destroyed with the sinner.

@c    27:4. Unless thou hold thyself diligently in the fear of the Lord, thy
@c    house shall quickly be overthrown.

@c    27:5. As when one sifteth with a sieve, the dust will remain:  so will
@c    the perplexity of a man in his thoughts.

@c    27:6. The furnace trieth the potter's vessels, and the trial of
@c    affliction just men.

@c    27:7. As the dressing of a tree sheweth the fruit thereof, so a word
@c    out of the thought of the heart of man.

@c    27:8. Praise not a man before he speaketh, for this is the trial of
@c    men.

@c    27:9. If thou followest justice, thou shalt obtain her:  and shalt put
@c    her on as a long robe of honour, and thou shalt dwell with her:  and she
@c    shall protect thee for ever, and in the day of acknowledgment thou
@c    shalt find a strong foundation.

@c    27:10. Birds resort unto their like:  so truth will return to them that
@c    practise her.

@c    27:11. The lion always lieth in wait for prey:  so do sins for them that
@c    work iniquities.

@c    27:12. A holy man continueth in wisdom as the sun:  but a fool is
@c    changed as the moon.

@c    27:13. In the midst of the unwise keep in the word till its time:  but
@c    be continually among men that think.

@c    27:14. The discourse of sinners is hateful, and their laughter is at
@c    the pleasures of sin.

@c    27:15. The speech that sweareth much shall make the hair of the head
@c    stand upright:  and its irreverence shall make one stop his ears.

@c    27:16. In the quarrels of the road is the shedding of blood:  and their
@c    cursing is a grievous hearing.

@c    27:17. He that discloseth the secret of a friend loseth his credit, and
@c    shall never find a friend to his mind.

@c    27:18. Love thy neighbour, and be joined to him with fidelity.

@c    27:19. But if thou discover his secrets, follow no more after him.

@c    27:20. For as a man that destroyeth his friend, so is he that
@c    destroyeth the friendship of his neighbour.

@c    27:21. And as one that letteth a bird go out of his hand, so hast thou
@c    let thy neighbour go, and thou shalt not get him again.

@c    27:22. Follow after him no more, for he is gone afar off, he is fled,
@c    as a roe escaped out of the snare because his soul is wounded.

@c    27:23. Thou canst no more bind him up.  And of a curse there is
@c    reconciliation:

@c    And of a curse there is reconciliation. . .That is, it is easier to
@c    obtain a reconciliation after a curse, than after disclosing a secret.

@c    27:24. But to disclose the secrets of a friend, leaveth no hope to an
@c    unhappy soul.

@c    27:25. He that winketh with the eye forgeth wicked things, and no man
@c    will cast him off:

@c    27:26. In the sight of thy eyes he will sweeten his mouth, and will
@c    admire thy words:  but at the last he will writhe his mouth, and on thy
@c    words he will lay a stumblingblock.

@c    27:27. I have hated many things but not like him, and the Lord will
@c    hate him.

@c    27:28. If one cast a stone on high, it will fall upon his own head:  and
@c    the deceitful stroke will wound the deceitful.

@c    27:29. He that diggeth a pit, shall fall into it:  and he that setteth a
@c    stone for his neighbour, shall stumble upon it:  and he that layeth a
@c    snare for another, shall perish in it.

@c    27:30. A mischievous counsel shall be rolled back upon the author, and
@c    he shall not know from whence it cometh to him.

@c    27:31. Mockery and reproach are of the proud, and vengeance as a lion
@c    shall lie in wait for him.

@c    27:32. They shall perish in a snare that are delighted with the fall of
@c    the just:  and sorrow shall consume them before they die.

@c    27:33. Anger and fury are both of them abominable, and the sinful man
@c    shall be subject to them.



@c    Ecclesiasticus Chapter 28


@c    Lessons against revenge and quarrels.  The evils of the tongue.

@c    28:1. He that seeketh to revenge himself, shall find vengeance from the
@c    Lord, and he will surely keep his sins in remembrance.

@c    28:2. Forgive thy neighbour if he hath hurt thee:  and then shall thy
@c    sins be forgiven to thee when thou prayest.

@c    28:3. Man to man reserveth anger, and doth he seek remedy of God?

@c    28:4. He hath no mercy on a man like himself, and doth he entreat for
@c    his own sins?

@c    28:5. He that is but flesh, nourisheth anger, and doth he ask
@c    forgiveness of God?  who shall obtain pardon for his sins?

@c    28:6. Remember thy last things, and let enmity cease:

@c    28:7. For corruption and death hang over in his commandments.

@c    In his commandments. . .Supply the sentence out of the Greek thus:
@c    Remember corruption and death, and abide in the commandments.

@c    28:8. Remember the fear of God, and be not angry with thy neighbour.

@c    28:9. Remember the covenant of the most High, and overlook the
@c    ignorance of thy neighbour.

@c    28:10. Refrain from strife, and thou shalt diminish thy sins.

@c    28:11. For a passionate man kindleth strife, and a sinful man will
@c    trouble his friends, and bring in debate in the midst of them that are
@c    at peace.

@c    28:12. For as the wood of the forest is, so the fire burneth, and as a
@c    man's strength is, so shall his anger be, and according to his riches
@c    he shall increase his anger.

@c    28:13. A hasty contention kindleth a fire and a hasty quarrel sheddeth
@c    blood and a tongue that beareth witness bringeth death.

@c    28:14. If thou blow the spark, it shall burn as a fire:  and if thou
@c    spit upon it, it shall be quenched:  both come out of the mouth.

@c    28:15. The whisperer and the double tongue is accursed:  for he hath
@c    troubled many that were at peace.

@c    28:16. The tongue of a third person hath disquieted many, and scattered
@c    them from nation to nation.

@c    28:17. It hath destroyed the strong cities of the rich, and hath
@c    overthrown the houses of great men.

@c    28:18. It hath cut in pieces the forces of people, and undone strong
@c    nations.

@c    28:19. The tongue of a third person hath cast out valiant women, and
@c    deprived them of their labours.

@c    28:20. He that hearkeneth to it, shall never have rest, neither shall
@c    he have a friend in whom he may repose.

@c    28:21. The stroke of a whip maketh a blue mark:  but the stroke of the
@c    tongue will break the bones.

@c    28:22. Many have fallen by the edge of the sword, but not so many as
@c    have perished by their own tongue.

@c    28:23. Blessed is he that is defended from a wicked tongue, that hath
@c    not passed into the wrath thereof, and that hath not drawn the yoke
@c    thereof, and hath not been bound in its bands.

@c    28:24. For its yoke is a yoke of iron:  and its bands are bands of
@c    brass.

@c    28:25. The death thereof is a most evil death:  and hell is preferable
@c    to it.

@c    28:26. Its continuance shall not be for a long time, but it shall
@c    possess the ways of the unjust:  and the just shall not be burnt with
@c    its flame.

@c    28:27. They that forsake God shall fall into it, and it shall burn in
@c    them, and shall not be quenched, and it shall be sent upon them as a
@c    lion, and as a leopard it shall tear them.

@c    28:28. Hedge in thy ears with thorns, hear not a wicked tongue, and
@c    make doors and bars to thy mouth.

@c    28:29. Melt down thy gold and silver, and make a balance for thy words,
@c    and a just bridle for thy mouth:

@c    28:30. And take heed lest thou slip with thy tongue, and fall in the
@c    sight of thy enemies who lie in wait for thee, and thy fall be
@c    incurable unto death.



@c    Ecclesiasticus Chapter 29


@c    Of charity in lending money, and justice in repaying.  Of alms, and of
@c    being surety.

@c    29:1. He that sheweth mercy, lendeth to his neighbour:  and he that is
@c    stronger in hand, keepeth the commandments.

@c    And he that is stronger in hand. . .That is, he that is hearty and
@c    bountiful in lending to his neighbour in his necessity.

@c    29:2. Lend to thy neighbour in the time of his need, and pay thou thy
@c    neighbour again in due time.

@c    29:3. Keep thy word, and deal faithfully with him:  and thou shalt
@c    always find that which is necessary for thee.

@c    29:4. Many have looked upon a thing lent as a thing found, and have
@c    given trouble to them that helped them.

@c    29:5. Till they receive, they kiss the hands of the lender, and in
@c    promises they humble their voice:

@c    29:6. But when they should repay, they will ask time, and will return
@c    tedious and murmuring words, and will complain of the time:

@c    29:7. And if he be able to pay, he will stand off, he will scarce pay
@c    one half, and will count it as if he had found it:

@c    29:8. But if not, he will defraud him of his money, and he shall get
@c    him for an enemy without cause.

@c    29:9. And he will pay him with reproaches and curses, and instead of
@c    honour and good turn will repay him injuries.

@c    29:10. Many have refused to lend, not out of wickedness, but they were
@c    afraid to be defrauded without cause.

@c    29:11. But yet towards the poor be thou more hearty, and delay not to
@c    shew him mercy.

@c    29:12. Help the poor because of the commandment:  and send him not away
@c    empty handed because of his poverty.

@c    29:13. Lose thy money for thy brother and thy friend:  and hide it not
@c    under a stone to be lost.

@c    29:14. Place thy treasure in the commandments of the most High, and it
@c    shall bring thee more profit than gold.

@c    29:15. Shut up alms in the heart of the poor, and it shall obtain help
@c    for thee against all evil.

@c    29:16. Better than the shield of the mighty, and better than the spear:

@c    29:17. It shall fight for thee against thy enemy.

@c    29:18. A good man is surety for his neighbour:  and he that hath lost
@c    shame, will leave him to himself.

@c    29:19. Forget not the kindness of thy surety:  for he hath given his
@c    life for thee.

@c    29:20. The sinner and the unclean fleeth from his surety.

@c    29:21. A sinner attributeth to himself the goods of his surety:  and he
@c    that is of an unthankful mind will leave him that delivered him.

@c    29:22. A man is surety for his neighbour:  and when he hath lost all
@c    shame, he shall forsake him.

@c    29:23. Evil suretyship hath undone many of good estate, and hath tossed
@c    them as a wave of the sea.

@c    29:24. It hath made powerful men to go from place to place round about,
@c    and they have wandered in strange countries.

@c    29:25. A sinner that transgresseth the commandment of the Lord, shall
@c    fall into an evil suretyship:  and he that undertaketh many things,
@c    shall fall into judgment.

@c    29:26. Recover thy neighbour according to thy power, and take heed to
@c    thyself that thou fall not.

@c    29:27. The chief thing for man's life is water and bread, and clothing,
@c    and a house to cover shame.

@c    29:28. Better is the poor man's fare under a roof of boards, than
@c    sumptuous cheer abroad in another man's house.

@c    29:29. Be contented with little instead of much, and thou shalt not
@c    hear the reproach of going abroad.

@c    29:30. It is a miserable life to go as a guest from house to house:  for
@c    where a man is a stranger, he shall not deal confidently, nor open his
@c    mouth.

@c    29:31. He shall entertain and feed, and give drink to the unthankful,
@c    and moreover he shall hear bitter words.

@c    29:32. Go, stranger, and furnish the table, and give others to eat what
@c    thou hast in thy hand.

@c    29:33. Give place to the honourable presence of my friends:  for I want
@c    my house, my brother being to be lodged with me.

@c    29:34. These things are grievous to a man of understanding:  the
@c    upbraiding of houseroom, and the reproaching of the lender.



@c    Ecclesiasticus Chapter 30


@c    Of correction of children.  Health is better than wealth.  Excessive
@c    grief is hurtful.

@c    30:1. He that loveth his son, frequently chastiseth him, that he may
@c    rejoice in his latter end, and not grope after the doors of his
@c    neighbours.

@c    30:2. He that instructeth his son shall be praised in him, and shall
@c    glory in him in the midst of them of his household.

@c    30:3. He that teacheth his son, maketh his enemy jealous, and in the
@c    midst of his friends he shall glory in him.

@c    30:4. His father is dead, and he is as if he were not dead:  for he hath
@c    left one behind him that is like himself.

@c    30:5. While he lived he saw and rejoiced in him:  and when he died he
@c    was not sorrowful, neither was he confounded before his enemies.

@c    30:6. For he left behind him a defender of his house against his
@c    enemies, and one that will requite kindness to his friends.

@c    30:7. For the souls of his sons he shall bind up his wounds, and at
@c    every cry his bowels shall be troubled.

@c    30:8. A horse not broken becometh stubborn, and a child left to himself
@c    will become headstrong.

@c    30:9. Give thy son his way, and he shall make thee afraid:  play with
@c    him, and he shall make thee sorrowful.

@c    30:10. Laugh not with him, lest thou have sorrow, and at the last thy
@c    teeth be set on edge.

@c    30:11. Give him not liberty in his youth, and wink not at his devices.

@c    30:12. Bow down his neck while he is young, and beat his sides while he
@c    is a child, lest he grow stubborn, and regard thee not, and so be a
@c    sorrow of heart to thee.

@c    30:13. Instruct thy son, and labour about him, lest his lewd behaviour
@c    be an offence to thee.

@c    30:14. Better is a poor man who is sound, and strong of constitution,
@c    than a rich man who is weak and afflicted with evils.

@c    30:15. Health of the soul in holiness of justice, is better than all
@c    gold and silver:  and a sound body, than immense revenues.

@c    30:16. There is no riches above the riches of the health of the body:
@c    and there is no pleasure above the joy of the heart.

@c    30:17. Better is death than a bitter life, and everlasting rest, than
@c    continual sickness.

@c    30:18. Good things that are hidden in a mouth that is shut, are as
@c    messes of meat set about a grave.

@c    30:19. What good shall an offering do to an idol?  for it can neither
@c    eat, nor smell:

@c    30:20. So is he that is persecuted by the Lord, bearing the reward of
@c    his iniquity:

@c    30:21. He seeth with his eyes, and groaneth, as an eunuch embracing a
@c    virgin, and sighing.

@c    30:22. Give not up thy soul to sadness, and afflict not thyself in thy
@c    own counsel.

@c    30:23. The joyfulness of the heart, is the life of a man, and a never
@c    failing treasure of holiness:  and the joy of a man is length of life.

@c    30:24. Have pity on thy own soul, pleasing God, and contain thyself:
@c    gather up thy heart in his holiness:  and drive away sadness far from
@c    thee.

@c    30:25. For sadness hath killed many, and there is no profit in it.

@c    30:26. Envy and anger shorten a man's days, and pensiveness will bring
@c    old age before the time.

@c    30:27. A cheerful and good heart is always feasting:  for his banquets
@c    are prepared with diligence.



@c    Ecclesiasticus Chapter 31


@c    Of the desire of riches, and of moderation in eating and drinking.

@c    31:1. Watching for riches consumeth the flesh, and the thought thereof
@c    driveth away sleep.

@c    31:2. The thinking beforehand turneth away the understanding, and a
@c    grievous sickness maketh the soul sober.

@c    31:3. The rich man hath laboured in gathering riches together, and when
@c    he resteth he shall be filled with his goods.

@c    31:4. The poor man hath laboured in his low way of life, and in the end
@c    he is still poor.

@c    31:5. He that loveth gold, shall not be justified:  and he that
@c    followeth after corruption, shall be filled with it.

@c    31:6. Many have been brought to fall for gold, and the beauty thereof
@c    hath been their ruin.

@c    31:7. Gold is a stumblingblock to them that sacrifice to it:  woe to
@c    them that eagerly follow after it, and every fool shall perish by it.

@c    31:8. Blessed is the rich man that is found without blemish:  and that
@c    hath not gone after gold, nor put his trust in money nor in treasures.

@c    31:9. Who is he, and we will praise him?  for he hath done wonderful
@c    things in his life.

@c    31:10. Who hath been tried thereby, and made perfect, he shall have
@c    glory everlasting.  He that could have transgressed, and hath not
@c    transgressed:  and could do evil things, and hath not done them:

@c    31:11. Therefore are his goods established in the Lord, and all the
@c    church of the saints shall declare his alms.

@c    31:12. Art thou set at a great table?  be not the first to open thy
@c    mouth upon it.

@c    31:13. Say not:  There are many things which are upon it.

@c    31:14. Remember that a wicked eye is evil.

@c    31:15. What is created more wicked than an eye?  therefore shall it weep
@c    over all the face when it shall see.

@c    31:16. Stretch not out thy hand first, lest being disgraced with envy
@c    thou be put to confusion.

@c    31:17. Be not hasty in a feast.

@c    31:18. Judge of the disposition of thy neighbour by thyself.

@c    31:19. Use as a frugal man the things that are set before thee:  lest if
@c    thou eatest much, thou be hated.

@c    31:20. Leave off first, for manners' sake:  and exceed not, lest thou
@c    offend.

@c    31:21. And if thou sittest among many, reach not thy hand out first of
@c    all, and be not the first to ask for drink.

@c    31:22. How sufficient is a little wine for a man well taught, and in
@c    sleeping thou shalt not be uneasy with it, and thou shalt feel no pain.

@c    31:23. Watching, and choler, and gripes, are with an intemperate man:

@c    31:24. Sound and wholesome sleep with a moderate man:  he shall sleep
@c    till morning, and his soul shall be delighted with him.

@c    31:25. And if thou hast been forced to eat much, arise, go out, and
@c    vomit:  and it shall refresh thee, and thou shalt not bring sickness
@c    upon thy body.

@c    31:26. Hear me, my son, and despise me not:  and in the end thou shalt
@c    find my words.

@c    31:27. In all thy works be quick, and no infirmity shall come to thee.

@c    31:28. The lips of many shall bless him that is liberal of his bread,
@c    and the testimony of his truth is faithful.

@c    31:29. Against him that is niggardly of his bread, the city will
@c    murmur, and the testimony of his niggardliness is true.

@c    31:30. Challenge not them that love wine:  for wine hath destroyed very
@c    many.

@c    31:31. Fire trieth hard iron:  so wine drunk to excess shall rebuke the
@c    hearts of the proud.

@c    31:32. Wine taken with sobriety is equal life to men:  if thou drink it
@c    moderately, thou shalt be sober.

@c    31:33. What is his life, who is diminished with wine?

@c    31:34. What taketh away life?  death.

@c    31:35. Wine was created from the beginning to make men joyful, and not
@c    to make them drunk.

@c    31:36. Wine drunken with moderation is the joy of the soul and the
@c    heart.

@c    31:37. Sober drinking is health to soul and body.

@c    31:38. Wine drunken with excess raiseth quarrels, and wrath, and many
@c    ruins.

@c    31:39. Wine drunken with excess is bitterness of the soul.

@c    31:40. The heat of drunkenness is the stumblingblock of the fool,
@c    lessening strength and causing wounds.

@c    31:41. Rebuke not thy neighbour in a banquet of wine:  and despise him
@c    not in his mirth.

@c    31:42. Speak not to him words of reproach:  and press him not in
@c    demanding again.



@c    Ecclesiasticus Chapter 32


@c    Lessons for superiors and inferiors.  Advantages of fearing God, and
@c    doing nothing without counsel.

@c    32:1. Have they made thee ruler?  be not lifted up:  be among them as one
@c    of them.

@c    32:2. Have care of them, and so sit down, and when thou hast acquitted
@c    thyself of all thy charge, take thy place:

@c    32:3. That thou mayst rejoice for them, and receive a crown as an
@c    ornament of grace, and get the honour of the contribution.

@c    32:4. Speak, thou that art elder:  for it becometh thee,

@c    32:5. To speak the first word with careful knowledge, and hinder not
@c    music.

@c    32:6. Where there is no hearing, pour not out words, and be not lifted
@c    up out of season with thy wisdom.

@c    32:7. A concert of music in a banquet of wine is as a carbuncle set in
@c    gold.

@c    32:8. As a signet of an emerald in a work of gold:  so is the melody of
@c    music with pleasant and moderate wine.

@c    32:9. Hear in silence, and for thy reverence good grace shall come to
@c    thee.

@c    32:10. Young man, scarcely speak in thy own cause.

@c    32:11. If thou be asked twice, let thy answer be short.

@c    32:12. In many things be as if thou wert ignorant, and hear in silence
@c    and withal seeking.

@c    32:13. In the company of great men take not upon thee:  and when the
@c    ancients are present, speak not much.

@c    32:14. Before a storm goeth lightning:  and before shamefacedness goeth
@c    favour:  and for thy reverence good grace shall come to thee.

@c    32:15. And at the time of rising be not slack:  but be first to run home
@c    to thy house, and there withdraw thyself, and there take thy pastime.

@c    32:16. And do what thou hast a mind, but not in sin or proud speech.

@c    32:17. And for all these things bless the Lord, that made thee, and
@c    that replenisheth thee with all his good things.

@c    32:18. He that feareth the Lord, will receive his discipline:  and they
@c    that will seek him early, shall find a blessing.

@c    32:19. He that seeketh the law, shall be filled with it:  and he that
@c    dealeth deceitfully, shall meet with a stumblingblock therein.

@c    32:20. They that fear the Lord, shall find just judgment, and shall
@c    kindle justice as a light.

@c    32:21. A sinful man will flee reproof, and will find an excuse
@c    according to his will.

@c    32:22. A man of counsel will not neglect understanding, a strange and
@c    proud man will not dread fear:

@c    32:23. Even after he hath done with fear without counsel, he shall be
@c    controlled by the things of his own seeking.

@c    32:24. My son, do thou nothing without counsel, and thou shalt not
@c    repent when thou hast done.

@c    32:25. Go not in the way of ruin, and thou shalt not stumble against
@c    the stones:  trust not thyself to a rugged way, lest thou set a
@c    stumblingblock to thy soul.

@c    32:26. And beware of thy own children, and take heed of them of thy
@c    household.

@c    32:27. In every work of thine regard thy soul in faith:  for this is the
@c    keeping of the commandments.

@c    In faith. . .That is, follow sincerely thy soul in her faith and
@c    conscience.

@c    32:28. He that believeth God, taketh heed to the commandments:  and he
@c    that trusteth in him, shall fare never the worse.



@c    Ecclesiasticus Chapter 33


@c    The fear of God is the best security.  Times and men are in the hands of
@c    God.  Take care of thyself as long as thou livest, and look to thy
@c    servants.

@c    33:1. No evils shall happen to him that feareth the Lord, but in
@c    temptation God will keep him and deliver him from evils.

@c    33:2. A wise man hateth not the commandments and justices, and he shall
@c    not be dashed in pieces as a ship in a storm.

@c    33:3. A man of understanding is faithful to the law of God, and the law
@c    is faithful to him.

@c    33:4. He that cleareth up a question, shall prepare what to say, and so
@c    having prayed he shall be heard, and shall keep discipline, and then he
@c    shall answer.

@c    33:5. The heart of a fool is as a wheel of a cart:  and his thoughts are
@c    like a rolling axletree.

@c    33:6. A friend that is a mocker, is like a stallion horse:  he neigheth
@c    under every one that sitteth upon him.

@c    33:7. Why doth one day excel another, and one light another, and one
@c    year another year, when all come of the sun?

@c    33:8. By the knowledge of the Lord they were distinguished, the sun
@c    being made, and keeping his commandment.

@c    33:9. And he ordered the seasons, and holidays of them, and in them
@c    they celebrated festivals at an hour.

@c    33:10. Some of them God made high and great days, and some of them he
@c    put in the number of ordinary days.  And all men are from the ground,
@c    and out of the earth, from whence Adam was created.

@c    33:11. With much knowledge the Lord hath divided them and diversified
@c    their ways.

@c    33:12. Some of them hath he blessed, and exalted:  and some of them hath
@c    he sanctified, and set near himself:  and some of them hath he cursed
@c    and brought low, and turned them from their station.

@c    33:13. As the potter's clay is in his hand, to fashion and order it:

@c    33:14. All his ways are according to his ordering:  so man is in the
@c    hand of him that made him, and he will render to him according to his
@c    judgment.

@c    33:15. Good is set against evil, and life against death:  so also is the
@c    sinner against a just man.  And so look upon all the works of the most
@c    High.  Two and two, and one against another.

@c    33:16. And I awaked last of all, and as one that gathereth after the
@c    grapegatherers.

@c    33:17. In the blessing of God I also have hoped:  and as one that
@c    gathereth grapes, have I filled the winepress.

@c    33:18. See that I have not laboured for myself only, but for all that
@c    seek discipline.

@c    33:19. Hear me, ye great men, and all ye people, and hearken with your
@c    ears, ye rulers of the church.

@c    33:20. Give not to son or wife, brother or friend, power over thee
@c    while thou livest; and give not thy estate to another, lest thou
@c    repent, and thou entreat for the same.

@c    33:21. As long as thou livest, and hast breath in thee, let no man
@c    change thee.

@c    Change thee. . .That is, so as to have this power over thee.

@c    33:22. For it is better that thy children should ask of thee, than that
@c    thou look toward the hands of thy children.

@c    33:23. In all thy works keep the pre-eminence.

@c    The pre-eminence. . .That is, be master in thy own house, and part not
@c    with thy authority.

@c    33:24. Let no stain sully thy glory.  In the time when thou shalt end
@c    the days of thy life, and in the time of thy decease, distribute thy
@c    inheritance.

@c    33:25. Fodder, and a wand, and a burden are for an ass:  bread, and
@c    correction, and work for a slave.

@c    33:26. He worketh under correction, and seeketh to rest:  let his hands
@c    be idle, and he seeketh liberty.

@c    33:27. The yoke and the thong bend a stiff neck, and continual labours
@c    bow a slave.

@c    33:28. Torture and fetters are for a malicious slave:  send him to work,
@c    that he be not idle:

@c    33:29. For idleness hath taught much evil.

@c    33:30. Set him to work:  for so it is fit for him.  And if he be not
@c    obedient, bring him down with fetters, but be not excessive towards any
@c    one, and do no grievous thing without judgment.

@c    33:31. If thou have a faithful servant, let him be to thee as thy own
@c    soul:  treat him as a brother:  because in the blood of thy soul thou
@c    hast gotten him.

@c    33:32. If thou hurt him unjustly, he will run away:

@c    33:33. And if he rise up and depart, thou knowest not whom to ask, and
@c    in what way to seek him.



@c    Ecclesiasticus Chapter 34


@c    The vanity of dreams.  The advantage of experience, and of the fear of
@c    God.

@c    34:1. The hopes of a man that is void of understanding are vain and
@c    deceitful:  and dreams lift up fools.

@c    34:2. The man that giveth heed to lying visions, is like to him that
@c    catcheth at a shadow, and followeth after the wind.

@c    34:3. The vision of dreams is the resemblance of one thing to another:
@c    as when a man's likeness is before the face of a man.

@c    34:4. What can be made clean by the unclean?  and what truth can come
@c    from that which is false?

@c    34:5. Deceitful divinations and lying omens and the dreams of
@c    evildoers, are vanity:

@c    34:6. And the heart fancieth as that of a woman in travail:  except it
@c    be a vision sent forth from the most High, set not thy heart upon them.

@c    34:7. For dreams have deceived many, and they have failed that put
@c    their trust in them.

@c    34:8. The word of the law shall be fulfilled without a lie, and wisdom
@c    shall be made plain in the mouth of the faithful.

@c    34:9. What doth he know, that hath not been tried?  A man that hath much
@c    experience, shall think of many things:  and he that hath learned many
@c    things, shall shew forth understanding.

@c    34:10. He that hath no experience, knoweth little:  and he that hath
@c    been experienced in many things, multiplieth prudence.

@c    34:11. He that hath not been tried, what manner of things doth he know?
@c    he that hath been surprised, shall abound with subtlety.

@c    34:12. I have seen many things by travelling, and many customs of
@c    things.

@c    34:13. Sometimes I have been in danger of death for these things, and I
@c    have been delivered by the grace of God.

@c    34:14. The spirit of those that fear God, is sought after, and by his
@c    regard shall be blessed.

@c    34:15. For their hope is on him that saveth them, and the eyes of God
@c    are upon them that love him.

@c    34:16. He that feareth the Lord shall tremble at nothing, and shall not
@c    be afraid:  for he is his hope.

@c    34:17. The soul of him that feareth the Lord is blessed.

@c    34:18. To whom doth he look, and who is his strength?

@c    34:19. The eyes of the Lord are upon them that fear him, he is their
@c    powerful protector, and strong stay, a defence from the heat, and a
@c    cover from the sun at noon,

@c    34:20. A preservation from stumbling, and a help from falling:  he
@c    raiseth up the soul, and enlighteneth the eyes, and giveth health, and
@c    life, and blessing.

@c    34:21. The offering of him that sacrificeth of a thing wrongfully
@c    gotten, is stained, and the mockeries of the unjust are not acceptable.

@c    34:22. The Lord is only for them that wait upon him in the way of truth
@c    and justice.

@c    34:23. The most High approveth not the gifts of the wicked:  neither
@c    hath he respect to the oblations of the unjust, nor will he be pacified
@c    for sins by the multitude of their sacrifices.

@c    34:24. He that offereth sacrifice of the goods of the poor, is as one
@c    that sacrificeth the son in the presence of his father.

@c    34:25. The bread of the needy, is the life of the poor:  he that
@c    defraudeth them thereof, is a man of blood.

@c    34:26. He that taketh away the bread gotten by sweat, is like him that
@c    killeth his neighbour.

@c    34:27. He that sheddeth blood, and he that defraudeth the laborer of
@c    his hire, are brothers.

@c    34:28. When one buildeth up, and another pulleth down:  what profit have
@c    they but the labour?

@c    34:29. When one prayeth, and another curseth:  whose voice will God
@c    hear?

@c    34:30. He that washeth himself after touching the dead, if he toucheth
@c    him again, what doth his washing avail?

@c    34:31. So a man that fasteth for his sins, and doth the same again,
@c    what doth his humbling himself profit him?  who will hear his prayer?



@c    Ecclesiasticus Chapter 35


@c    What sacrifices are pleasing to God.

@c    35:1. He that keepeth the law, multiplieth offerings.

@c    35:2. It is a wholesome sacrifice to take heed to the commandments, and
@c    to depart from all iniquity.

@c    35:3. And to depart from injustice, is to offer a propitiatory
@c    sacrifice for injustices, and a begging of pardon for sins.

@c    35:4. He shall return thanks, that offereth fine flour:  and he that
@c    doth mercy, offereth sacrifice.

@c    35:5. To depart from iniquity is that which pleaseth the Lord, and to
@c    depart from injustice, is an entreaty for sins.

@c    35:6. Thou shalt not appear empty in the sight of the Lord.

@c    35:7. For all these things are to be done because of the commandment of
@c    God.

@c    35:8. The oblation of the just maketh the altar fat, and is an odour of
@c    sweetness in the sight of the most High.

@c    35:9. The sacrifice of the just is acceptable, and the Lord will not
@c    forget the memorial thereof.

@c    35:10. Give glory to God with a good heart:  and diminish not the
@c    firstfruits of thy hands.

@c    35:11. In every gift shew a cheerful countenance, and sanctify thy
@c    tithes with joy.

@c    35:12. Give to the most High according to what he hath given to thee,
@c    and with a good eye do according to the ability of thy hands:

@c    35:13. For the Lord maketh recompense, and will give thee seven times
@c    as much.

@c    35:14. Do not offer wicked gifts, for such he will not receive.

@c    35:15. And look not upon an unjust sacrifice, for the Lord is judge,
@c    and there is not with him respect of person.

@c    35:16. The Lord will not accept any person against a poor man, and he
@c    will hear the prayer of him that is wronged.

@c    35:17. He will not despise the prayers of the fatherless:  nor the
@c    widow, when she poureth out her complaint.

@c    35:18. Do not the widow's tears run down the cheek, and her cry against
@c    him that causeth them to fall?

@c    35:19. For from the cheek they go up even to heaven, and the Lord that
@c    heareth will not be delighted with them.

@c    35:20. He that adoreth God with joy, shall be accepted, and his prayer
@c    shall approach even to the clouds.

@c    35:21. The prayer of him that humbleth himself, shall pierce the
@c    clouds:  and till it come nigh he will not be comforted:  and he will not
@c    depart till the most High behold.

@c    35:22. And the Lord will not be slack, but will judge for the just, and
@c    will do judgment:  and the Almighty will not have patience with them,
@c    that he may crush their back:

@c    35:23. And he will repay vengeance to the Gentiles, till he have taken
@c    away the multitude of the proud, and broken the sceptres of the unjust,

@c    35:24. Till he have rendered to men according to their deeds:  and
@c    according to the works of Adam, and according to his presumption,

@c    35:25. Till he have judged the cause of his people, and he shall
@c    delight the just with his mercy.

@c    35:26. The mercy of God is beautiful in the time of affliction, as a
@c    cloud of rain in the time of drought.



@c    Ecclesiasticus Chapter 36


@c    A prayer for the church of God.  Of a good heart, and a good wife.

@c    36:1. Have mercy upon us, O God of all, and behold us, and shew us the
@c    light of thy mercies:

@c    36:2. And send thy fear upon the nations, that have not sought after
@c    thee:  that they may know that there is no God beside thee, and that
@c    they may shew forth thy wonders.

@c    36:3. Lift up thy hand over the strange nations, that they may see thy
@c    power.

@c    36:4. For as thou hast been sanctified in us in their sight, so thou
@c    shalt be magnified among them in our presence,

@c    36:5. That they may know thee, as we also have known thee, that there
@c    is no God beside thee, O Lord.

@c    36:6. Renew thy signs, and work new miracles.

@c    36:7. Glorify thy hand, and thy right arm.

@c    36:8. Raise up indignation, and pour out wrath.

@c    36:9. Take away the adversary, and crush the enemy.

@c    36:10. Hasten the time, and remember the end, that they may declare thy
@c    wonderful works.

@c    36:11. Let him that escapeth be consumed by the rage of the fire:  and
@c    let them perish that oppress thy people.

@c    36:12. Crush the head of the princes of the enemies that say:  There is
@c    no other beside us.

@c    36:13. Gather together all the tribes of Jacob:  that they may know that
@c    there no God besides thee, and may declare thy great works:  and thou
@c    shalt inherit them as from the beginning.

@c    36:14. Have mercy on thy people, upon whom thy name is invoked:  and
@c    upon Israel, whom thou hast raised up to be thy firstborn.

@c    36:15. Have mercy on Jerusalem, the city which thou hast sanctified,
@c    the city of thy rest.

@c    36:16. Fill Sion with thy unspeakable words, and thy people with thy
@c    glory.

@c    36:17. Give testimony to them that are thy creatures from the
@c    beginning, and raise up the prophecies which the former prophets spoke
@c    in thy name.

@c    36:18. Reward them that patiently wait for thee, that thy prophets may
@c    be found faithful:  and hear the prayers of thy servants,

@c    36:19. According to the blessing of Aaron over thy people, and direct
@c    us into the way of justice, and let all know that dwell upon the earth,
@c    that thou art God the beholder of all ages.

@c    36:20. The belly will devour all meat, yet one is better than another.

@c    36:21. The palate tasteth venison and the wise heart false speeches.

@c    36:22. A perverse heart will cause grief, and a man of experience will
@c    resist it.

@c    36:23. A woman will receive every man:  yet one daughter is better than
@c    another.

@c    A woman will receive every man. . .That is, any man that her parents
@c    propose to her to marry, though she does not like him, but marries in
@c    obedience to her parents, who make the choice for her.

@c    36:24. The beauty of a woman cheereth the countenance of her husband,
@c    and a man desireth nothing more.

@c    36:25. If she have a tongue that can cure, and likewise mitigate and
@c    shew mercy:  her husband is not like other men.

@c    36:26. He that possesseth a good wife, beginneth a possession:  she is a
@c    help like to himself, and a pillar of rest.

@c    36:27. Where there is no hedge, the possession shall be spoiled:  and
@c    where there is no wife, he mourneth that is in want.

@c    36:28. Who will trust him that hath no rest, and that lodgeth
@c    wheresoever the night taketh him, as a robber well appointed, that
@c    skippeth from city to city.



@c    Ecclesiasticus Chapter 37


@c    Of the choice of friends and counsellors.

@c    37:1. Every friend will say:  I also am his friend:  but there is a
@c    friend, that is only a friend in name.  Is not this a grief even to
@c    death?

@c    37:2. But a companion and a friend shall be turned to an enemy.

@c    37:3. O wicked presumption, whence camest thou to cover the earth with
@c    thy malice, and deceitfulness?

@c    37:4. There is a companion who rejoiceth with his friend in his joys,
@c    but in the time of trouble, he will be against him.

@c    37:5. There is a companion who condoleth with his friend for his
@c    belly's sake, and he will take up a shield against the enemy.

@c    37:6. Forget not thy friend in thy mind, and be not unmindful of him in
@c    thy riches.

@c    37:7. Consult not with him that layeth a snare for thee, and hide thy
@c    counsel from them that envy thee.

@c    37:8. Every counsellor giveth out counsel, but there is one that is a
@c    counsellor for himself.

@c    37:9. Beware of a counsellor.  And know before what need he hath:  for he
@c    will devise to his own mind:

@c    37:10. Lest he thrust a stake into the ground, and say to thee:

@c    37:11. Thy way is good; and then stand on the other side to see what
@c    shall befall thee.

@c    37:12. Treat not with a man without religion concerning holiness, nor
@c    with an unjust man concerning justice, nor with a woman touching her of
@c    whom she is jealous, nor with a coward concerning war, nor with a
@c    merchant about traffic, nor with a buyer of selling, nor with an
@c    envious man of giving thanks,

@c    37:13. Nor with the ungodly of piety, nor with the dishonest of
@c    honesty, nor with the field laborer of every work,

@c    37:14. Nor with him that worketh by the year of the finishing of the
@c    year, nor with an idle servant of much business:  give no heed to these
@c    in any matter of counsel.

@c    37:15. But be continually with a holy man, whomsoever thou shalt know
@c    to observe the fear of God,

@c    37:16. Whose soul is according to thy own soul:  and who, when thou
@c    shalt stumble in the dark, will be sorry for thee.

@c    37:17. And establish within thyself a heart of good counsel:  for there
@c    is no other thing of more worth to thee than it.

@c    37:18. The soul of a holy man discovereth sometimes true things, more
@c    than seven watchmen that sit in a high place to watch.

@c    37:19. But above all these things pray to the most High, that he may
@c    direct thy way in truth.

@c    37:20. In all thy works let the true word go before thee, and steady
@c    counsel before every action.

@c    37:21. A wicked word shall change the heart:  out of which four manner
@c    of things arise, good and evil, life and death:  and the tongue is
@c    continually the ruler of them.  There is a man that is subtle and a
@c    teacher of many, and yet is unprofitable to his own soul.

@c    37:22. A skilful man hath taught many, and is sweet to his own soul.

@c    37:23. He that speaketh sophistically, is hateful:  he shall be
@c    destitute of every thing.

@c    37:24. Grace is not given him from the Lord:  for he is deprived of all
@c    wisdom.

@c    37:25. There is a wise man that is wise to his own soul:  and the fruit
@c    of his understanding is commendable.

@c    37:26. A wise man instructeth his own people, and the fruits of his
@c    understanding are faithful.

@c    37:27. A wise man shall be filled with blessings, and they that see
@c    shall praise him.

@c    37:28. The life of a man is in the number of his days:  but the days of
@c    Israel are innumerable.

@c    37:29. A wise man shall inherit honour among his people, and his name
@c    shall live for ever.

@c    37:30. My son, prove thy soul in thy life:  and if it be wicked, give it
@c    no power:

@c    37:31. For all things are not expedient for all, and every kind
@c    pleaseth not every soul.

@c    37:32. Be not greedy in any feasting, and pour not out thyself upon any
@c    meat:

@c    37:33. For in many meats there will be sickness, and greediness will
@c    turn to choler.

@c    37:34. By surfeiting many have perished, but he that is temperate,
@c    shall prolong life.



@c    Ecclesiasticus Chapter 38


@c    Of physicians and medicines:  what is to be done in sickness, and how we
@c    are to mourn for the dead.  Of the employments of labourers and
@c    artificers.

@c    38:1. Honour the physician for the need thou hast of him:  for the most
@c    High hath created him.

@c    38:2. For all healing is from God, and he shall receive gifts of the
@c    king.

@c    38:3. The skill of the physician shall lift up his head, and in the
@c    sight of great men he shall be praised.

@c    38:4. The most High hath created medicines out of the earth, and a wise
@c    man will not abhor them.

@c    38:5. Was not bitter water made sweet with wood?

@c    38:6. The virtue of these things is come to the knowledge of men, and
@c    the most High hath given knowledge to men, that he may be honoured in
@c    his wonders.

@c    38:7. By these he shall cure and shall allay their pains, and of these
@c    the apothecary shall make sweet confections, and shall make up
@c    ointments of health, and of his works there shall be no end.

@c    38:8. For the peace of God is over all the face of the earth.

@c    38:9. My son, in thy sickness neglect not thyself, but pray to the
@c    Lord, and he shall heal thee.

@c    38:10. Turn away from sin and order thy hands aright, and cleanse thy
@c    heart from all offence.

@c    38:11. Give a sweet savour, and a memorial of fine flour, and make a
@c    fat offering, and then give place to the physician.

@c    38:12. For the Lord created him:  and let him not depart from thee, for
@c    his works are necessary.

@c    38:13. For there is a time when thou must fall into their hands:

@c    38:14. And they shall beseech the Lord, that he would prosper what they
@c    give for ease and remedy, for their conversation.

@c    38:15. He that sinneth in the sight of his Maker, shall fall into the
@c    hands of the physician.

@c    38:16. My son, shed tears over the dead, and begin to lament as if thou
@c    hadst suffered some great harm, and according to judgment cover his
@c    body, and neglect not his burial.

@c    38:17. And for fear of being ill spoken of weep bitterly for a day, and
@c    then comfort thyself in thy sadness.

@c    38:18. And make mourning for him according to his merit for a day, or
@c    two, for fear of detraction.

@c    38:19. For of sadness cometh death, and it overwhelmeth the strength,
@c    and the sorrow of the heart boweth down the neck.

@c    38:20. In withdrawing aside sorrow remaineth:  and the substance of the
@c    poor is according to his heart.

@c    38:21. Give not up thy heart to sadness, but drive it from thee:  and
@c    remember the latter end.

@c    38:22. Forget it not:  for there is no returning, and thou shalt do him
@c    no good, and shalt hurt thyself.

@c    38:23. Remember my judgment:  for thine also shall be so:  yesterday for
@c    me, and to day for thee.

@c    38:24. When the dead is at rest, let his remembrance rest, and comfort
@c    him in the departing of his spirit.

@c    38:25. The wisdom of a scribe cometh by his time of leisure:  and he
@c    that is less in action, shall receive wisdom.

@c    A scribe. . .That is, a doctor of the law, or, a learned man.

@c    38:26. With what wisdom shall he be furnished that holdeth the plough,
@c    and that glorieth in the goad, that driveth the oxen therewith, and is
@c    occupied in their labours, and his whole talk is about the offspring of
@c    bulls?

@c    38:27. He shall give his mind to turn up furrows, and his care is to
@c    give the kine fodder.

@c    38:28. So every craftsman and workmaster that laboureth night and day,
@c    he who maketh graven seals, and by his continual diligence varieth the
@c    figure:  he shall give his mind to the resemblance of the picture, and
@c    by his watching shall finish the work.

@c    38:29. So doth the smith sitting by the anvil and considering the iron
@c    work.  The vapour of the fire wasteth his flesh, and he fighteth with
@c    the heat of the furnace.

@c    38:30. The noise of the hammer is always in his ears, and his eye is
@c    upon the pattern of the vessel he maketh.

@c    38:31. He setteth his mind to finish his work, and his watching to
@c    polish them to perfection.

@c    38:32. So doth the potter sitting at his work, turning the wheel about
@c    with his feet, who is always carefully set to his work, and maketh all
@c    his work by number:

@c    38:33. He fashioneth the clay with his arm, and boweth down his
@c    strength before his feet:

@c    38:34. He shall give his mind to finish the glazing, and his watching
@c    to make clean the furnace.

@c    38:35. All these trust to their hands, and every one is wise in his own
@c    art.

@c    38:36. Without these a city is not built.

@c    38:37. And they shall not dwell, nor walk about therein, and they shall
@c    not go up into the assembly.

@c    38:38. Upon the judges' seat they shall not sit, and the ordinance of
@c    judgment they shall not understand, neither shall they declare
@c    discipline and judgment, and they shall not be found where parables are
@c    spoken:

@c    38:39. But they shall strengthen the state of the world, and their
@c    prayer shall be in the work of their craft, applying their soul, and
@c    searching in the law of the most High.



@c    Ecclesiasticus Chapter 39


@c    The exercises of the wise man.  The Lord is to be glorified for his
@c    works.

@c    39:1. The wise man will seek out the wisdom of all the ancients, and
@c    will be occupied in the prophets.

@c    39:2. He will keep the sayings of renowned men, and will enter withal
@c    into the subtilties of parables.

@c    39:3. He will search out the hidden meanings of proverbs, and will be
@c    conversant in the secrets of parables.

@c    39:4. He shall serve among great men, and appear before the governor.

@c    39:5. He shall pass into strange countries:  for he shall try good and
@c    evil among men.

@c    39:6. He will give his heart to resort early to the Lord that made him,
@c    and he will pray in the sight of the most High.

@c    39:7. He will open his mouth in prayer, and will make supplication for
@c    his sins.

@c    39:8. For if it shall please the great Lord, he will fill him with the
@c    spirit of understanding:

@c    39:9. And he will pour forth the words of his wisdom as showers, and in
@c    his prayer he will confess to the Lord.

@c    39:10. And he shall direct his counsel, and his knowledge, and in his
@c    secrets shall he meditate.

@c    39:11. He shall shew forth the discipline he hath learned, and shall
@c    glory in the law of the covenant of the Lord.

@c    39:12. Many shall praise his wisdom, and it shall never be forgotten.

@c    39:13. The memory of him shall not depart away, and his name shall be
@c    in request from generation to generation.

@c    39:14. Nations shall declare his wisdom, and the church shall shew
@c    forth his praise.

@c    39:15. If he continue, he shall leave a name above a thousand:  and if
@c    he rest, it shall be to his advantage.

@c    39:16. I will yet meditate that I may declare:  for I am filled as with
@c    a holy transport.

@c    39:17. By a voice he saith:  Hear me, ye divine offspring, and bud forth
@c    as the rose planted by the brooks of waters.

@c    Ye divine offspring. . .He speaks to the children of Israel, the people
@c    of God:  whom he exhorts to bud forth and flourish with virtue.

@c    39:18. Give ye a sweet odour as frankincense.

@c    39:19. Send forth flowers, as the lily, and yield a smell, and bring
@c    forth leaves in grace, and praise with canticles, and bless the Lord in
@c    his works.

@c    39:20. Magnify his name, and give glory to him with the voice of your
@c    lips, and with the canticles of your mouths, and with harps, and in
@c    praising him, you shall say in this manner:

@c    39:21. All the works of the Lord are exceeding good.

@c    39:22. At his word the waters stood as a heap:  and at the words of his
@c    mouth the receptacles of waters:

@c    39:23. For at his commandment favour is shewn, and there is no
@c    diminishing of his salvation.

@c    39:24. The works of all flesh are before him, and there is nothing hid
@c    from his eyes.

@c    39:25. He seeth from eternity to eternity, and there is nothing
@c    wonderful before him.

@c    39:26. There is no saying:  What is this, or what is that?  for all
@c    things shall be sought in their time.

@c    39:27. His blessing hath overflowed like a river.

@c    39:28. And as a flood hath watered the earth; so shall his wrath
@c    inherit the nations, that have not sought after him.

@c    39:29. Even as he turned the waters into a dry land, and the earth was
@c    made dry:  and his ways were made plain for their journey:  so to sinners
@c    they are stumblingblocks in his wrath.

@c    39:30. Good things were created for the good from the beginning, so for
@c    the wicked, good and evil things.

@c    39:31. The principal things necessary for the life of men, are water,
@c    fire, and iron, salt, milk, and bread of flour, and honey, and the
@c    cluster of the grape, and oil, and clothing.

@c    39:32. All these things shall be for good to the holy, so to the
@c    sinners and the ungodly they shall be turned into evil.

@c    39:33. There are spirits that are created for vengeance, and in their
@c    fury they lay on grievous torments.

@c    39:34. In the time of destruction they shall pour out their force:  and
@c    they shall appease the wrath of him that made them.

@c    39:35. Fire, hail, famine, and death, all these were created for
@c    vengeance.

@c    39:36. The teeth of beasts, and scorpions, and serpents, and the sword
@c    taking vengeance upon the ungodly unto destruction.

@c    39:37. In his commandments they shall feast, and they shall be ready
@c    upon earth when need is, and when their time is come they shall not
@c    transgress his word.

@c    39:38. Therefore from the beginning I was resolved, and I have
@c    meditated, and thought on these things and left them in writing,

@c    39:39. All the works of the Lord are good, and he will furnish every
@c    work in due time.

@c    39:40. It is not to be said:  This is worse than that:  for all shall be
@c    well approved in their time.

@c    39:41. Now therefore with the whole heart and mouth praise ye him, and
@c    bless the name of the Lord.



@c    Ecclesiasticus Chapter 40


@c    The miseries of the life of man are relieved by the grace of God and
@c    his fear.

@c    40:1. Great labour is created for all men, and a heavy yoke is upon the
@c    children of Adam from the day of their coming out of their mother's
@c    womb, until the day of their burial into the mother of all.

@c    40:2. Their thoughts, and fears of the heart, their imagination of
@c    things to come, and the day of their end:

@c    40:3. From him that sitteth on a glorious throne, unto him that is
@c    humbled in earth and ashes:

@c    40:4. From him that weareth purple, and beareth the crown, even to him
@c    that is covered with rough linen:  wrath, envy, trouble, unquietness,
@c    and the fear of death, continual anger, and strife,

@c    40:5. And in the time of rest upon his bed, the sleep of the night
@c    changeth his knowledge.

@c    40:6. A little and as nothing is his rest, and afterward in sleep, as
@c    in the day of keeping watch.

@c    40:7. He is troubled in the vision of his heart, as if he had escaped
@c    in the day of battle.  In the time of his safety he rose up, and
@c    wondereth that there is no fear.

@c    40:8. Such things happen to all flesh, from man even to beast, and upon
@c    sinners are sevenfold more.

@c    40:9. Moreover, death, and bloodshed, strife, and sword, oppressions,
@c    famine, and affliction, and scourges:

@c    40:10. All these things are created for the wicked, and for their sakes
@c    came the flood.

@c    40:11. All things that are of the earth, shall return to the earth
@c    again, and all waters shall return to the sea.

@c    40:12. All bribery, and injustice shall be blotted out, and fidelity
@c    shall stand for ever.

@c    40:13. The riches of the unjust shall be dried up like a river, and
@c    shall pass away with a noise like a great thunder in rain.

@c    40:14. While he openeth his hands he shall rejoice:  but transgressors
@c    shall pine away in the end.

@c    40:15. The offspring of the ungodly shall not bring forth many
@c    branches, and make a noise as unclean roots upon the top of a rock.

@c    40:16. The weed growing over every water, and at the bank of the river,
@c    shall be pulled up before all grass.

@c    40:17. Grace is like a paradise in blessings, and mercy remaineth for
@c    ever.

@c    40:18. The life of a laborer that is content with what he hath, shall
@c    be sweet, and in it thou shalt find a treasure.

@c    40:19. Children, and the building of a city shall establish a name, but
@c    a blameless wife shall be counted above them both.

@c    40:20. Wine and music rejoice the heart, but the love of wisdom is
@c    above them both.

@c    40:21. The flute and the psaltery make a sweet melody, but a pleasant
@c    tongue is above them both.

@c    40:22. Thy eye desireth favour and beauty, but more than these green
@c    sown fields.

@c    40:23. A friend and companion meeting together in season, but above
@c    them both is a wife with her husband.

@c    40:24. Brethren are a help in the time of trouble, but mercy shall
@c    deliver more than they.

@c    40:25. Gold and silver make the feet stand sure:  but wise counsel is
@c    above them both.

@c    40:26. Riches and strength lift up the heart:  but above these is the
@c    fear of the Lord.

@c    40:27. There is no want in the fear of the Lord, and it needeth not to
@c    seek for help.

@c    40:28. The fear of the Lord is like a paradise of blessing, and they
@c    have covered it above all glory.

@c    40:29. My son, in thy lifetime be not indigent:  for it is better to die
@c    than to want.

@c    40:30. The life of him that looketh toward another man's table is not
@c    to be counted a life:  for he feedeth his soul with another man's meat.

@c    40:31. But a man, well instructed and taught, will look to himself.

@c    40:32. Begging will be sweet in the mouth of the unwise, but in his
@c    belly there shall burn a fire.



@c    Ecclesiasticus Chapter 41


@c    Of the remembrance of death:  of an evil and of a good name:  of what
@c    things we ought to be ashamed.

@c    41:1. O death, how bitter is the remembrance of thee to a man that hath
@c    peace in his possessions!

@c    41:2. To a man that is at rest, and whose ways are prosperous in all
@c    things, and that is yet able to take meat!

@c    41:3. O death thy sentence is welcome to the man that is in need, and
@c    to him whose strength faileth:

@c    41:4. Who is in a decrepit age, and that is in care about all things,
@c    and to the distrustful that loseth patience!

@c    41:5. Fear not the sentence of death.  Remember what things have been
@c    before thee, and what shall come after thee:  this sentence is from the
@c    Lord upon all flesh.

@c    41:6. And what shall come upon thee by the good pleasure of the most
@c    High?  whether ten, or a hundred, or a thousand years.

@c    41:7. For among the dead there is no accusing of life.

@c    41:8. The children of sinners become children of abominations, and they
@c    that converse near the houses of the ungodly.

@c    41:9. The inheritance of the children of sinners shall perish, and with
@c    their posterity shall be a perpetual reproach.

@c    41:10. The children will complain of an ungodly father, because for his
@c    sake they are in reproach.

@c    41:11. Woe to you, ungodly men, who have forsaken the law of the most
@c    high Lord.

@c    41:12. And if you be born, you shall be born in malediction:  and if you
@c    die, in malediction shall be your portion.

@c    41:13. All things that are of the earth, shall return into the earth:
@c    so the ungodly shall from malediction to destruction.

@c    41:14. The mourning of men is about their body, but the name of the
@c    ungodly shall be blotted out.

@c    41:15. Take care of a good name:  for this shall continue with thee,
@c    more than a thousand treasures precious and great.

@c    41:16. A good life hath its number of days:  but a good name shall
@c    continue for ever.

@c    41:17. My children, keep discipline in peace:  for wisdom that is hid,
@c    and a treasure that is not seen, what profit is there in them both?

@c    41:18. Better is the man that hideth his folly, than the man that
@c    hideth his wisdom.

@c    41:19. Wherefore have a shame of these things I am now going to speak
@c    of.

@c    Have a shame, etc. . .That is to say, be ashamed of doing any of these
@c    things, which I am now going to mention; for though sometimes
@c    shamefacedness is not to be indulged:  yet it is often good and
@c    necessary:  as in the following cases.

@c    41:20. For it is not good to keep all shamefacedness:  and all things do
@c    not please all men in opinion.

@c    41:21. Be ashamed of fornication before father and mother:  and of a lie
@c    before a governor and a man in power:

@c    41:22. Of an offence before a prince, and a judge:  of iniquity before a
@c    congregation and a people:

@c    41:23. Of injustice before a companion and friend:  and in regard to the
@c    place where thou dwellest,

@c    41:24. Of theft, and of the truth of God, and the covenant:  of leaning
@c    with thy elbow over meat, and of deceit in giving and taking:

@c    41:25. Of silence before them that salute thee:  of looking upon a
@c    harlot:  and of turning away thy face from thy kinsman.

@c    41:26. Turn not away thy face from thy neighbour, and of taking away a
@c    portion and not restoring.

@c    41:27. Gaze not upon another man's wife, and be not inquisitive after
@c    his handmaid, and approach not her bed.

@c    41:28. Be ashamed of upbraiding speeches before friends:  and after thou
@c    hast given, upbraid not.



@c    Ecclesiasticus Chapter 42


@c    Of what things we ought not to be ashamed.  Cautions with regard to
@c    women.  The works and greatness of God.

@c    42:1. Repeat not the word which thou hast heard, and disclose not the
@c    thing that is secret; so shalt thou be truly without confusion, and
@c    shalt find favour before all men:  be not ashamed of any of these
@c    things, and accept no person to sin thereby:

@c    42:2. Of the law of the most High, and of his covenant, and of judgment
@c    to justify the ungodly:

@c    42:3. Of the affair of companions and travellers, and of the gift of
@c    the inheritance of friends:

@c    42:4. Of exactness of balance and weights, of getting much or little:

@c    42:5. Of the corruption of buying, and of merchants, and of much
@c    correction of children, and to make the side of a wicked slave to
@c    bleed.

@c    42:6. Sure keeping is good over a wicked wife.

@c    42:7. Where there are many hands, shut up, and deliver all things in
@c    number, and weight:  and put all in writing that thou givest out or
@c    receivest in.

@c    42:8. Be not ashamed to inform the unwise and foolish, and the aged,
@c    that are judged by young men:  and thou shalt be well instructed in all
@c    things, and well approved in the sight of all men living.

@c    42:9. The father waketh for the daughter when no man knoweth, and the
@c    care for her taketh away his sleep, when she is young, lest she pass
@c    away the flower of her age, and when she is married, lest she should be
@c    hateful:

@c    42:10. In her virginity, lest she should be corrupted, and be found
@c    with child in her father's house:  and having a husband, lest she should
@c    misbehave herself, or at the least become barren.

@c    42:11. Keep a sure watch over a shameless daughter:  lest at anytime she
@c    make thee become a laughingstock to thy enemies, and a byword in the
@c    city, and a reproach among the people, and she make thee ashamed before
@c    all the multitude.

@c    42:12. Behold not everybody's beauty:  and tarry not among women.

@c    42:13. For from garments cometh a moth, and from a woman the iniquity
@c    of a man.

@c    42:14. For better is the iniquity of a man, than a woman doing a good
@c    turn, and a woman bringing shame and reproach.

@c    Better is the iniquity, etc. . .That is, there is, commonly speaking,
@c    less danger to be apprehended to the soul from the churlishness, or
@c    injuries we receive from men, than from the flattering favours and
@c    familiarity of women.

@c    42:15. I will now remember the works of the Lord, and I will declare
@c    the things I have seen.  By the words of the Lord are his works.

@c    42:16. The sun giving light hath looked upon all things, and full of
@c    the glory of the Lord is his work.

@c    42:17. Hath not the Lord made the saints to declare all his wonderful
@c    works, which the Lord Almighty hath firmly settled to be established
@c    for his glory?

@c    42:18. He hath searched out the deep, and the heart of men:  and
@c    considered their crafty devices.

@c    42:19. For the Lord knoweth all knowledge, and hath beheld the signs of
@c    the world, he declareth the things that are past, and the things that
@c    are to come, and revealeth the traces of hidden things.

@c    42:20. No thought escapeth him, and no word can hide itself from him.

@c    42:21. He hath beautified the glorious works of his wisdom:  and he is
@c    from eternity to eternity, and to him nothing may be added,

@c    42:22. Nor can he be diminished, and he hath no need of any counsellor.

@c    42:23. O how desirable are all his works, and what we can know is but
@c    as a spark!

@c    42:24. All these things live, and remain for ever, and for every use
@c    all things obey him.

@c    42:25. All things are double, one against another, and he hath made
@c    nothing defective.

@c    42:26. He hath established the good things of every one.  And who shall
@c    be filled with beholding his glory?



@c    Ecclesiasticus Chapter 43


@c    The works of God are exceedingly glorious and wonderful:  no man is able
@c    sufficiently to praise him.

@c    43:1. The firmament on high is his beauty, the beauty of heaven with
@c    its glorious shew.

@c    43:2. The sun when he appeareth shewing forth at his rising, an
@c    admirable instrument, the work of the most High.

@c    43:3. At noon he burneth the earth, and who can abide his burning heat?
@c    As one keeping a furnace in the works of heat:

@c    43:4. The sun three times as much, burneth the mountains, breathing out
@c    fiery vapours, and shining with his beams, he blindeth the eyes.

@c    43:5. Great is the Lord that made him, and at his words he hath
@c    hastened his course.

@c    43:6. And the moon in all in her season, is for a declaration of times
@c    and a sign of the world.

@c    43:7. From the moon is the sign of the festival day, a light that
@c    decreaseth in her perfection.

@c    43:8. The month is called after her name, increasing wonderfully in her
@c    perfection.

@c    43:9. Being an instrument of the armies on high, shining gloriously in
@c    the firmament of heaven.

@c    43:10. The glory of the stars is the beauty of heaven; the Lord
@c    enlighteneth the world on high.

@c    43:11. By the words of the holy one they stand in judgment, and shall
@c    never fall in their watches.

@c    43:12. Look upon the rainbow, and bless him that made it:  it is very
@c    beautiful in its brightness.

@c    43:13. It encompasseth the heaven about with the circle of its glory,
@c    the hands of the most High have displayed it.

@c    43:14. By his commandment he maketh the snow to fall apace, and sendeth
@c    forth swiftly the lightnings of his judgment.

@c    43:15. Through this are the treasures opened, and the clouds fly out
@c    like birds.

@c    43:16. By his greatness he hath fixed the clouds, and the hailstones
@c    are broken.

@c    43:17. At his sight shall the mountains be shaken, and at his will the
@c    south wind shall blow.

@c    43:18. The noise of his thunder shall strike the earth, so doth the
@c    northern storm, and the whirlwind:

@c    43:19. And as the birds lighting upon the earth, he scattereth snow,
@c    and the falling thereof, is as the coming down of locusts.

@c    43:20. The eye admireth at the beauty of the whiteness thereof, and the
@c    heart is astonished at the shower thereof.

@c    43:21. He shall pour frost as salt upon the earth:  and when it
@c    freezeth, it shall become like the tops of thistles.

@c    43:22. The cold north wind bloweth, and the water is congealed into
@c    crystal; upon every gathering together of waters it shall rest, and
@c    shall clothe the waters as a breastplate.

@c    43:23. And it shall devour the mountains, and burn the wilderness, and
@c    consume all that is green as with fire.

@c    43:24. A present remedy of all is the speedy coming of a cloud, and a
@c    dew that meeteth it, by the heat that cometh, shall overpower it.

@c    43:25. At his word the wind is still, and with his thought he appeaseth
@c    the deep, and the Lord hath planted islands therein.

@c    43:26. Let them that sail on the sea, tell the dangers thereof:  and
@c    when we hear with our ears, we shall admire.

@c    43:27. There are great and wonderful works:  a variety of beasts, and of
@c    all living things, and the monstrous creatures of whales.

@c    43:28. Through him is established the end of their journey, and by his
@c    word all things are regulated.

@c    43:29. We shall say much, and yet shall want words:  but the sum of our
@c    words is, He is all.

@c    43:30. What shall we be able to do to glorify him?  for the Almighty
@c    himself is above all his works.

@c    43:31. The Lord is terrible, and exceeding great, and his power is
@c    admirable.

@c    43:32. Glorify the Lord as much as ever you can, for he will yet far
@c    exceed, and his magnificence is wonderful.

@c    43:33. Blessing the Lord, exalt him as much as you can; for he is above
@c    all praise.

@c    43:34. When you exalt him put forth all your strength, and be not
@c    weary:  for you can never go far enough.

@c    43:35. Who shall see him, and declare him?  and who shall magnify him as
@c    he is from the beginning?

@c    43:36. There are many things hidden from us that are greater than
@c    these:  for we have seen but a few of his works.

@c    43:37. But the Lord hath made all things, and to the godly he hath
@c    given wisdom.



@c    Ecclesiasticus Chapter 44


@c    The praises of the holy fathers, in particular of Enoch, Noe, Abraham,
@c    Isaac, and Jacob.

@c    44:1. Let us now praise men of renown and our fathers in their
@c    generation.

@c    44:2. The Lord hath wrought great glory through his magnificence from
@c    the beginning.

@c    44:3. Such as have borne rule in their dominions, men of great power,
@c    and endued with their wisdom, shewing forth in the prophets the dignity
@c    of prophets,

@c    44:4. And ruling over the present people, and by the strength of wisdom
@c    instructing the people in most holy words.

@c    44:5. Such as by their skill sought out musical tunes, and published
@c    canticles of the scriptures.

@c    44:6. Rich men in virtue, studying beautifulness:  living at peace in
@c    their houses.

@c    44:7. All these have gained glory in their generations, and were
@c    praised in their days.

@c    44:8. They that were born of them have left a name behind them, that
@c    their praises might be related:

@c    44:9. And there are some, of whom there is no memorial:  who are
@c    perished, as if they had never been:  and are become as if they had
@c    never been born, and their children with them.

@c    44:10. But these were men of mercy, whose godly deeds have not failed:

@c    44:11. Good things continue with their seed,

@c    44:12. Their posterity are a holy inheritance, and their seed hath
@c    stood in the covenants.

@c    44:13. And their children for their sakes remain for ever:  their seed
@c    and their glory shall not be forsaken.

@c    44:14. Their bodies are buried in peace, and their name liveth unto
@c    generation and generation.

@c    44:15. Let the people shew forth their wisdom, and the church declare
@c    their praise.

@c    44:16. Henoch pleased God, and was translated into paradise, that he
@c    may give repentance to the nations.

@c    44:17. Noe was found perfect, just, and in the time of wrath he was
@c    made a reconciliation.

@c    44:18. Therefore was there a remnant left to the earth, when the flood
@c    came.

@c    44:19. The covenants of the world were made with him, that all flesh
@c    should no more be destroyed with the flood.

@c    44:20. Abraham was the great father of a multitude of nations, and
@c    there was not found the like to him in glory, who kept the law of the
@c    most High, and was in covenant with him.

@c    44:21. In his flesh he established the covenant, and in temptation he
@c    was found faithful.

@c    44:22. Therefore by an oath he gave him glory in his posterity, that he
@c    should increase as the dust of the earth,

@c    44:23. And that he would exalt his seed as the stars, and they should
@c    inherit from sea to sea, and from the river to the ends of the earth.

@c    44:24. And he did in like manner with Isaac for the sake of Abraham his
@c    father.

@c    44:25. The Lord gave him the blessing of all nations, and confirmed his
@c    covenant upon the head of Jacob.

@c    44:26. He acknowledged him in his blessings, and gave him an
@c    inheritance, and divided him his portion in twelve tribes.

@c    44:27. And he preserved for him men of mercy, that found grace in the
@c    eyes of all flesh.



@c    Ecclesiasticus Chapter 45


@c    The praises of Moses, of Aaron, and of Phinees.

@c    45:1. Moses was beloved of God, and men:  whose memory is in
@c    benediction.

@c    45:2. He made him like the saints in glory, and magnified him in the
@c    fear of his enemies, and with his words he made prodigies to cease.

@c    45:3. He glorified him in the sight of kings, and gave him commandments
@c    in the sight of his people, and shewed him his glory.

@c    45:4. He sanctified him in his faith, and meekness, and chose him out
@c    of all flesh.

@c    45:5. For he heard him, and his voice, and brought him into a cloud.

@c    45:6. And he gave him commandments before his face, and a law of life
@c    and instruction, that he might teach Jacob his covenant, and Israel his
@c    judgments.

@c    45:7. He exalted Aaron his brother, and like to himself of the tribe of
@c    Levi:

@c    45:8. He made an everlasting covenant with him, and gave him the
@c    priesthood of the nation, and made him blessed in glory,

@c    45:9. And he girded him about with a glorious girdle, and clothed him
@c    with a robe of glory, and crowned him with majestic attire.

@c    45:10. He put upon him a garment to the feet, and breeches, and an
@c    ephod, and he compassed him with many little bells of gold all round
@c    about,

@c    45:11. That as he went there might be a sound, and a noise made that
@c    might be heard in the temple, for a memorial to the children of his
@c    people.

@c    45:12. He gave him a holy robe of gold, and blue, and purple, a woven
@c    work of a wise man, endued with judgment and truth:

@c    45:13. Of twisted scarlet the work of an artist, with precious stones
@c    cut and set in gold, and graven by the work of a lapidary for a
@c    memorial, according to the number of the tribes of Israel.

@c    45:14. And a crown of gold upon his mitre wherein was engraved
@c    Holiness, an ornament of honour:  a work of power, and delightful to the
@c    eyes for its beauty.

@c    45:15. Before him there were none so beautiful, even from the
@c    beginning.

@c    45:16. No stranger was ever clothed with them, but only his children
@c    alone, and his grandchildren for ever.

@c    45:17. His sacrifices were consumed with fire every day.

@c    45:18. Moses filled his hands and anointed him with holy oil.

@c    45:19. This was made to him for an everlasting testament, and to his
@c    seed as the days of heaven, to execute the office of the priesthood,
@c    and to have praise, and to glorify his people in his name.

@c    45:20. He chose him out of all men living, to offer sacrifice to God,
@c    incense, and a good savour, for a memorial to make reconciliation for
@c    his people:

@c    45:21. And he gave him power in his commandments, in the covenants of
@c    his judgments, that he should teach Jacob his testimonies, and give
@c    light to Israel in his law.

@c    45:22. And strangers stood up against him, and through envy the men
@c    that were with Dathan and Abiron, compassed him about in the
@c    wilderness, and the congregation of Core in their wrath.

@c    45:23. The Lord God saw and it pleased him not, and they were consumed
@c    in his wrathful indignation.

@c    45:24. He wrought wonders upon them, and consumed them with a flame of
@c    fire.

@c    45:25. And he added glory to Aaron, and gave him an inheritance, and
@c    divided unto him the firstfruits of the increase of the earth.

@c    45:26. He prepared them bread in the first place unto fulness:  for the
@c    sacrifices also of the Lord they shall eat, which he gave to him, and
@c    to his seed.

@c    45:27. But he shall not inherit among the people in the land, and he
@c    hath no portion among the people:  for he himself is his portion and
@c    inheritance.

@c    45:28. Phinees the son of Eleazar is the third in glory, by imitating
@c    him in the fear of the Lord:

@c    45:29. And he stood up in the shameful fall of the people:  in the
@c    goodness and readiness of his soul he appeased God for Israel.

@c    45:30. Therefore he made to him a covenant of peace, to be the prince
@c    of the sanctuary, and of his people, that the dignity of priesthood
@c    should be to him and to his seed for ever.

@c    45:31. And a covenant to David the king, the son of Jesse of the tribe
@c    of Juda, an inheritance to him and to his seed, that he might give
@c    wisdom into our heart to judge his people in justice, that their good
@c    things might not be abolished, and he made their glory in their nation
@c    everlasting.



@c    Ecclesiasticus Chapter 46


@c    The praise of Josue, of Caleb, and of Samuel.

@c    46:1. Valiant in war was Jesus the son of Nave, who was successor of
@c    Moses among the prophets, who was great according to his name,

@c    Jesus the son of Nave. . .So Josue is named in the Greek Bibles.  For
@c    Josue and Jesus signify the same thing, viz., a saviour.

@c    46:2. Very great for the saving the elect of God, to overthrow the
@c    enemies that rose up against them, that he might get the inheritance
@c    for Israel.

@c    46:3. How great glory did he gain when he lifted up his hands, and
@c    stretched out swords against the cities?

@c    46:4. Who before him hath so resisted?  for the Lord himself brought the
@c    enemies.

@c    46:5. Was not the sun stopped in his anger, and one day made as two?

@c    46:6. He called upon the most high Sovereign when the enemies assaulted
@c    him on every side, and the great and holy God heard him by hailstones
@c    of exceeding great force.

@c    46:7. He made a violent assault against the nation of his enemies, and
@c    in the descent he destroyed the adversaries.

@c    And in the descent. . .Of Beth-horon (Jos. 10.).

@c    46:8. That the nations might know his power, that it is not easy to
@c    fight against God.  And he followed the mighty one:

@c    46:9. And in the days of Moses he did a work of mercy, he and Caleb the
@c    son of Jephone, in standing against the enemy, and withholding the
@c    people from sins, and appeasing the wicked murmuring.

@c    46:10. And they two being appointed, were delivered out of the danger
@c    from among the number of six hundred thousand men on foot, to bring
@c    them into their inheritance, into the land that floweth with milk and
@c    honey.

@c    46:11. And the Lord gave strength also to Caleb, and his strength
@c    continued even to his old age, so that he went up to the high places of
@c    the land, and his seed obtained it for an inheritance:

@c    46:12. That all the children of Israel might see, that it is good to
@c    obey the holy God.

@c    46:13. Then all the judges, every one by name, whose heart was not
@c    corrupted:  who turned not away from the Lord,

@c    46:14. That their memory might be blessed, and their bones spring up
@c    out of their place,

@c    46:15. And their name continue for ever, the glory of the holy men
@c    remaining unto their children.

@c    46:16. Samuel the prophet of the Lord, the beloved of the Lord his God,
@c    established a new government, and anointed princes over his people.

@c    46:17. By the law of the Lord he judged the congregation, and the God
@c    of Jacob beheld, and by his fidelity he was proved a prophet.

@c    46:18. And he was known to be faithful in his words, because he saw the
@c    God of light:

@c    46:19. And called upon the name of the Lord Almighty, in fighting
@c    against the enemies who beset him on every side, when he offered a lamb
@c    without blemish.

@c    46:20. And the Lord thundered from heaven, and with a great noise made
@c    his voice to be heard.

@c    46:21. And he crushed the princes of the Tyrians, and all the lords of
@c    the Philistines:

@c    46:22. And before the time of the end of his life in the world, he
@c    protested before the Lord, and his anointed:  money, or any thing else,
@c    even to a shoe, he had not taken of any man, and no man did accuse him.

@c    46:23. And after this he slept, and he made known to the king, and
@c    shewed him the end of his life, and he lifted up his voice from the
@c    earth in prophecy to blot out the wickedness of the nation.



@c    Ecclesiasticus Chapter 47


@c    The praise of Nathan, of David, and of Solomon:  Of his fall and
@c    punishment.

@c    47:1. Then Nathan the prophet arose in the days of David.

@c    47:2. And as the fat taken away from the flesh, so was David chosen
@c    from among the children of Israel.

@c    47:3. He played with lions as with lambs:  and with bears he did in like
@c    manner as with the lambs of the flock, in his youth.

@c    47:4. Did not he kill the giant, and take away reproach from his
@c    people?

@c    47:5. In lifting up his hand, with the stone in the sling he beat down
@c    the boasting of Goliath:

@c    47:6. For he called upon the Lord the Almighty, and he gave strength in
@c    his right hand, to take away the mighty warrior, and to set up the horn
@c    of his nation.

@c    47:7. So in ten thousand did he glorify him, and praised him in the
@c    blessings of the Lord, in offering to him a crown of glory:

@c    47:8. For he destroyed the enemies on every side, and extirpated the
@c    Philistines the adversaries unto this day:  he broke their horn for
@c    ever.

@c    47:9. In all his works he gave thanks to the holy one, and to the most
@c    High, with words of glory.

@c    47:10. With his whole heart he praised the Lord, and loved God that
@c    made him:  and he gave him power against his enemies:

@c    47:11. And he set singers before the altar, and by their voices he made
@c    sweet melody.

@c    47:12. And to the festivals he added beauty, and set in order the
@c    solemn times even to the end of his life, that they should praise the
@c    holy name of the Lord, and magnify the holiness of God in the morning.

@c    47:13. The Lord took away his sins, and exalted his horn for ever:  and
@c    he gave him a covenant of the kingdom, and a throne of glory in Israel.

@c    47:14. After him arose up a wise son, and for his sake he cast down all
@c    the power of the enemies.

@c    47:15. Solomon reigned in days of peace, and God brought all his
@c    enemies under him, that he might build a house in his name, and prepare
@c    a sanctuary for ever:  O how wise wast thou in thy youth!

@c    47:16. And thou wast filled as a river with wisdom, and thy soul
@c    covered the earth.

@c    47:17. And thou didst multiply riddles in parables:  thy name went
@c    abroad to the islands far off, and thou wast beloved in thy peace.

@c    47:18. The countries wondered at thee for thy canticles, and proverbs,
@c    and parables, and interpretations,

@c    47:19. And at the name of the Lord God, whose surname is, God of
@c    Israel.

@c    47:20. Thou didst gather gold as copper, and didst multiply silver as
@c    lead,

@c    47:21. And thou didst bow thyself to women:  and by thy body thou wast
@c    brought under subjection.

@c    47:22. Thou hast stained thy glory, and defiled thy seed so as to bring
@c    wrath upon thy children, and to have thy folly kindled,

@c    47:23. That thou shouldst make the kingdom to be divided, and out of
@c    Ephraim a rebellious kingdom to rule.

@c    47:24. But God will not leave off his mercy, and he will not destroy,
@c    nor abolish his own works, neither will he cut up by the roots the
@c    offspring of his elect:  and he will not utterly take away the seed of
@c    him that loveth the Lord.

@c    47:25. Wherefore he gave a remnant to Jacob, and to David of the same
@c    stock.

@c    47:26. And Solomon had an end with his fathers.

@c    47:27. And he left behind him of his seed, the folly of the nation,

@c    47:28. Even Roboam that had little wisdom, who turned away the people
@c    through his counsel:

@c    47:29. And Jeroboam the son of Nabat, who caused Israel to sin, and
@c    shewed Ephraim the way of sin, and their sins were multiplied
@c    exceedingly.

@c    47:30. They removed them far away from their land.

@c    47:31. And they sought out all iniquities, till vengeance came upon
@c    them, and put an end to all their sins.



@c    Ecclesiasticus Chapter 48


@c    The praise of Elias, of Eliseus, of Ezechias, and of Isaias.

@c    48:1. And Elias the prophet stood up, as a fire, and his word burnt
@c    like a torch.

@c    48:2. He brought a famine upon them, and they that provoked him in
@c    their envy, were reduced to a small number, for they could not endure
@c    the commandments of the Lord.

@c    48:3. By the word of the Lord he shut up the heaven, and he brought
@c    down fire from heaven thrice.

@c    48:4. Thus was Elias magnified in his wondrous works.  And who can glory
@c    like to thee?

@c    48:5. Who raisedst up a dead man from below, from the lot of death, by
@c    the word of the Lord God.

@c    48:6. Who broughtest down kings to destruction, and brokest easily
@c    their power in pieces, and the glorious from their bed.

@c    48:7. Who heardest judgment in Sina, and in Horeb the judgments of
@c    vengeance.

@c    48:8. Who anointedst kings to penance, and madest prophets successors
@c    after thee.

@c    48:9. Who wast taken up in a whirlwind of fire, in a chariot of fiery
@c    horses.

@c    48:10. Who art registered in the judgments of times to appease the
@c    wrath of the Lord, to reconcile the heart of the father to the son, and
@c    to restore the tribes of Jacob.

@c    48:11. Blessed are they that saw thee, and were honoured with thy
@c    friendship.

@c    48:12. For we live only in our life, but after death our name shall not
@c    be such.

@c    48:13. Elias was indeed covered with the whirlwind, and his spirit was
@c    filled up in Eliseus:  in his days he feared not the prince, and no man
@c    was more powerful than he.

@c    48:14. No word could overcome him, and after death his body prophesied.

@c    48:15. In his life he did great wonders, and in death he wrought
@c    miracles.

@c    48:16. For all this the people repented not, neither did they depart
@c    from their sins till they were cast out of their land, and were
@c    scattered through all the earth.

@c    48:17. And there was left but a small people, and a prince in the house
@c    of David.

@c    48:18. Some of these did that which pleased God:  but others committed
@c    many sins.

@c    48:19. Ezechias fortified his city, and brought in water into the midst
@c    thereof, and he digged a rock with iron, and made a well for water.

@c    48:20. In his days Sennacherib came up, and sent Rabsaces, and lifted
@c    up his hand against them, and he stretched out his hand against Sion,
@c    and became proud through his power.

@c    48:21. Then their hearts and hands trembled, and they were in pain as
@c    women in travail.

@c    48:22. And they called upon the Lord who is merciful, and spreading
@c    their hands, they lifted them up to heaven:  and the holy Lord God
@c    quickly heard their voice.

@c    48:23. He was not mindful of their sins, neither did he deliver them up
@c    to their enemies, but he purified them by the hand of Isaias, the holy
@c    prophet.

@c    48:24. He overthrew the army of the Assyrians, and the angel of the
@c    Lord destroyed them.

@c    48:25. For Ezechias did that which pleased God, and walked valiantly in
@c    the way of David his father, which Isaias, the great prophet, and
@c    faithful in the sight of God, had commanded him.

@c    48:26. In his days the sun wen backward, and he lengthened the king's
@c    life.

@c    48:27. With a great spirit he saw the things that are to come to pass
@c    at last, and comforted the mourners in Sion.

@c    48:28. He showed what should come to pass for ever, and secret things
@c    before they came.



@c    Ecclesiasticus Chapter 49


@c    The praise of Josias, of Jeremias, Ezechiel, and the twelve prophets.
@c    Also of Zorobabel, Jesus the son of Josedech, Nehemias, Enoch, Joseph,
@c    Seth, Sem, and Adam.

@c    49:1. The memory of Josias is like the composition of a sweet smell
@c    made by the art of a perfumer:

@c    49:2. His remembrance shall be sweet as honey in every mouth, and as
@c    music at a banquet of wine.

@c    49:3. He was directed by God unto the repentance of the nation, and he
@c    took away the abominations of wickedness.

@c    49:4. And he directed his heart towards the Lord, and in the days of
@c    sinners he strengthened godliness.

@c    49:5. Except David, and Ezechias and Josias, all committed sin.

@c    49:6. For the kings of Juda forsook the law of the most High, and
@c    despised the fear of God.

@c    49:7. So they gave their kingdom to others, and their glory to a
@c    strange nation,

@c    49:8. They burnt the chosen city of holiness, and made the streets
@c    thereof desolate according to the prediction of Jeremias.

@c    49:9. For they treated him evil, who was consecrated a prophet from his
@c    mother's womb, to overthrow, and pluck up, and destroy, and to build
@c    again, and renew.

@c    49:10. It was Ezechiel that saw the glorious vision, which was shewn
@c    him upon the chariot of cherubims.

@c    49:11. For he made mention of the enemies under the figure of rain, and
@c    of doing good to them that shewed right ways.

@c    49:12. And may the bones of the twelve prophets spring up out of their
@c    place:  for they strengthened Jacob, and redeemed themselves by strong
@c    faith.

@c    49:13. How shall we magnify Zorobabel?  for he was as a signet on the
@c    right hand;

@c    49:14. In like manner Jesus the son of Josedec who in their days built
@c    the house, and set up a holy temple to the Lord, prepared for
@c    everlasting glory.

@c    49:15. And let Nehemias be a long time remembered, who raised up for us
@c    our walls that were cast down, and set up the gates and the bars, who
@c    rebuilt our houses.

@c    49:16. No man was born upon earth like Henoch:  for he also was taken up
@c    from the earth.

@c    49:17. Nor as Joseph, who was a man born prince of his brethren, the
@c    support of his family, the ruler of his brethren, the stay of the
@c    people:

@c    49:18. And his bones were visited, and after death they prophesied.

@c    They prophesied. . .That is, by their being carried out of Egypt they
@c    verified the prophetic prediction of Joseph.  Gen. 50.

@c    49:19. Seth and Sem obtained glory among men:  and above every soul Adam
@c    in the beginning,



@c    Ecclesiasticus Chapter 50


@c    The praises of Simon the high priest.  The conclusion.

@c    50:1. Simon the high priest, the son of Onias, who in his life propped
@c    up the house, and in his days fortified the temple.

@c    50:2. By him also the height of the temple was founded, the double
@c    building and the high walls of the temple.

@c    50:3. In his days the wells of water flowed out, and they were filled
@c    as the sea above measure.

@c    50:4. He took care of his nation, and delivered it from destruction.

@c    50:5. He prevailed to enlarge the city, and obtained glory in his
@c    conversation with the people:  and enlarged the entrance of the house
@c    and the court.

@c    50:6. He shone in his days as the morning star in the midst of a cloud,
@c    and as the moon at the full.

@c    50:7. And as the sun when it shineth, so did he shine in the temple of
@c    God.

@c    50:8. And as the rainbow giving light in bright clouds, and as the
@c    flower of roses in the days of the spring, and as the lilies that are
@c    on the brink of the water, and as the sweet smelling frankincense in
@c    the time of summer.

@c    50:9. As a bright fire, and frankincense burning in the fire.

@c    50:10. As a massy vessel of gold, adorned with every precious stone.

@c    50:11. As an olive tree budding forth, and a cypress tree rearing
@c    itself on high, when he put on the robe of glory, and was clothed with
@c    the perfection of power.

@c    Clothed with the perfection of power. . .That is, with all the vestments
@c    denoting his dignity and authority.

@c    50:12. When he went up to the holy altar, he honoured the vesture of
@c    holiness.

@c    50:13. And when he took the portions out of the hands of the priests,
@c    he himself stood by the altar.  And about him was the ring of his
@c    brethren:  and as the cedar planted in mount Libanus,

@c    50:14. And as branches of palm trees, they stood round about him, and
@c    all the sons of Aaron in their glory.

@c    50:15. And the oblation of the Lord was in their hands, before all the
@c    congregation of Israel:  and finishing his service, on the altar, to
@c    honour the offering of the most high King,

@c    50:16. He stretched forth his hand to make a libation, and offered of
@c    the blood of the grape.

@c    50:17. He poured out at the foot of the altar a divine odour to the
@c    most high Prince.

@c    50:18. Then the sons of Aaron shouted, they sounded with beaten
@c    trumpets, and made a great noise to be heard for a remembrance before
@c    God.

@c    50:19. Then all the people together made haste, and fell down to the
@c    earth upon their faces, to adore the Lord their God, and to pray to the
@c    Almighty God the most High.

@c    50:20. And the singers lifted up their voices, and in the great house
@c    the sound of sweet melody was increased.

@c    50:21. And the people in prayer besought the Lord the most High, until
@c    the worship of the Lord was perfected, and they had finished their
@c    office.

@c    50:22. Then coming down, he lifted up his hands over all the
@c    congregation of the children of Israel, to give glory to God with his
@c    lips, and to glory in his name:

@c    50:23. And he repeated his prayer, willing to shew the power of God.

@c    50:24. And now pray ye to the God of all, who hath done great things in
@c    all the earth, who hath increased our days from our mother's womb, and
@c    hath done with us according to his mercy.

@c    50:25. May he grant us joyfulness of heart, and that there be peace in
@c    our days in Israel for ever:

@c    50:26. That Israel may believe that the mercy of God is with us, to
@c    deliver us in his days.

@c    50:27. There are two nations which my soul abhorreth:  and the third is
@c    no nation:  which I hate:

@c    Abhorreth. . .Viz., with a holy indignation, as enemies of God and
@c    persecutors of his people.  Such were then the Edomites who abode in
@c    mount Seir, the Philistines, and the Samaritans who dwelt in Sichem,
@c    and had their schismatical temple in that neighbourhood.

@c    50:28. They that sit on mount Seir, and the Philistines, and the
@c    foolish people that dwell in Sichem.

@c    50:29. Jesus the son of Sirach, of Jerusalem, hath written in this book
@c    the doctrine of wisdom and instruction, who renewed wisdom from his
@c    heart.

@c    50:30. Blessed is he that is conversant in these good things and he
@c    that layeth them up in his heart, shall be wise always.

@c    50:31. For if he do them, he shall be strong to do all things:  because
@c    the light of God guideth his steps.



@c    Ecclesiasticus Chapter 51


@c    A prayer of praise and thanksgiving.

@c    51:1. A prayer of Jesus the son of Sirach.  I will give glory to thee, O
@c    Lord, O King, and I will praise thee, O God my Saviour.

@c    51:2. I will give glory to thy name:  for thou hast been a helper and
@c    protector to me.

@c    51:3. And hast preserved my body from destruction, from the snare of an
@c    unjust tongue, and from the lips of them that forge lies, and in the
@c    sight of them that stood by, thou hast been my helper.

@c    51:4. And thou hast delivered me, according to the multitude of the
@c    mercy of thy name, from them that did roar, prepared to devour.

@c    51:5. Out of the hands of them that sought my life, and from the gates
@c    of afflictions, which compassed me about:

@c    51:6. From the oppression of the flame which surrounded me, and in the
@c    midst of the fire I was not burnt.

@c    51:7. From the depth of the belly of hell, and from an unclean tongue,
@c    and from lying words, from an unjust king, and from a slanderous
@c    tongue:

@c    51:8. My soul shall praise the Lord even to death.

@c    51:9. And my life was drawing near to hell beneath.

@c    51:10. They compassed me on every side, and there was no one that would
@c    help me.  I looked for the succour of men, and there was none.

@c    51:11. I remembered thy mercy, O Lord, and thy works, which are from
@c    the beginning of the world.

@c    51:12. How thou deliverest them that wait for thee, O Lord, and savest
@c    them out of the hands of the nations.

@c    51:13. Thou hast exalted my dwelling place upon the earth and I have
@c    prayed for death to pass away.

@c    51:14. I called upon the Lord, the father of my Lord, that he would not
@c    leave me in the day of my trouble, and in the time of the proud without
@c    help.

@c    51:15. I will praise thy name continually, and will praise it with
@c    thanksgiving, and my prayer was heard.

@c    51:16. And thou hast saved me from destruction, and hast delivered me
@c    from the evil time.

@c    51:17. Therefore I will give thanks, and praise thee, and bless the
@c    name of the Lord.

@c    51:18. When I was yet young, before I wandered about, I sought for
@c    wisdom openly in my prayer.

@c    51:19. I prayed for her before the temple, and unto the very end I will
@c    seek after her, and she flourished as a grape soon ripe.

@c    51:20. My heart delighted in her, my foot walked in the right way, from
@c    my youth up I sought after her.

@c    51:21. I bowed down my ear a little, and received her.

@c    51:22. I found much wisdom in myself, and profited much therein.

@c    51:23. To him that giveth me wisdom, will I give glory.

@c    51:24. For I have determined to follow her:  I have had a zeal for good,
@c    and shall not be confounded.

@c    51:25. My soul hath wrestled for her, and in doing it I have been
@c    confirmed.

@c    51:26. I stretched forth my hands on high, and I bewailed my ignorance
@c    of her.

@c    51:27. I directed my soul to her, and in knowledge I found her.

@c    51:28. I possessed my heart with her from the beginning:  therefore I
@c    shall not be forsaken.

@c    51:29. My entrails were troubled in seeking her:  therefore shall I
@c    possess a good possession.

@c    51:30. The Lord hath given me a tongue for my reward:  and with it I
@c    will praise him.

@c    51:31. Draw near to me, ye unlearned, and gather yourselves together
@c    into the hours of discipline.

@c    51:32. Why are ye slow and what do you say of these things?  your souls
@c    are exceeding thirsty.

@c    51:33. I have opened my mouth, and have spoken:  buy her for yourselves
@c    without silver,

@c    51:34. And submit your neck to the yoke, and let your soul receive
@c    discipline:  for she is near at hand to be found.

@c    51:35. Behold with your eyes how I have laboured a little, and have
@c    found much rest to myself.

@c    51:36. Receive ye discipline as a great sum of money, and possess
@c    abundance of gold by her.

@c    51:37. Let your soul rejoice in his mercy and you shall not be
@c    confounded in his praise.

@c    51:38. Work your work before the time, and he will give you your reward
@c    in his time.
