@c    THE BOOK OF GENESIS



@c    This book is so called from its treating of the GENERATION, that is, of
@c    the creation and the beginning of the world.  The Hebrews call it
@c    BERESITH, from the Word with which it begins.  It contains not only the
@c    history of the Creation of the world; but also an account of its
@c    progress during the space of 2369 years, that is, until the death of
@c    JOSEPH.



@c    Genesis Chapter 1


@c    God createth Heaven and Earth, and all things therein, in six days.

@c    1:1. In the beginning God created heaven, and earth.

@c    1:2. And the earth was void and empty, and darkness was upon the face
@c    of the deep; and the spirit of God moved over the waters.

@c    1:3. And God said:  Be light made.  And light was made.

@c    1:4. And God saw the light that it was good; and he divided the light
@c    from the darkness.

@c    1:5. And he called the light Day, and the darkness Night; and there was
@c    evening and morning one day.

@c    1:6. And God said:  Let there be a firmament made amidst the waters:  and
@c    let it divide the waters from the waters.

@c    A firmament. . .By this name is here understood the whole space between
@c    the earth, and the highest stars.  The lower part of which divideth the
@c    waters that are upon the earth, from those that are above in the
@c    clouds.

@c    1:7. And God made a firmament, and divided the waters that were under
@c    the firmament, from those that were above the firmament, and it was so.

@c    1:8. And God called the firmament, Heaven; and the evening and morning
@c    were the second day.

@c    1:9. God also said; Let the waters that are under the heaven, be
@c    gathered together into one place:  and let the dry land appear.  And it
@c    was so done.

@c    1:10. And God called the dry land, Earth; and the gathering together of
@c    the waters, he called Seas.  And God saw that it was good.

@c    1:11. And he said:  let the earth bring forth green herb, and such as
@c    may seed, and the fruit tree yielding fruit after its kind, which may
@c    have seed in itself upon the earth.  And it was so done.

@c    1:12. And the earth brought forth the green herb, and such as yieldeth
@c    seed according to its kind, and the tree that beareth fruit, having
@c    seed each one according to its kind.  And God saw that it was good.

@c    1:13. And the evening and the morning were the third day.

@c    1:14. And God said:  Let there be lights made in the firmament of
@c    heaven, to divide the day and the night, and let them be for signs, and
@c    for seasons, and for days and years:

@c    1:15. To shine in the firmament of heaven, and to give light upon the
@c    earth, and it was so done.

@c    1:16. And God made two great lights:  a greater light to rule the day;
@c    and a lesser light to rule the night:  and the stars.

@c    Two great lights. . .God created on the first day, light, which being
@c    moved from east to west, by its rising and setting, made morning and
@c    evening.  But on the fourth day he ordered and distributed this light,
@c    and made the sun, moon, and stars.  The moon, though much less than the
@c    stars, is here called a great light, from its giving a far greater
@c    light to the earth than any of them.

@c    1:17. And he set them in the firmament of heaven to shine upon the
@c    earth.

@c    1:18. And to rule the day and the night, and to divide the light and
@c    the darkness.  And God saw that it was good.

@c    1:19. And the evening and morning were the fourth day.

@c    1:20. God also said:  let the waters bring forth the creeping creature
@c    having life, and the fowl that may fly over the earth under the
@c    firmament of heaven.

@c    1:21. And God created the great whales, and every living and moving
@c    creature, which the waters brought forth, according to their kinds, and
@c    every winged fowl according to its kind.  And God saw that it was good.

@c    1:22. And he blessed them, saying:  Increase and multiply, and fill the
@c    waters of the sea:  and let the birds be multiplied upon the earth.

@c    1:23. And the evening and morning were the fifth day.

@c    1:24. And God said:  Let the earth bring forth the living creature in
@c    its kind, cattle and creeping things, and beasts of the earth,
@c    according to their kinds.  And it was so done.

@c    1:25. And God made the beasts of the earth according to their kinds,
@c    and cattle, and every thing that creepeth on the earth after its kind.
@c    And God saw that it was good.

@c    1:26. And he said:  Let us make man to our image and likeness:  and let
@c    him have dominion over the fishes of the sea, and the fowls of the air,
@c    and the beasts, and the whole earth, and every creeping creature that
@c    moveth upon the earth.

@c    Let us make man to our image. . .This image of God in man, is not in the
@c    body, but in the soul; which is a spiritual substance, endued with
@c    understanding and free will.  God speaketh here in the plural number, to
@c    insinuate the plurality of persons in the Deity.

@c    1:27. And God created man to his own image:  to the image of God he
@c    created him:  male and female he created them.

@c    1:28. And God blessed them, saying:  Increase and multiply, and fill the
@c    earth, and subdue it, and rule over the fishes of the sea, and the
@c    fowls of the air, and all living creatures that move upon the earth.

@c    Increase and multiply. . .This is not a precept, as some Protestant
@c    controvertists would have it, but a blessing, rendering them fruitful;
@c    for God had said the same words to the fishes, and birds, (ver. 22) who
@c    were incapable of receiving a precept.

@c    1:29. And God said:  Behold I have given you every herb bearing seed
@c    upon the earth, and all trees that have in themselves seed of their own
@c    kind, to be your meat:

@c    1:30. And to all beasts of the earth, and to every fowl of the air, and
@c    to all that move upon the earth, and wherein there is life, that they
@c    may have to feed upon.  And it was so done.

@c    1:31. And God saw all the things that he had made, and they were very
@c    good.  And the evening and morning were the sixth day.



@c    Genesis Chapter 2


@c    God resteth on the seventh day and blesseth it.  The earthly paradise,
@c    in which God placeth man.  He commandeth him not to eat of the tree of
@c    knowledge.  And formeth a woman of his rib.

@c    2:1. So the heavens and the earth were finished, and all the furniture
@c    of them.

@c    2:2. And on the seventh day God ended his work which he had made:  and
@c    he rested on the seventh day from all his work which he had done.

@c    He rested, etc. . .That is, he ceased to make or create any new kinds of
@c    things.  Though, as our Lord tells us, John 5.17, "He still worketh",
@c    viz., by conserving and governing all things, and creating souls.

@c    2:3. And he blessed the seventh day, and sanctified it:  because in it
@c    he had rested from all his work which God created and made.

@c    2:4. These are the generations of the heaven and the earth, when they
@c    were created, in the day that the Lord God made the heaven and the
@c    earth:

@c    2:5. And every plant of the field before it sprung up in the earth, and
@c    every herb of the ground before it grew:  for the Lord God had not
@c    rained upon the earth; and there was not a man to till the earth.

@c    2:6. But a spring rose out of the earth, watering all the surface of
@c    the earth.

@c    2:7. And the Lord God formed man of the slime of the earth:  and
@c    breathed into his face the breath of life, and man became a living
@c    soul.

@c    2:8. And the Lord God had planted a paradise of pleasure from the
@c    beginning:  wherein he placed man whom he had formed.

@c    2:9. And the Lord God brought forth of the ground all manner of trees,
@c    fair to behold, and pleasant to eat of:  the tree of life also in the
@c    midst of paradise:  and the tree of knowledge of good and evil.

@c    The tree of life. . .So called because it had that quality, that by
@c    eating of the fruit of it, man would have been preserved in a constant
@c    state of health, vigour, and strength, and would not have died at all.
@c    The tree of knowledge. . .To which the deceitful serpent falsely
@c    attributed the power of imparting a superior kind of knowledge, beyond
@c    that which God was pleased to give.

@c    2:10. And a river went out of the place of pleasure to water paradise,
@c    which from thence is divided into four heads.

@c    2:11. The name of the one is Phison:  that is it which compasseth all
@c    the land of Hevilath, where gold groweth.

@c    2:12. And the gold of that land is very good:  there is found bdellium,
@c    and the onyx stone.

@c    2:13. And the name of the second river is Gehon:  the same is it that
@c    compasseth all the land of Ethiopia.

@c    2:14. And the name of the third river is Tigris:  the same passeth along
@c    by the Assyrians.  And the fourth river is Euphrates.

@c    2:15. And the Lord God took man, and put him into the paradise of
@c    pleasure, to dress it, and to keep it.

@c    2:16. And he commanded him, saying:  Of every tree of paradise thou
@c    shalt eat:

@c    2:17. But of the tree of knowledge of good and evil, thou shalt not
@c    eat.  For in what day soever thou shalt eat of it, thou shalt die the
@c    death.

@c    2:18. And the Lord God said:  It is not good for man to be alone:  let us
@c    make him a help like unto himself.

@c    2:19. And the Lord God having formed out of the ground all the beasts
@c    of the earth, and all the fowls of the air, brought them to Adam to see
@c    what he would call them:  for whatsoever Adam called any living creature
@c    the same is its name.

@c    2:20. And Adam called all the beasts by their names, and all the fowls
@c    of the air, and all the cattle of the field:  but for Adam there was not
@c    found a helper like himself.

@c    2:21. Then the Lord God cast a deep sleep upon Adam:  and when he was
@c    fast asleep, he took one of his ribs, and filled up flesh for it.

@c    2:22. And the Lord God built the rib which he took from Adam into a
@c    woman:  and brought her to Adam.

@c    2:23. And Adam said:  This now is bone of my bones, and flesh of my
@c    flesh; she shall be called woman, because she was taken out of man.

@c    2:24. Wherefore a man shall leave father and mother, and shall cleave
@c    to his wife:  and they shall be two in one flesh.

@c    2:25. And they were both naked:  to wit, Adam and his wife:  and were not
@c    ashamed.



@c    Genesis Chapter 3


@c    The serpent's craft.  The fall of our first parents.  Their punishment.
@c    The promise of a Redeemer.

@c    3:1. Now the serpent was more subtle than any of the beasts of the
@c    earth which the Lord God had made.  And he said to the woman:  Why hath
@c    God commanded you, that you should not eat of every tree of paradise?

@c    3:2. And the woman answered him, saying:  Of the fruit of the trees that
@c    are in paradise we do eat:

@c    3:3. But of the fruit of the tree which is in the midst of paradise,
@c    God hath commanded us that we should not eat; and that we should not
@c    touch it, lest perhaps we die.

@c    3:4. And the serpent said to the woman:  No, you shall not die the
@c    death.

@c    3:5. For God doth know that in what day soever you shall eat thereof,
@c    your eyes shall be opened:  and you shall be as Gods, knowing good and
@c    evil.

@c    3:6. And the woman saw that the tree was good to eat, and fair to the
@c    eyes, and delightful to behold:  and she took of the fruit thereof, and
@c    did eat, and gave to her husband, who did eat.

@c    3:7. And the eyes of them both were opened:  and when they perceived
@c    themselves to be naked, they sewed together fig leaves, and made
@c    themselves aprons.

@c    And the eyes, etc. . .Not that they were blind before, (for the woman
@c    saw that the tree was fair to the eyes, ver. 6.) nor yet that their
@c    eyes were opened to any more perfect knowledge of good; but only to the
@c    unhappy experience of having lost the good of original grace and
@c    innocence, and incurred the dreadful evil of sin.  From whence followed
@c    a shame of their being naked; which they minded not before; because
@c    being now stript of original grace, they quickly began to be subject to
@c    the shameful rebellions of the flesh.

@c    3:8. And when they heard the voice of the Lord God walking in paradise
@c    at the afternoon air, Adam and his wife hid themselves from the face of
@c    the Lord God, amidst the trees of paradise.

@c    3:9. And the Lord God called Adam, and said to him:  Where art thou?

@c    3:10. And he said:  I heard thy voice in paradise; and I was afraid,
@c    because I was naked, and I hid myself.

@c    3:11. And he said to him:  And who hath told thee that thou wast naked,
@c    but that thou hast eaten of the tree whereof I commanded thee that thou
@c    shouldst not eat?

@c    3:12. And Adam said:  The woman, whom thou gavest me to be my companion,
@c    gave me of the tree, and I did eat.

@c    3:13. And the Lord God said to the woman:  Why hast thou done this?  And
@c    she answered:  The serpent deceived me, and I did eat.

@c    3:14. And the Lord God said to the serpent:  Because thou hast done this
@c    thing, thou art cursed among all cattle, and beasts of the earth:  upon
@c    thy breast shalt thou go, and earth shalt thou eat all the days of thy
@c    life.

@c    3:15. I will put enmities between thee and the woman, and thy seed and
@c    her seed:  she shall crush thy head, and thou shalt lie in wait for her
@c    heel.

@c    She shall crush. . .Ipsa, the woman; so divers of the fathers read this
@c    place, conformably to the Latin:  others read it ipsum, viz., the seed.
@c    The sense is the same:  for it is by her seed, Jesus Christ, that the
@c    woman crushes the serpent's head.

@c    3:16. To the woman also he said:  I will multiply thy sorrows, and thy
@c    conceptions:  in sorrow shalt thou bring forth children, and thou shalt
@c    be under thy husband's power, and he shall have dominion over thee.

@c    3:17. And to Adam he said:  Because thou hast hearkened to the voice of
@c    thy wife, and hast eaten of the tree, whereof I commanded thee, that
@c    thou shouldst not eat, cursed is the earth in thy work:  with labour and
@c    toil shalt thou eat thereof all the days of thy life.

@c    3:18. Thorns and thistles shall it bring forth to thee, and thou shalt
@c    eat the herbs of the earth.

@c    3:19. In the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat bread till thou return to
@c    the earth out of which thou wast taken:  for dust thou art, and into
@c    dust thou shalt return.

@c    3:20. And Adam called the name of his wife Eve:  because she was the
@c    mother of all the living.

@c    3:21. And the Lord God made for Adam and his wife garments of skins,
@c    and clothed them.

@c    3:22. And he said:  Behold Adam is become as one of us, knowing good and
@c    evil:  now therefore lest perhaps he put forth his hand and take also of
@c    the tree of life, and eat, and live for ever.

@c    Behold Adam, etc. . .This was spoken by way of reproaching him with his
@c    pride, in affecting a knowledge that might make him like to God.

@c    3:23. And the Lord God sent him out of the paradise of pleasure, to
@c    till the earth from which he was taken.

@c    3:24. And he cast out Adam:  and placed before the paradise of pleasure
@c    Cherubims, and a flaming sword, turning every way, to keep the way of
@c    the tree of life.



@c    Genesis Chapter 4


@c    The history of Cain and Abel.

@c    4:1. And Adam knew Eve his wife; who conceived and brought forth Cain,
@c    saying:  I have gotten a man through God.

@c    4:2. And again she brought forth his brother Abel.  And Abel was a
@c    shepherd, and Cain a husbandman.

@c    4:3. And it came to pass after many days, that Cain offered, of the
@c    fruits of the earth, gifts to the Lord.

@c    4:4. Abel also offered of the firstlings of his flock, and of their
@c    fat:  and the Lord had respect to Abel, and to his offerings.

@c    Had respect. . .That is, shewed his acceptance of his sacrifice (as
@c    coming from a heart full of devotion):  and that, as we may suppose, by
@c    some visible token, such as sending fire from heaven upon his
@c    offerings.

@c    4:5. But to Cain and his offerings he had no respect:  and Cain was
@c    exceeding angry, and his countenance fell.

@c    4:6. And the Lord said to him:  Why art thou angry?  and why is thy
@c    countenance fallen?

@c    4:7. If thou do well, shalt thou not receive?  but if ill, shall not sin
@c    forthwith be present at the door?  but the lust thereof shall be under
@c    thee, and thou shalt have dominion over it.

@c    4:8. And Cain said to Abel his brother:  Let us go forth abroad.  And
@c    when they were in the field, Cain rose up against his brother Abel, and
@c    slew him.

@c    4:9. And the Lord said to Cain:  Where is thy brother Abel?  And he
@c    answered:  I know not:  am I my brother's keeper?

@c    4:10. And he said to him:  What hast thou done?  the voice of thy
@c    brother's blood crieth to me from the earth.

@c    4:11. Now therefore cursed shalt thou be upon the earth, which hath
@c    opened her mouth and received the blood of thy brother at thy hand.

@c    4:12. When thou shalt till it, it shall not yield to thee its fruit:  a
@c    fugitive and a vagabond shalt thou be upon the earth.

@c    4:13. And Cain said to the Lord:  My iniquity is greater than that I may
@c    deserve pardon.

@c    4:14. Behold thou dost cast me out this day from the face of the earth,
@c    and from thy face I shall be hid, and I shall be a vagabond and a
@c    fugitive on the earth:  every one therefore that findeth me, shall kill
@c    me.

@c    Every one that findeth me shall kill me. . .His guilty conscience made
@c    him fear his own brothers and nephews; of whom, by this time, there
@c    might be a good number upon the earth; which had now endured near 130
@c    years; as may be gathered from Gen. 5.3, compared with chap. 4.25,
@c    though in the compendious account given in the scriptures, only Cain
@c    and Abel are mentioned.

@c    4:15. And the Lord said to him:  No, it shall not so be:  but whosoever
@c    shall kill Cain, shall be punished sevenfold.  And the Lord set a mark
@c    upon Cain, that whosoever found him should not kill him.

@c    Set a mark, etc. . .The more common opinion of the interpreters of holy
@c    writ supposes this mark to have been a trembling of the body; or a
@c    horror and consternation in his countenance.

@c    4:16. And Cain went out from the face of the Lord, and dwelt as a
@c    fugitive on the earth at the east side of Eden.

@c    4:17. And Cain knew his wife, and she conceived, and brought forth
@c    Henoch:  and he built a city, and called the name thereof by the name of
@c    his son Henoch.

@c    His wife. . .She was a daughter of Adam, and Cain's own sister; God
@c    dispensing with such marriages in the beginning of the world, as
@c    mankind could not otherwise be propagated.  He built a city, viz. . .In
@c    process of time, when his race was multiplied, so as to be numerous
@c    enough to people it.  For in the many hundred years he lived, his race
@c    might be multiplied even to millions.

@c    4:18. And Henoch begot Irad, and Irad begot Maviael, and Maviael begot
@c    Mathusael, and Mathusael begot Lamech,

@c    4:19. Who took two wives:  the name of the one was Ada, and the name of
@c    the other Sella.

@c    4:20. And Ada brought forth Jabel:  who was the father of such as dwell
@c    in tents, and of herdsmen.

@c    4:21. And his brother's name was Jubal:  he was the father of them that
@c    play upon the harp and the organs.

@c    4:22. Sella also brought forth Tubalcain, who was a hammerer and
@c    artificer in every work of brass and iron.  And the sister of Tubalcain
@c    was Noema.

@c    4:23. And Lamech said to his wives Ada and Sella:  Hear my voice, ye
@c    wives of Lamech, hearken to my speech:  for I have slain a man to the
@c    wounding of myself, and a stripling to my own bruising.

@c    I have slain a man, etc. . .It is the tradition of the Hebrews, that
@c    Lamech in hunting slew Cain, mistaking him for a wild beast; and that
@c    having discovered what he had done, he beat so unmercifully the youth,
@c    by whom he was led into that mistake, that he died of the blows.

@c    4:24. Sevenfold vengeance shall be taken for Cain:  but for Lamech
@c    seventy times sevenfold.

@c    4:25. Adam also knew his wife again:  and she brought forth a son, and
@c    called his name Seth, saying:  God hath given me another seed for Abel,
@c    whom Cain slew.

@c    4:26. But to Seth also was born a son, whom he called Enos:  this man
@c    began to call upon the name of the Lord.

@c    Began to call upon, etc. . .Not that Adam and Seth had not called upon
@c    God, before the birth of Enos; but that Enos used more solemnity in the
@c    worship and invocation of God.



@c    Genesis Chapter 5


@c    The genealogy, age, and death of the Patriarchs, from Adam to Noe.  The
@c    translation of Henoch.

@c    5:1. This is the book of the generation of Adam.  In the day that God
@c    created man, he made him to the likeness of God.

@c    5:2. He created them male and female; and blessed them:  and called
@c    their name Adam, in the day when they were created.

@c    5:3. And Adam lived a hundred and thirty years, and begot a son to his
@c    own image and likeness, and called his name Seth.

@c    5:4. And the days of Adam, after he begot Seth, were eight hundred
@c    years:  and he begot sons and daughters.

@c    5:5. And all the time that Adam lived, came to nine hundred and thirty
@c    years, and he died.

@c    5:6. Seth also lived a hundred and five years, and begot Enos.

@c    5:7. And Seth lived after he begot Enos, eight hundred and seven years,
@c    and begot sons and daughters.

@c    5:8. And all the days of Seth were nine hundred and twelve years, and
@c    he died.

@c    5:9. And Enos lived ninety years, and begot Cainan.

@c    5:10. After whose birth he lived eight hundred and fifteen years, and
@c    begot sons and daughters.

@c    5:11. And all the days of Enos were nine hundred and five years, and he
@c    died.

@c    5:12. And Cainan lived seventy years, and begot Malaleel.

@c    5:13. And Cainan lived after he begot Malaleel, eight hundred and forty
@c    years, and begot sons and daughters.

@c    5:14. And all the days of Cainan were nine hundred and ten years, and
@c    he died.

@c    5:15. And Malaleel lived sixty-five years and begot Jared.

@c    5:16. And Malaleel lived after he begot Jared, eight hundred and thirty
@c    years, and begot sons and daughters.

@c    5:17. And all the days of Malaleel were eight hundred and ninety-five
@c    years, and he died.

@c    5:18. And Jared lived a hundred and sixty-two years, and begot Henoch.

@c    5:19. And Jared lived after he begot Henoch, eight hundred years, and
@c    begot sons and daughters.

@c    5:20. And all the days of Jared were nine hundred and sixty-two years,
@c    and he died.

@c    5:21. And Henoch lived sixty-five years, and begot Mathusala.

@c    5:22. And Henoch walked with God:  and lived after he begot Mathusala,
@c    three hundred years, and begot sons and daughters.

@c    5:23. And all the days of Henoch were three hundred and sixty-five
@c    years.

@c    5:24. And he walked with God, and was seen no more:  because God took
@c    him.

@c    5:25. And Mathusala lived a hundred and eighty-seven years, and begot
@c    Lamech.

@c    5:26. And Mathlusala lived after he begot Lamech, seven hundred and
@c    eighty-two years, and begot sons and daughters.

@c    5:27. And all the days of Mathusala were nine hundred and sixty-nine
@c    years, and he died.

@c    5:28. And Lamech lived a hundred and eighty-two years, and begot a son.

@c    5:29. And he called his name Noe, saying:  This same shall comfort us
@c    from the works and labours of our hands on the earth, which the Lord
@c    hath cursed.

@c    5:30. And Lamech lived after he begot Noe, five hundred and ninety-five
@c    years, and begot sons and daughters.

@c    5:31. And all the days of Lamech came to seven hundred and
@c    seventy-seven years, and he died.  And Noe, when he was five hundred
@c    years old, begot Sem, Cham, and Japheth.



@c    Genesis Chapter 6


@c    Man's sin is the cause of the deluge.  Noe is commanded to build the
@c    ark.

@c    6:1. And after that men began to be multiplied upon the earth, and
@c    daughters were born to them,

@c    6:2. The sons of God seeing the daughters of men, that they were fair,
@c    took to themselves wives of all which they chose.

@c    The sons of God. . .The descendants of Seth and Enos are here called
@c    sons of God from their religion and piety:  whereas the ungodly race of
@c    Cain, who by their carnal affections lay grovelling upon the earth, are
@c    called the children of men.  The unhappy consequence of the former
@c    marrying with the latter, ought to be a warning to Christians to be
@c    very circumspect in their marriages; and not to suffer themselves to be
@c    determined in their choice by their carnal passion, to the prejudice of
@c    virtue or religion.

@c    6:3. And God said:  My spirit shall not remain in man for ever, because
@c    he is flesh, and his days shall be a hundred and twenty years.

@c    His days shall be, etc. . .The meaning is, that man's days, which before
@c    the flood were usually 900 years, should now be reduced to 120 years.
@c    Or rather, that God would allow men this term of 120 years, for their
@c    repentance and conversion, before he would send the deluge.

@c    6:4. Now giants were upon the earth in those days.  For after the sons
@c    of God went in to the daughters of men, and they brought forth
@c    children, these are the mighty men of old, men of renown.

@c    Giants. . .It is likely the generality of men before the flood were of a
@c    gigantic stature in comparison with what men now are.  But these here
@c    spoken of are called giants, as being not only tall in stature, but
@c    violent and savage in their dispositions, and mere monsters of cruelty
@c    and lust.

@c    6:5. And God seeing that the wickedness of men was great on the earth,
@c    and that all the thought of their heart was bent upon evil at all
@c    times,

@c    6:6. It repented him that he had made man on the earth.  And being
@c    touched inwardly with sorrow of heart,

@c    It repented him, etc. . .God, who is unchangeable, is not capable of
@c    repentance, grief, or any other passion.  But these expressions are used
@c    to declare the enormity of the sins of men, which was so provoking as
@c    to determine their Creator to destroy these his creatures, whom before
@c    he had so much favoured.

@c    6:7. He said:  I will destroy man, whom I have created, from the face of
@c    the earth, from man even to beasts, from the creeping thing even to the
@c    fowls of the air, for it repenteth me that I have made them.

@c    6:8. But Noe found grace before the Lord.

@c    6:9. These are the generations of Noe:  Noe was a just and perfect man
@c    in his generations, he walked with God.

@c    6:10. And he begot three sons, Sem, Cham, and Japheth.

@c    6:11. And the earth was corrupted before God, and was filled with
@c    iniquity.

@c    6:12. And when God had seen that the earth was corrupted (for all flesh
@c    had corrupted its way upon the earth),

@c    6:13. He said to Noe:  The end of all flesh is come before me, the earth
@c    is filled with iniquity through them, and I will destroy them with the
@c    earth.

@c    6:14. Make thee an ark of timber planks:  thou shalt make little rooms
@c    in the ark, and thou shalt pitch it within and without.

@c    6:15. And thus shalt thou make it.  The length of the ark shall be three
@c    hundred cubits:  the breadth of it fifty cubits, and the height of it
@c    thirty cubits.

@c    Three hundred cubits, etc. . .The ark, according to the dimensions here
@c    set down, contained four hundred and fifty thousand square cubits;
@c    which was more than enough to contain all the kinds of living
@c    creatures, with all necessary provisions:  even supposing the cubits
@c    here spoken of to have been only a foot and a half each, which was the
@c    least kind of cubits.

@c    6:16. Thou shalt make a window in the ark, and in a cubit shalt thou
@c    finish the top of it:  and the door of the ark thou shalt set in the
@c    side:  with lower, middle chambers, and third stories shalt thou make
@c    it.

@c    6:17. Behold, I will bring the waters of a great flood upon the earth,
@c    to destroy all flesh, wherein is the breath of life under heaven.  All
@c    things that are in the earth shall be consumed.

@c    6:18. And I will establish my covenant with thee, and thou shalt enter
@c    into the ark, thou and thy sons, and thy wife, and the wives of thy
@c    sons with thee.

@c    6:19. And of every living creature of all flesh, thou shalt bring two
@c    of a sort into the ark, that they may live with thee:  of the male sex,
@c    and the female.

@c    6:20. Of fowls according to their kind, and of beasts in their kind,
@c    and of every thing that creepeth on the earth according to its kind:
@c    two of every sort shall go in with thee, that they may live.

@c    6:21. Thou shalt take unto thee of all food that may be eaten, and thou
@c    shalt lay it up with thee:  and it shall be food for thee and them.

@c    6:22. And Noe did all things which God commanded him.



@c    Genesis Chapter 7


@c    Noe with his family go into the ark.  The deluge overflows the earth.

@c    7:1. And the Lord said to him:  Go in, thou and all thy house, into the
@c    ark:  for thee I have seen just before me in this generation.

@c    7:2. Of all clean beasts take seven and seven, the male and the female.

@c    Of all clean. . .The distinction of clean and unclean beasts appears to
@c    have been made before the law of Moses, which was not promulgated till
@c    the year of the world 2514.

@c    7:3. But of the beasts that are unclean two and two, the male and the
@c    female.  Of the fowls also of the air seven and seven, the male and the
@c    female:  that seed may be saved upon the face of the whole earth.

@c    7:4. For yet a while, and after seven days, I will rain upon the earth
@c    forty days and forty nights:  and I will destroy every substance that I
@c    have made, from the face of the earth.

@c    7:5. And Noe did all things which the Lord had commanded him.

@c    7:6. And he was six hundred years old, when the waters of the flood
@c    overflowed the earth.

@c    7:7. And Noe went in and his sons, his wife and the wives of his sons
@c    with him into the ark, because of the waters of the flood.

@c    7:8. And of beasts clean and unclean, and of fowls, and of every thing
@c    that moveth upon the earth,

@c    7:9. Two and two went in to Noe into the ark, male and female, as the
@c    Lord had commanded Noe.

@c    7:10. And after the seven days were passed, the waters of the flood
@c    overflowed the earth.

@c    7:11. In the six hundredth year of the life of Noe, in the second
@c    month, in the seventeenth day of the month, all the fountains of the
@c    great deep were broken up, and the floodgates of heaven were opened:

@c    7:12. And the rain fell upon the earth forty days and forty nights.

@c    7:13. In the selfsame day Noe, and Sem, and Cham, and Japheth, his
@c    sons:  his wife, and the three wives of his sons with them, went into
@c    the ark.

@c    7:14. They and every beast according to its kind, and all the cattle in
@c    their kind, and every thing that moveth upon the earth, according to
@c    its kind, and every fowl according to its kind, all birds, and all that
@c    fly,

@c    7:15. Went in to Noe into the ark, two and two of all flesh, wherein
@c    was the breath of life.

@c    7:16. And they that went in, went in male and female of all flesh, as
@c    God had commanded him:  and the Lord shut him in on the outside.

@c    7:17. And the flood was forty days upon the earth:  and the waters
@c    increased, and lifted up the ark on high from the earth.

@c    7:18. For they overflowed exceedingly:  and filled all on the face of
@c    the earth:  and the ark was carried upon the waters.

@c    7:19. And the waters prevailed beyond measure upon the earth:  and all
@c    the high mountains under the whole heaven were covered.

@c    7:20. The water was fifteen cubits higher than the mountains which it
@c    covered.

@c    7:21. And all flesh was destroyed that moved upon the earth, both of
@c    fowl and of cattle, and of beasts, and of all creeping things that
@c    creep upon the earth:  and all men.

@c    7:22. And all things wherein there is the breath of life on the earth,
@c    died.

@c    7:23. And he destroyed all the substance that was upon the earth, from
@c    man even to beast, and the creeping things and fowls of the air:  and
@c    they were destroyed from the earth:  and Noe only remained, and they
@c    that were with him in the ark.

@c    7:24. And the waters prevailed upon the earth a hundred and fifty days.



@c    Genesis Chapter 8


@c    The deluge ceaseth.  Noe goeth out of the ark, and offereth a sacrifice.
@c    God's covenant to him.

@c    8:1. And God remembered Noe, and all the living creatures, and all the
@c    cattle which were with him in the ark, and brought a wind upon the
@c    earth, and the waters were abated:

@c    8:2. The fountains also of the deep, and the floodgates of heaven, were
@c    shut up, and the rain from heaven was restrained.

@c    8:3. And the waters returned from off the earth going and coming:  and
@c    they began to be abated after a hundred and fifty days.

@c    8:4. And the ark rested in the seventh month, the seven and twentieth
@c    day of the month, upon the mountains of Armenia.

@c    8:5. And the waters were going and decreasing until the tenth month:
@c    for in the tenth month, the first day of the month, the tops of the
@c    mountains appeared.

@c    8:6. And after that forty days were passed, Noe opening the window of
@c    the ark, which he had made, sent forth a raven:

@c    8:7. Which went forth and did not return, till the waters were dried up
@c    upon the earth.

@c    Did not return. . .The raven did not return into the ark; but (as it may
@c    be gathered from the Hebrew) went to and fro; sometimes going to the
@c    mountains, where it found carcasses to feed on:  and other times
@c    returning, to rest upon the top of the ark.

@c    8:8. He sent forth also a dove after him, to see if the waters had now
@c    ceased upon the face of the earth.

@c    8:9. But she not finding where her foot might rest, returned to him
@c    into the ark:  for the waters were upon the whole earth:  and he put
@c    forth his hand, and caught her, and brought her into the ark.

@c    8:10. And having waited yet seven other days, he again sent forth the
@c    dove out of the ark.

@c    8:11. And she came to him in the evening carrying a bough of an olive
@c    tree, with green leaves, in her mouth.  Noe therefore understood that
@c    the waters were ceased upon the earth.

@c    8:12. And he stayed yet other seven days:  and he sent forth the dove,
@c    which returned not any more unto him.

@c    8:13. Therefore in the six hundredth and first year, the first month,
@c    the first day of the month, the waters were lessened upon the earth,
@c    and Noe opening the covering of the ark, looked, and saw that the face
@c    of the earth was dried.

@c    8:14. In the second month, the seven and twentieth day of the month,
@c    the earth was dried.

@c    8:15. And God spoke to Noe, saying:

@c    8:16. Go out of the ark, thou and thy wife, thy sons and the wives of
@c    thy sons with thee.

@c    8:17. All living things that are with thee of all flesh, as well in
@c    fowls as in beasts, and all creeping things that creep upon the earth,
@c    bring out with thee, and go ye upon the earth:  increase and multiply
@c    upon it.

@c    8:18. So Noe went out, he and his sons:  his wife, and the wives of his
@c    sons with him.

@c    8:19. And all living things, and cattle, and creeping things that creep
@c    upon the earth, according to their kinds went out of the ark.

@c    8:20. And Noe built an altar unto the Lord:  and taking of all cattle
@c    and fowls that were clean, offered holocausts upon the altar.

@c    Holocausts,. . .or whole burnt offerings.  In which the whole victim was
@c    consumed by fire upon God's altar, and no part was reserved for the use
@c    of priest or people.

@c    8:21. And the Lord smelled a sweet savour, and said:  I will no more
@c    curse the earth for the sake of man:  for the imagination and thought of
@c    man's heart are prone to evil from his youth:  therefore I will no more
@c    destroy every living soul as I have done.

@c    Smelled, etc. . .A figurative expression, denoting that God was well
@c    pleased with the sacrifices which his servant offered.

@c    8:22. All the days of the earth, seedtime and harvest, cold and heat,
@c    summer and winter, night and day, shall not cease.



@c    Genesis Chapter 9


@c    God blesseth Noe:  forbiddeth blood, and promiseth never more to destroy
@c    the world by water.  The blessing of Sem and Japheth.

@c    9:1. And God blessed Noe and his sons.  And he said to them:  Increase,
@c    and multiply, and fill the earth.

@c    9:2. And let the fear and dread of you be upon all the beasts of the
@c    earth, and upon all the fowls of the air, and all that move upon the
@c    earth:  all the fishes of the sea are delivered into your hand.

@c    9:3. And every thing that moveth, and liveth shall be meat for you:
@c    even as the green herbs have I delivered them all to you:

@c    9:4. Saving that flesh with blood you shall not eat.

@c    9:5. For I will require the blood of your lives at the hand of every
@c    beast, and at the hand of man, at the hand of every man, and of his
@c    brother, will I require the life of man.

@c    9:6. Whosoever shall shed man's blood, his blood shall be shed:  for man
@c    was made to the image of God.

@c    9:7. But increase you and multiply, and go upon the earth and fill it.

@c    9:8. Thus also said God to Noe, and to his sons with him:

@c    9:9. Behold I will establish my covenant with you, and with your seed
@c    after you:

@c    9:10. And with every living soul that is with you, as well in all
@c    birds, as in cattle and beasts of the earth, that are come forth out of
@c    the ark, and in all the beasts of the earth.

@c    9:11. I will establish my covenant with you, and all flesh shall be no
@c    more destroyed with the waters of a flood, neither shall there be from
@c    henceforth a flood to waste the earth.

@c    9:12. And God said:  This is the sign of the covenant which I give
@c    between me and you, and to every living soul that is with you, for
@c    perpetual generations.

@c    9:13. I will set my bow in the clouds, and it shall be the sign of a
@c    covenant between me and between the earth.

@c    9:14. And when I shall cover the sky with clouds, my bow shall appear
@c    in the clouds:

@c    9:15. And I will remember my covenant with you, and with every living
@c    soul that beareth flesh:  and there shall no more be waters of a flood
@c    to destroy all flesh.

@c    9:16. And the bow shall be in the clouds, and I shall see it, and shall
@c    remember the everlasting covenant, that was made between God and every
@c    living soul of all flesh which is upon the earth.

@c    9:17. And God said to Noe:  This shall be the sign of the covenant,
@c    which I have established, between me and all flesh upon the earth.

@c    9:18. And the sons of Noe, who came out of the ark, were Sem, Cham, and
@c    Japheth:  and Cham is the father of Chanaan.

@c    9:19. These three are the sons of Noe:  and from these was all mankind
@c    spread over the whole earth.

@c    9:20. And Noe a husbandman began to till the ground, and planted a
@c    vineyard.

@c    9:21. And drinking of the wine was made drunk, and was uncovered in his
@c    tent.

@c    Drunk. . .Noe by the judgment of the fathers was not guilty of sin, in
@c    being overcome by wine:  because he knew not the strength of it.

@c    9:22. Which when Cham the father of Chanaan had seen, to wit, that his
@c    father's nakedness was uncovered, he told it to his two brethren
@c    without.

@c    9:23. But Sem and Japheth put a cloak upon their shoulders, and going
@c    backward, covered the nakedness of their father:  and their faces were
@c    turned away, and they saw not their father's nakedness.

@c    Covered the nakedness. . .Thus, as St. Gregory takes notice L. 35;
@c    Moral. c. 22, we ought to cover the nakedness, that is, the sins, of
@c    our spiritual parents and superiors.

@c    9:24. And Noe awaking from the wine, when he had learned what his
@c    younger son had done to him,

@c    9:25. He said:  Cursed be Chanaan, a servant of servants shall he be
@c    unto his brethren.

@c    Cursed be Chanaan. . .The curses, as well as the blessings, of the
@c    patriarchs, were prophetical:  And this in particular is here recorded
@c    by Moses, for the children of Israel, who were to possess the land of
@c    Chanaan.  But why should Chanaan be cursed for his father's faults?  The
@c    Hebrews answer, that he being then a boy, was the first that saw his
@c    grandfather's nakedness, and told his father Cham of it; and joined
@c    with him in laughing at it:  which drew upon him, rather than upon the
@c    rest of the children of Cham, this prophetical curse.

@c    9:26. And he said:  Blessed be the Lord God of Sem, be Chanaan his
@c    servant.

@c    9:27. May God enlarge Japheth, and may he dwell in the tents of Sem,
@c    and Chanaan be his servant.

@c    9:28. And Noe lived after the flood three hundred and fifty years.

@c    9:29. And all his days were in the whole nine hundred and fifty years:
@c    and he died.



@c    Genesis Chapter 10


@c    The genealogy of the children of Noe, by whom the world was peopled
@c    after the flood.

@c    10:1. These are the generations of the sons of Noe:  Sem, Cham, and
@c    Japheth:  and unto them sons were born after the flood.

@c    10:2. The sons of Japheth:  Gomer, and Magog, and Madai, and Javan, and
@c    Thubal, and Mosoch, and Thiras.

@c    10:3. And the sons of Gomer:  Ascenez and Riphath and Thogorma.

@c    10:4. And the sons of Javan:  Elisa and Tharsis, Cetthim and Dodanim.

@c    10:5. By these were divided the islands of the Gentiles in their lands,
@c    every one according to his tongue and their families in their nations.

@c    The islands. . .So the Hebrews called all the remote countries, to which
@c    they went by ships from Judea, to Greece, Italy, Spain, etc.

@c    10:6. And the Sons of Cham:  Chus, and Mesram, and Phuth, and Chanaan.

@c    10:7. And the sons of Chus:  Saba, and Hevila, and Sabatha, and Regma,
@c    and Sabatacha.  The sons of Regma:  Saba, and Dadan.

@c    10:8. Now Chus begot Nemrod:  he began to be mighty on the earth.

@c    10:9. And he was a stout hunter before the Lord.  Hence came a proverb:
@c    Even as Nemrod the stout hunter before the Lord.

@c    A stout hunter. . .Not of beasts but of men:  whom by violence and
@c    tyranny he brought under his dominion.  And such he was, not only in the
@c    opinion of men, but before the Lord, that is, in his sight who cannot
@c    be deceived.

@c    10:10. And the beginning of his kingdom was Babylon, and Arach, and
@c    Achad, and Chalanne in the land of Sennaar.

@c    10:11. Out of that land came forth Assur, and built Ninive, and the
@c    streets of the city, and Chale.

@c    10:12. Resen also between Ninive and Chale:  this is the great city.

@c    10:13. And Mesraim begot Ludim, and Anamim and Laabim, Nephthuim.

@c    10:14. And Phetrusim, and Chasluim; of whom came forth the Philistines,
@c    and the Capthorim.

@c    10:15. And Chanaan begot Sidon his firstborn, the Hethite,

@c    10:16. And the Jebusite, and the Amorrhite, and the Gergesite.

@c    10:17. The Hevite and Aracite:  the Sinite,

@c    10:18. And the Aradian, the Samarite, and the Hamathite:  and afterwards
@c    the families of the Chanaanites were spread abroad.

@c    10:19. And the limits of Chanaan were from Sidon as one comes to Gerara
@c    even to Gaza, until thou enter Sodom and Gomorrha, and Adama, and
@c    Seboim even to Lesa.

@c    10:20. These are the children of Cham in their kindreds and tongues,
@c    and generations, and lands, and nations.

@c    10:21. Of Sem also the father of all the children of Heber, the elder
@c    brother of Japheth, sons were born.

@c    10:22. The sons of Sem:  Elam and Assur, and Arphaxad, and Lud, and
@c    Aram.

@c    10:23. The sons of Aram:  Us, and Hull, and Gether; and Mes.

@c    10:24. But Arphaxad begot Sale, of whom was born Heber.

@c    10:25. And to Heber were born two sons:  the name of the one was Phaleg,
@c    because in his days was the earth divided:  and his brother's name
@c    Jectan.

@c    10:26. Which Jectan begot Elmodad, and Saleph, and Asarmoth, Jare,

@c    10:27. And Aduram, and Uzal, and Decla,

@c    10:28. And Ebal, and Abimael, Saba,

@c    10:29. And Ophir, and Hevila, and Jobab.  All these were the sons of
@c    Jectan.

@c    10:30. And their dwelling was from Messa as we go on as far as Sephar,
@c    a mountain in the east.

@c    10:31. These are the children of Sem according to their kindreds and
@c    tongues, and countries in their nations.

@c    10:32. These are the families of Noe, according to their people and
@c    nations.  By these were the nations divided on the earth after the
@c    flood.



@c    Genesis Chapter 11


@c    The tower of Babel.  The confusion of tongues.  The genealogy of Sem down
@c    to Abram.

@c    11:1. And the earth was of one tongue, and of the same speech.

@c    11:2. And when they removed from the east, they found a plain in the
@c    land of Sennaar, and dwelt in it.

@c    11:3. And each one said to his neighbour:  Come let us make brick, and
@c    bake them with fire.  And they had brick instead of stones, and slime
@c    instead of mortar:

@c    11:4. And they said:  Come, let us make a city and a tower, the top
@c    whereof may reach to heaven; and let us make our name famous before we
@c    be scattered abroad into all lands.

@c    11:5. And the Lord came down to see the city and the tower, which the
@c    children of Adam were building.

@c    11:6. And he said:  Behold, it is one people, and all have one tongue:
@c    and they have begun to do this, neither will they leave off from their
@c    designs, till they accomplish them in deed.

@c    11:7. Come ye, therefore, let us go down, and there confound their
@c    tongue, that they may not understand one another's speech.

@c    11:8. And so the Lord scattered them from that place into all lands,
@c    and they ceased to build the city.

@c    11:9. And therefore the name thereof was called Babel, because there
@c    the language of the whole earth was confounded:  and from thence the
@c    Lord scattered them abroad upon the face of all countries.

@c    Babel. . .That is, confusion.

@c    11:10. These are the generations of Sem:  Sem was a hundred years old
@c    when he begot Arphaxad, two years after the flood.

@c    11:11. And Sem lived after he begot Arphaxad, five hundred years, and
@c    begot sons and daughters.

@c    11:12. And Arphaxad lived thirty-five years, and begot Sale.

@c    11:13. And Arphaxad lived after he begot Sale, three hundred and three
@c    years, and begot sons and daughters.

@c    11:14. Sale also lived thirty years, and begot Heber.

@c    11:15. And Sale lived after he begot Heber, four hundred and three
@c    years:  and begot sons and daughters.

@c    11:16. And Heber lived thirty-four years, and begot Phaleg.

@c    11:17. And Heber lived after he begot Phaleg, four hundred and thirty
@c    years:  and begot sons and daughters.

@c    11:18. Phaleg also lived thirty years, and begot Reu.

@c    11:19. And Phaleg lived after he begot Reu, two hundred and nine years,
@c    and begot sons and daughters.

@c    11:20. And Reu lived thirty-two years, and begot Sarug.

@c    11:21. And Reu lived after he begot Sarug, two hundred and seven years,
@c    and begot sons and daughters.

@c    11:22. And Sarug lived thirty years, and begot Nachor.

@c    11:23. And Sarug lived after he begot Nachor, two hundred years, and
@c    begot sons and daughters.

@c    11:24. And Nachor lived nine and twenty years, and begot Thare.

@c    11:25. And Nachor lived after he begot Thare, a hundred and nineteen
@c    years, and begot sons and daughters.

@c    11:26. And Thare lived seventy years, and begot Abram, and Nachor, and
@c    Aran.

@c    11:27. And these are the generations of Thare:  Thare begot Abram,
@c    Nachor, and Aran.  And Aran begot Lot.

@c    11:28. And Aran died before Thare his father, in the land of his
@c    nativity in Ur of the Chaldees.

@c    11:29. And Abram and Nachor married wives:  the name of Abram's wife was
@c    Sarai:  and the name of Nachor's wife, Melcha, the daughter of Aran,
@c    father of Melcha and father of Jescha.

@c    11:30. And Sarai was barren, and had no children.

@c    11:31. And Thare took Abram his son, and Lot the son of Aran, his son's
@c    son, and Sarai his daughter in law, the wife of Abram his son, and
@c    brought them out of Ur of the Chaldees, to go into the land of Chanaan:
@c    and they came as far as Haran, and dwelt there.

@c    11:32. And the days of Thare were two hundred and five years, and he
@c    died in Haran.



@c    Genesis Chapter 12


@c    The call of Abram, and the promise made to him.  He sojourneth in
@c    Chanaan, and then by occasion of a famine, goeth down to Egypt.

@c    12:1. And the Lord said to Abram:  Go forth out of thy country, and from
@c    thy kindred, and out of thy father's house, and come into the land
@c    which I shall shew thee.

@c    12:2. And I will make of thee a great nation, and I will bless thee,
@c    and magnify thy name, and thou shalt be blessed.

@c    12:3. I will bless them that bless thee, and curse them that curse
@c    thee, and IN THEE shall all the kindreds of the earth be blessed.

@c    12:4. So Abram went out as the Lord had commanded him, and Lot went
@c    with him:  Abram was seventy-five years old when he went forth from
@c    Haran.

@c    12:5. And he took Sarai his wife, and Lot his brother's son, and all
@c    the substance which they had gathered, and the souls which they had
@c    gotten in Haran:  and they went out to go into the land of Chanaan.  And
@c    when they were come into it,

@c    12:6. Abram passed through the country unto the place of Sichem, as far
@c    as the noble vale:  now the Chanaanite was at that time in the land.

@c    12:7. And the Lord appeared to Abram, and said to him:  To thy seed will
@c    I give this land.  And he built there an altar to the Lord, who had
@c    appeared to him.

@c    12:8. And passing on from thence to a mountain, that was on the east
@c    side of Bethel, he there pitched his tent, having Bethel on the west,
@c    and Hai on the east:  he built there also an altar to the Lord, and
@c    called upon his name.

@c    12:9. And Abram went forward, going and proceeding on to the south.

@c    12:10. And there came a famine in the country:  and Abram went down into
@c    Egypt, to sojourn there:  for the famine was very grievous in the land.

@c    12:11. And when he was near to enter into Egypt, he said to Sarai his
@c    wife:  I know that thou art a beautiful woman:

@c    12:12. And that when the Egyptians shall see thee, they will say:  She
@c    is his wife:  and they will kill me, and keep thee.

@c    12:13. Say, therefore, I pray thee, that thou art my sister:  that I may
@c    be well used for thee, and that my soul may live for thy sake.

@c    My sister. . .This was no lie; because she was his niece, being daughter
@c    to his brother Aran, and therefore, in the style of the Hebrews, she
@c    might truly be called his sister, as Lot is called Abram's brother,
@c    Gen. 14.14.  See Gen. 20.12.

@c    12:14. And when Abram was come into Egypt, the Egyptians saw the woman
@c    that she was very beautiful.

@c    12:15. And the princes told Pharao, and praised her before him:  and the
@c    woman was taken into the house of Pharao.

@c    12:16. And they used Abram well for her sake.  And he had sheep and oxen
@c    and he asses, and men servants, and maid servants, and she asses, and
@c    camels.

@c    12:17. But the Lord scourged Pharao and his house with most grievous
@c    stripes for Sarai, Abram's wife.

@c    12:18. And Pharao called Abram, and said to him:  What is this that thou
@c    hast done to me?  Why didst thou not tell me that she was thy wife?

@c    12:19. For what cause didst thou say, she was thy sister, that I might
@c    take her to my wife?  Now therefore there is thy wife, take her, and go
@c    thy way.

@c    12:20. And Pharao gave his men orders concerning Abram:  and they led
@c    him away and his wife, and all that he had.



@c    Genesis Chapter 13


@c    Abram and Lot part from each other.  God's promise to Abram.

@c    13:1. And Abram went up out of Egypt, he and his wife, and all that he
@c    had, and Lot with him into the south.

@c    13:2. And he was very rich in possession of gold and silver.

@c    13:3. And he returned by the way, that he came, from the south to
@c    Bethel, to the place where before he had pitched his tent between
@c    Bethel and Hai,

@c    13:4. In the place of the altar which he had made before, and there he
@c    called upon the name of the Lord.

@c    13:5. But Lot also, who was with Abram, had flocks of sheep, and herds
@c    of beasts, and tents.

@c    13:6. Neither was the land able to bear them, that they might dwell
@c    together:  for their substance was great, and they could not dwell
@c    together.

@c    13:7. Whereupon also there arose a strife between the herdsmen of Abram
@c    and of Lot.  And at that time the Chanaanite and the Pherezite dwelled
@c    in that country.

@c    13:8. Abram therefore said to Lot:  Let there be no quarrel, I beseech
@c    thee, between me and thee, and between my herdsmen and thy herdsmen:
@c    for we are brethren.

@c    13:9. Behold the whole land is before thee:  depart from me, I pray
@c    thee:  if thou wilt go to the left hand, I will take the right:  if thou
@c    choose the right hand, I will pass to the left.

@c    13:10. And Lot lifting up his eyes, saw all the country about the
@c    Jordan, which was watered throughout, before the Lord destroyed Sodom
@c    and Gomorrha, as the paradise of the Lord, and like Egypt as one comes
@c    to Segor.

@c    13:11. And Lot chose to himself the country about the Jordan, and he
@c    departed from the east:  and they were separated one brother from the
@c    other.

@c    13:12. Abram dwelt in the land of Chanaan:  and Lot abode in the towns,
@c    that were about the Jordan, and dwelt in Sodom.

@c    13:13. And the men of Sodom were very wicked, and sinners before the
@c    face of the Lord beyond measure.

@c    13:14. And the Lord said to Abram, after Lot was separated from him:
@c    Lift up thy eyes, and look from the place wherein thou now art, to the
@c    north and to the south, to the east and to the west.

@c    13:15. All the land which thou seest, I will give to thee, and to thy
@c    seed for ever.

@c    13:16. And I will make thy seed as the dust of the earth:  if any man be
@c    able to number the dust of the earth, he shall be able to number thy
@c    seed also.

@c    13:17. Arise and walk through the land in the length, and the breadth
@c    thereof:  for I will give it to thee.

@c    13:18. So Abram removing his tent, came, and dwelt by the vale of
@c    Mambre, which is in Hebron:  and he built there an altar to the Lord.



@c    Genesis Chapter 14


@c    The expedition of the four kings; the victory of Abram; he is blessed
@c    by Melchisedech.

@c    14:1. And it came to pass at that time, that Amraphel, king of Sennaar,
@c    and Arioch, king of Pontus, and Chodorlahomor, king of the Elamites,
@c    and Thadal, king of nations,

@c    14:2. Made war against Bara, king of Sodom, and against Bersa, king of
@c    Gomorrha, and against Sennaab, king of Adama, and against Semeber, king
@c    of Seboim, and against the king of Bala, which is Segor.

@c    14:3. All these came together into the woodland vale, which now is the
@c    salt sea.

@c    14:4. For they had served Chodorlahomor twelve years, and in the
@c    thirteenth year they revolted from him.

@c    14:5. And in the fourteenth year came Chodorlahomor, and the kings that
@c    were with him:  and they smote the Raphaim in Astarothcarnaim, and the
@c    Zuzim with them, and the Emim in Save of Cariathaim.

@c    14:6. And the Chorreans in the mountains of Seir, even to the plains of
@c    Pharan, which is in the wilderness.

@c    14:7. And they returned, and came to the fountain of Misphat, the same
@c    is Cades:  and they smote all the country of the Amalecites, and the
@c    Amorrhean that dwelt in Asasonthamar.

@c    14:8. And the king of Sodom, and the king of Gomorrha, and the king of
@c    Adama, and the king of Seboim, and the king of Bala, which is Segor,
@c    went out:  and they set themselves against them in battle array, in the
@c    woodland vale:

@c    14:9. To wit, against Chodorlahomor king of the Elamites, and Thadal
@c    king of nations, and Amraphel king of Sennaar, and Arioch king of
@c    Pontus:  four kings against five.

@c    14:10. Now the woodland vale had many pits of slime.  And the king of
@c    Sodom, and the king of Gomorrha turned their backs, and were overthrown
@c    there:  and they that remained, fled to the mountain.

@c    Of slime.  Bituminis. . .This was a kind of pitch, which served for
@c    mortar in the building of Babel, Gen. 11.3, and was used by Noe in
@c    pitching the ark.

@c    14:11. And they took all the substance of the Sodomites, and
@c    Gomorrhites, and all their victuals, and went their way:

@c    14:12. And Lot also, the son of Abram's brother, who dwelt in Sodom,
@c    and his substance.

@c    14:13. And behold one, that had escaped, told Abram the Hebrew, who
@c    dwelt in the vale of Mambre the Amorrhite, the brother of Escol, and
@c    the brother of Aner:  for these had made a league with Abram.

@c    14:14. Which when Abram had heard, to wit, that his brother Lot was
@c    taken, he numbered of the servants born in his house, three hundred and
@c    eighteen, well appointed:  and pursued them to Dan.

@c    14:15. And dividing his company, he rushed upon them in the night, and
@c    defeated them:  and pursued them as far as Hoba, which is on the left
@c    hand of Damascus.

@c    14:16. And he brought back all the substance, and Lot his brother, with
@c    his substance, the women also, and the people.

@c    14:17. And the king of Sodom went out to meet him, after he returned
@c    from the slaughter of Chodorlahomor, and of the kings that were with
@c    him in the vale of Save, which is the king's vale.

@c    14:18. But Melchisedech, the king of Salem, bringing forth bread and
@c    wine, for he was the priest of the most high God,

@c    14:19. Blessed him, and said:  Blessed be Abram by the most high God,
@c    who created heaven and earth.

@c    14:20. And blessed be the most high God, by whose protection, the
@c    enemies are in thy hands.  And he gave him the tithes of all.

@c    14:21. And the king of Sodom said to Abram:  Give me the persons, and
@c    the rest take to thyself.

@c    14:22. And he answered him:  I lift up my hand to the Lord God the most
@c    high, the possessor of heaven and earth,

@c    14:23. That from the very woof thread unto the shoe latchet, I will not
@c    take of any things that are thine, lest thou say:  I have enriched
@c    Abram.

@c    14:24. Except such things as the young men have eaten, and the shares
@c    of the men that came with me, Aner, Escol, and Mambre:  these shall take
@c    their shares.



@c    Genesis Chapter 15


@c    God promiseth seed to Abram.  His faith, sacrifice and vision.

@c    15:1. Now when these things were done, the word of the Lord came to
@c    Abram by a vision, saying:  Fear not, Abram, I am thy protector, and thy
@c    reward exceeding great.

@c    15:2. And Abram said:  Lord God, what wilt thou give me?  I shall go
@c    without children:  and the son of the steward of my house is this
@c    Damascus Eliezer.

@c    15:3. And Abram added:  But to me thou hast not given seed:  and lo my
@c    servant born in my house, shall be my heir.

@c    15:4. And immediately the word of the Lord came to him, saying :  He
@c    shall not be thy heir:  but he that shall come out of thy bowels, him
@c    shalt thou have for thy heir.

@c    15:5. And he brought him forth abroad, and said to him:  Look up to
@c    heaven and number the stars if thou canst.  And he said to him:  So shall
@c    thy seed be.

@c    15:6. Abram believed God, and it was reputed to him unto justice.

@c    15:7. And he said to him:  I am the Lord who brought thee out from Ur of
@c    the Chaldees, to give thee this land, and that thou mightest possess
@c    it.

@c    15:8. But he said:  Lord God, whereby may I know that I shall possess
@c    it?

@c    15:9. And the Lord answered, and said:  Take me a cow of three years
@c    old, and a she-goat of three years.  and a ram of three years, a turtle
@c    also, and a pigeon.

@c    15:10. And he took all these, and divided them in the midst, and laid
@c    the two pieces of each one against the other:  but the birds he divided
@c    not.

@c    15:11. And the fowls came down upon the carcasses, and Abram drove them
@c    away.

@c    15:12. And when the sun was setting, a deep sleep fell upon Abram, and
@c    a great and darksome horror seized upon him.

@c    15:13. And it was said unto him:  Know thou beforehand that thy seed
@c    shall be a stranger in a land not their own, and they shall bring them
@c    under bondage, and afflict them four hundred years.

@c    15:14. But I will judge the nation which they shall serve, and after
@c    this they shall come out with great substance.

@c    15:15. And thou shalt go to thy fathers in peace, and be buried in a
@c    good old age.

@c    15:16. But in the fourth generation they shall return hither:  for as
@c    yet the iniquities of the Amorrhites are not at the full until this
@c    present time.

@c    15:17. And when the sun was set, there arose a dark mist, and there
@c    appeared a smoking furnace, and a lamp of fire passing between those
@c    divisions.

@c    15:18. That day God made a covenant with Abram, saying:  To thy seed
@c    will I give this land, from the river to Egypt even to the great river
@c    Euphrates.

@c    15:19. The Cineans, and Cenezites, the Cedmonites,

@c    15:20. And the Hethites, and the Pherezites, the Raphaim also,

@c    15:21. And the Amorrhites, and the Chanaanites, and the Gergesites, and
@c    the Jebusites.



@c    Genesis Chapter 16


@c    Abram marrieth Agar, who bringeth forth Ismael.

@c    16:1. Now Sarai, the wife of Abram, had brought forth no children:  but
@c    having a handmaid, an Egyptian, named Agar,

@c    16:2. She said to her husband:  Behold, the Lord hath restrained me from
@c    bearing:  go in unto my handmaid, it may be I may have children of her
@c    at least.  And when he agreed to her request,

@c    16:3. She took Agar the Egyptian her handmaid, ten years after they
@c    first dwelt in the land of Chanaan, and gave her to her husband to
@c    wife.

@c    To wife. . .Plurality of wives, though contrary to the primitive
@c    institution of marriage, Gen. 2.24, was by divine dispensation allowed
@c    to the patriarchs:  which allowance seems to have continued during the
@c    time of the law of Moses.  But Christ our Lord reduced marriage to its
@c    primitive institution.  Matt. 19.

@c    16:4. And he went in to her.  But she perceiving that she was with
@c    child, despised her mistress.

@c    16:5. And Sarai said to Abram:  Thou dost unjustly with me:  I gave my
@c    handmaid into thy bosom, and she perceiving herself to be with child,
@c    despiseth me.  The Lord judge between me and thee.

@c    16:6. And Abram made answer, and said to her:  Behold thy handmaid is in
@c    thy own hand, use her as it pleaseth thee.  And when Sarai afflicted
@c    her, she ran away.

@c    16:7. And the angel of the Lord having found her, by a fountain of
@c    water in the wilderness, which is in the way to Sur in the desert,

@c    16:8. He said to her:  Agar, handmaid of Sarai, whence comest thou?  and
@c    whither goest thou?  And she answered:  I flee from the face of Sarai, my
@c    mistress.

@c    16:9. And the angel of the Lord said to her:  Return to thy mistress,
@c    and humble thyself under her hand.

@c    16:10. And again he said:  I will multiply thy seed exceedingly, and it
@c    shall not be numbered for multitude.

@c    16:11. And again:  Behold, said he, thou art with child, and thou shalt
@c    bring forth a son:  and thou shalt call his name Ismael, because the
@c    Lord hath heard thy affliction.

@c    16:12. He shall be a wild man:  his hand will be against all men, and
@c    all men's hands against him:  and he shall pitch his tents over against
@c    all his brethren.

@c    16:13. And she called the name of the Lord that spoke unto her:  Thou
@c    the God who hast seen me.  For she said:  Verily, here have I seen the
@c    hinder parts of him that seeth me.

@c    16:14. Therefore she called that well, the well of him that liveth and
@c    seeth me.  The same is between Cades and Barad.

@c    16:15. And Agar brought forth a son to Abram:  who called his name
@c    Ismael.

@c    16:16. Abram was four score and six years old when Agar brought him
@c    forth Ismael.



@c    Genesis Chapter 17


@c    The Covenant of circumcision.

@c    17:1. And after he began to be ninety and nine years old, the Lord
@c    appeared to him:  and said unto him:  I am the Almighty God:  walk before
@c    me, and be perfect.

@c    17:2. And I will make my covenant between me and thee:  and I will
@c    multiply thee exceedingly.

@c    17:3. Abram fell flat on his face.

@c    17:4. And God said to him:  I am, and my covenant is with thee, and thou
@c    shalt be a father of many nations.

@c    17:5. Neither shall thy name be called any more Abram:  but thou shalt
@c    be called Abraham:  because I have made thee a father of many nations.

@c    Abram. . .in the Hebrew, signifies a high father:  but Abraham, the
@c    father of the multitude; Sarai signifies my Lady, but Sara absolutely
@c    Lady.

@c    17:6. And I will make thee increase exceedingly, and I will make
@c    nations of thee, and kings shall come out of thee.

@c    17:7. And I will establish my covenant between me and thee, and between
@c    thy seed after thee in their generations, by a perpetual covenant:  to
@c    be a God to thee, and to thy seed after thee.

@c    17:8. And I will give to thee, and to thy seed, the land of thy
@c    sojournment, all the land of Chanaan, for a perpetual possession, and I
@c    will be their God.

@c    17:9. Again God said to Abraham:  And thou therefore shalt keep my
@c    covenant, and thy seed after thee in their generations.

@c    17:10. This is my covenant which you shall observe between me and you,
@c    and thy seed after thee:  All the male-kind of you shall be circumcised.

@c    17:11. And you shall circumcise the flesh of your foreskin, that it may
@c    be for a sign of the covenant between me and you.

@c    17:12. An infant of eight days old shall be circumcised among you,
@c    every manchild in your generations:  he that is born in the house, as
@c    well as the bought servant, shall be circumcised, and whosoever is not
@c    of your stock:

@c    17:13. And my covenant shall be in your flesh for a perpetual covenant.

@c    17:14. The male whose flesh of his foreskin shall not be circumcised,
@c    that soul shall be destroyed out of his people:  because he hath broken
@c    my covenant.

@c    17:15. God said also to Abraham:  Sarai thy wife thou shalt not call
@c    Sarai, but Sara.

@c    17:16. And I will bless her, and of her I will give thee a son, whom I
@c    will bless, and he shall become nations, and kings of people shall
@c    spring from him.

@c    17:17. Abraham fell upon his face, and laughed, saying in his heart:
@c    Shall a son, thinkest thou, be born to him that is a hundred years old?
@c    and shall Sara that is ninety years old bring forth?

@c    17:18. And he said to God:  O that Ismael may live before thee.

@c    17:19. And God said to Abraham:  Sara thy wife shall bear thee a son,
@c    and thou shalt call his name Isaac, and I will establish my covenant
@c    with him for a perpetual covenant, and with his seed after him.

@c    17:20. And as for Ismael I have also heard thee.  Behold, I will bless
@c    him, and increase, and multiply him exceedingly:  he shall beget twelve
@c    chiefs, and I will make him a great nation.

@c    17:21. But my covenant I will establish with Isaac, whom Sara shall
@c    bring forth to thee at this time in the next year.

@c    17:22. And when he had left off speaking with him, God went up from
@c    Abraham.

@c    17:23. And Abraham took Ismael his son, and all that were born in his
@c    house:  and all whom he had bought, every male among the men of his
@c    house:  and he circumcised the flesh of their foreskin forthwith the
@c    very same day, as God had commanded him.

@c    17:24. Abraham was ninety and nine years old, when he circumcised the
@c    flesh of his foreskin.

@c    17:25. And Ismael his son was full thirteen years old at the time of
@c    his circumcision.

@c    17:26. The self-same day was Abraham circumcised and Ismael his son.

@c    17:27. And all the men of his house, as well they that were born in his
@c    house, as the bought servants and strangers, were circumcised with him.



@c    Genesis Chapter 18


@c    Angels are entertained by Abraham.  They foretell the birth of Isaac.
@c    Abraham's prayer for the men of Sodom.

@c    18:1. And the Lord appeared to him in the vale of Mambre as he was
@c    sitting at the door of his tent, in the very heat of the day.

@c    18:2. And when he had lifted up his eyes, there appeared to him three
@c    men standing near to him:  and as soon as he saw them, he ran to meet
@c    them from the door of his tent, and adored down to the ground.

@c    18:3. And he said:  Lord, if I have found favour in thy sight, pass not
@c    away from thy servant.

@c    18:4. But I will fetch a little water, and wash ye your feet, and rest
@c    ye under the tree.

@c    18:5. And I will set a morsel of bread, and strengthen ye your heart,
@c    afterwards you shall pass on:  for therefore are you come aside to your
@c    servant.  And they said:  Do as thou hast spoken.

@c    18:6. Abraham made haste into the tent to Sara, and said to her:  Make
@c    haste, temper together three measures of flour, and make cakes upon the
@c    hearth.

@c    18:7. And he himself ran to the herd, and took from thence a calf, very
@c    tender and very good, and gave it to a young man, who made haste and
@c    boiled it.

@c    18:8. He took also butter and milk, and the calf which he had boiled,
@c    and set before them:  but he stood by them under the tree.

@c    18:9. And when they had eaten, they said to him:  Where is Sara thy
@c    wife?  He answered:  Lo she is in the tent.

@c    18:10. And he said to him:  I will return and come to thee at this time,
@c    life accompanying, and Sara, thy wife, shall have a son.  Which when
@c    Sara heard, she laughed behind the door of the tent.

@c    18:11. Now they were both old, and far advanced in years, and it had
@c    ceased to be with Sara after the manner of women.

@c    18:12. And she laughed secretly, saying:  After I am grown old, and my
@c    lord is an old man, shall I give myself to pleasure?

@c    18:13. And the Lord said to Abraham:  Why did Sara laugh, saying:  Shall
@c    I, who am an old woman, bear a child indeed?

@c    18:14. Is there any thing hard to God?  According to appointment I will
@c    return to thee at this same time, life accompanying, and Sara shall
@c    have a son.

@c    18:15. Sara denied, saying:  I did not laugh:  for she was afraid.  But
@c    the Lord said:  Nay; but thou didst laugh.

@c    18:16. And when the men rose up from thence, they turned their eyes
@c    towards Sodom:  and Abraham walked with them, bringing them on the way.

@c    18:17. And the Lord said:  Can I hide from Abraham what I am about to
@c    do:

@c    18:18. Seeing he shall become a great and mighty nation, and in him all
@c    the nations of the earth shall be blessed?

@c    18:19. For I know that he will command his children, and his household
@c    after him, to keep the way of the Lord, and do judgment and justice:
@c    that for Abraham's sake, the Lord may bring to effect all the things he
@c    hath spoken unto him.

@c    18:20. And the Lord said:  The cry of Sodom and Gomorrha is multiplied,
@c    and their sin is become exceedingly grievous.

@c    18:21. I will go down and see whether they have done according to the
@c    cry that is come to me; or whether it be not so, that I may know.

@c    I will go down, etc. . .The Lord here accommodates his discourse to the
@c    way of speaking and acting amongst men; for he knoweth all things, and
@c    needeth not to go anywhere for information.  Note here, that two of the
@c    three angels went away immediately for Sodom; whilst the third, who
@c    represented the Lord, remained with Abraham.

@c    18:22. And they turned themselves from thence, and went their way to
@c    Sodom:  but Abraham as yet stood before the Lord.

@c    18:23. And drawing nigh, he said:  Wilt thou destroy the just with the
@c    wicked?

@c    18:24. If there be fifty just men in the city, shall they perish
@c    withal?  and wilt thou not spare that place for the sake of the fifty
@c    just, if they be therein?

@c    18:25. Far be it from thee to do this thing, and to slay the just with
@c    the wicked, and for the just to be in like case as the wicked; this is
@c    not beseeming thee:  thou who judgest all the earth, wilt not make this
@c    judgment.

@c    18:26. And the Lord said to him:  If I find in Sodom fifty just within
@c    the city, I will spare the whole place for their sake.

@c    18:27. And Abraham answered, and said:  Seeing I have once begun, I will
@c    speak to my Lord, whereas I am dust and ashes.

@c    18:28. What if there be five less than fifty just persons?  wilt thou
@c    for five and forty destroy the whole city:  And he said:  I will not
@c    destroy it, if I find five and forty.

@c    18:29. And again he said to him:  But if forty be found there, what wilt
@c    thou do?  He said:  I will not destroy it for the sake of forty.

@c    18:30. Lord, saith he, be not angry, I beseech thee, if I speak:  What
@c    if thirty shall be found there?  He answered:  I will not do it, if I
@c    find thirty there.

@c    18:31. Seeing, saith he, I have once begun, I will speak to my Lord:
@c    What if twenty be found there?  He said:  I will not destroy it for the
@c    sake of twenty.

@c    18:32. I beseech thee, saith he, be not angry, Lord, if I speak yet
@c    once more:  What if ten shall be found there?  And he said:  I will not
@c    destroy it for the sake of ten.

@c    18:33. And the Lord departed, after he had left speaking to Abraham:
@c    and Abraham returned to his place.



@c    Genesis Chapter 19


@c    Lot, entertaining Angels in his house, is delivered from Sodom, which
@c    is destroyed:  his wife for looking back is turned into a statue of
@c    salt.

@c    19:1. And the two angels came to Sodom in the evening, and Lot was
@c    sitting in the gate of the city.  And seeing them, he rose up and went
@c    to meet them:  and worshipped prostrate to the ground.

@c    19:2. And said:  I beseech you, my lords, turn in to the house of your
@c    servant, and lodge there:  wash your feet, and in the morning you shall
@c    go on your way.  And they said:  No, but we will abide in the street.

@c    19:3. He pressed them very much to turn in unto him:  and when they were
@c    come into his house, he made them a feast, and baked unleavened bread,
@c    and they ate:

@c    19:4. But before they went to bed, the men of the city beset the house,
@c    both young and old, all the people together.

@c    19:5. And they called Lot, and said to him:  Where are the men that came
@c    in to thee at night?  bring them out hither, that we may know them:

@c    19:6. Lot went out to them, and shut the door after him, and said:

@c    19:7. Do not so, I beseech you, my brethren, do not commit this evil.

@c    19:8. I have two daughters who, as yet, have not known man; I will
@c    bring them out to you, and abuse you them as it shall please you, so
@c    that you do no evil to these men, because they are come in under the
@c    shadow of my roof.

@c    19:9. But they said:  Get thee back thither.  And again:  Thou camest in,
@c    said they, as a stranger, was it to be a judge?  therefore we will
@c    afflict thee more than them.  And they pressed very violently upon Lot:
@c    and they were even at the point of breaking open the doors.

@c    19:10. And behold the men put out their hand, and drew in Lot unto
@c    them, and shut the door.

@c    19:11. And them, that were without, they struck with blindness from the
@c    least to the greatest, so that they could not find the door.

@c    19:12. And they said to Lot:  Hast thou here any of thine?  son in law,
@c    or sons, or daughters, all that are thine bring them out of this city:

@c    19:13. For we will destroy this place, because their cry is grown loud
@c    before the Lord, who hath sent us to destroy them.

@c    19:14. So Lot went out, and spoke to his sons in law that were to have
@c    his daughters, and said:  Arise:  get you out of this place, because the
@c    Lord will destroy this city.  And he seemed to them to speak as it were
@c    in jest.

@c    19:15. And when it was morning, the angels pressed him, saying:  Arise,
@c    take thy wife, and the two daughters that thou hast:  lest thou also
@c    perish in the wickedness of the city.

@c    19:16. And as he lingered, they took his hand, and the hand of his
@c    wife, and of his two daughters, because the Lord spared him.

@c    19:17. And they brought him forth, and set him without the city:  and
@c    there they spoke to him, saying:  Save thy life:  look not back, neither
@c    stay thou in all the country about:  but save thy self in the mountain,
@c    lest thou be also consumed.

@c    19:18. And Lot said to them:  I beseech thee, my Lord,

@c    19:19. Because thy servant hath found grace before thee, and thou hast
@c    magnified thy mercy, which thou hast shewn to me, in saving my life,
@c    and I cannot escape to the mountain, lest some evil seize me, and I
@c    die.

@c    19:20. There is this city here at hand, to which I may flee, it is a
@c    little one, and I shall be saved in it:  is it not a little one, and my
@c    soul shall live?

@c    19:21. And he said to him:  Behold also in this, I have heard thy
@c    prayers, not to destroy the city for which thou hast spoken.

@c    19:22. Make haste, and be saved there:  because I cannot do any thing
@c    till thou go in thither.  Therefore the name of that city was called
@c    Segor.

@c    Segor. . .That is, a little one.

@c    19:23. The sun was risen upon the earth, and Lot entered into Segor.

@c    19:24. And the Lord rained upon Sodom and Gomorrha brimstone and fire
@c    from the Lord out of heaven.

@c    19:25. And he destroyed these cities, and all the country about, all
@c    the inhabitants of the cities, and all things that spring from the
@c    earth.

@c    19:26. And his wife looking behind her, was turned into a statue of
@c    salt.

@c    And his wife. . .As a standing memorial to the servants of God to
@c    proceed in virtue, and not to look back to vice or its allurements.

@c    19:27. And Abraham got up early in the morning, and in the place where
@c    he had stood before with the Lord:

@c    19:28. He looked towards Sodom and Gomorrha, and the whole land of that
@c    country:  and he saw the ashes rise up from the earth as the smoke of a
@c    furnace.

@c    19:29. Now when God destroyed the cities of that country, remembering
@c    Abraham, he delivered Lot out of the destruction of the cities wherein
@c    he had dwelt.

@c    19:30. And Lot went up out of Segor, and abode in the mountain, and his
@c    two daughters with him (for he was afraid to stay in Segor) and he
@c    dwelt in a cave, he and his two daughters with him.

@c    19:31. And the elder said to the younger:  Our father is old, and there
@c    is no man left on the earth, to come in unto us after the manner of the
@c    whole earth.

@c    19:32. Come, let us make him drunk with wine, and let us lie with him,
@c    that we may preserve seed of our father.

@c    19:33. And they made their father drink wine that night:  and the elder
@c    went in, and lay with her father:  but he perceived not, neither when
@c    his daughter lay down, nor when she rose up.

@c    19:34. And the next day the elder said to the younger:  Behold I lay
@c    last night with my father, let us make him drink wine also to night,
@c    and thou shalt lie with him, that we may save seed of our father.

@c    19:35. They made their father drink wine that night also, and the
@c    younger daughter went in, and lay with him:  and neither then did he
@c    perceive when she lay down, nor when she rose up.

@c    19:36. So the two daughters of Lot were with child by their father.

@c    19:37. And the elder bore a son, and she called his name Moab:  he is
@c    the father of the Moabites unto this day.

@c    19:38. The younger also bore a son, and she called his name Ammon; that
@c    is, the son of my people:  he is the father of the Ammonites unto this
@c    day.



@c    Genesis Chapter 20


@c    Abraham sojourned in Gerara:  Sara is taken into king Abimelech's house,
@c    but by God's commandment is restored untouched.

@c    20:1. Abraham removed from thence to the south country, and dwelt
@c    between Cades and Sur, and sojourned in Gerara.

@c    20:2. And he said of Sara his wife:  She is my sister.  So Abimelech the
@c    king of Gerara sent, and took her.

@c    20:3. And God came to Abimelech in a dream by night, and he said to
@c    him:  Lo thou shalt die for the woman that thou hast taken:  for she hath
@c    a husband.

@c    20:4. Now Abimelech had not touched her, and he said:  Lord, wilt thou
@c    slay a nation that is ignorant and just?

@c    20:5. Did not he say to me:  She is my sister:  and she say, He is my
@c    brother?  in the simplicity of my heart, and cleanness of my hands have
@c    I done this.

@c    20:6. And God said to him:  And I know that thou didst it with a sincere
@c    heart:  and therefore I withheld thee from sinning against me, and I
@c    suffered thee not to touch her.

@c    20:7. Now therefore restore the man his wife, for he is a prophet:  and
@c    he shall pray for thee, and thou shalt live:  but if thou wilt not
@c    restore her, know that thou shalt surely die, thou and all that are
@c    thine.

@c    20:8. And Abimelech forthwith rising up in the night, called all his
@c    servants:  and spoke all these words in their hearing, and all the men
@c    were exceedingly afraid.

@c    20:9. And Abimelech called also for Abraham, and said to him:  What hast
@c    thou done to us?  what have we offended thee in, that thou hast brought
@c    upon me and upon my kingdom a great sin?  thou hast done to us what thou
@c    oughtest not to do.

@c    20:10. And again he expostulated with him, and said:  What sawest thou,
@c    that thou hast done this?

@c    20:11. Abraham answered:  I thought with myself, saying:  Perhaps there
@c    is not the fear of God in this place:  and they will kill me for the
@c    sake of my wife:

@c    20:12. Howbeit, otherwise also she is truly my sister, the daughter of
@c    my father, and not the daughter of my mother, and I took her to wife.

@c    20:13. And after God brought me out of my father's house, I said to
@c    her:  Thou shalt do me this kindness:  In every place, to which we shall
@c    come, thou shalt say that I am thy brother.

@c    20:14. And Abimelech took sheep and oxen, and servants and handmaids,
@c    and gave to Abraham:  and restored to him Sara his wife,

@c    20:15. And said:  The land is before you, dwell wheresoever it shall
@c    please thee.

@c    20:16. And to Sara he said:  Behold I have given thy brother a thousand
@c    pieces of silver, this shall serve thee for a covering of thy eyes to
@c    all that are with thee, and whithersoever thou shalt go:  and remember
@c    thou wast taken.

@c    20:17. And when Abraham prayed, God healed Abimelech and his wife, and
@c    his handmaids, and they bore children:

@c    20:18. For the Lord had closed up every womb of the house of Abimelech,
@c    on account of Sara, Abraham's wife.



@c    Genesis Chapter 21


@c    Isaac is born.  Agar and Ismael are cast forth.

@c    21:1. And the Lord visited Sara, as he had promised:  and fulfilled what
@c    he had spoken.

@c    21:2. And she conceived and bore a son in her old age, at the time that
@c    God had foretold her.

@c    21:3. And Abraham called the name of his son, whom Sara bore him,
@c    Isaac.

@c    Isaac. . .This word signifies laughter.

@c    21:4. And he circumcised him the eighth day, as God had commanded him,

@c    21:5. When he was a hundred years old:  for at this age of his father,
@c    was Isaac born.

@c    21:6. And Sara said:  God hath made a laughter for me:  whosoever shall
@c    hear of it will laugh with me.

@c    21:7. And again she said:  Who would believe that Abraham should hear
@c    that Sara gave suck to a son, whom she bore to him in his old age?

@c    21:8. And the child grew, and was weaned:  and Abraham made a great
@c    feast on the day of his weaning.

@c    21:9. And when Sara had seen the son of Agar, the Egyptian, playing
@c    with Isaac, her son, she said to Abraham:

@c    21:10. Cast out this bondwoman and her son; for the son of the
@c    bondwoman shall not be heir with my son Isaac.

@c    21:11. Abraham took this grievously for his son.

@c    21:12. And God said to him:  Let it not seem grievous to thee for the
@c    boy, and for thy bondwoman:  in all that Sara hath said to thee, hearken
@c    to her voice:  for in Isaac shall thy seed be called.

@c    21:13. But I will make the son also of the bondwoman a great nation,
@c    because he is thy seed.

@c    21:14. So Abraham rose up in the morning, and taking bread and a bottle
@c    of water, put it upon her shoulder, and delivered the boy, and sent her
@c    away.  And she departed, and wandered in the wilderness of Bersabee.

@c    21:15. And when the water in the bottle was spent, she cast the boy
@c    under one of the trees that were there.

@c    21:16. And she went her way, and sat over against him a great way off,
@c    as far as a bow can carry, for she said:  I will not see the boy die:
@c    and sitting over against, she lifted up her voice and wept.

@c    21:17. And God heard the voice of the boy:  and an angel of God called
@c    to Agar from heaven, saying:  What art thou doing, Agar?  fear not; for
@c    God hath heard the voice of the boy, from the place wherein he is.

@c    21:18. Arise, take up the boy, and hold him by the hand, for I will
@c    make him a great nation.

@c    21:19. And God opened her eyes:  and she saw a well of water, and went
@c    and filled the bottle, and gave the boy to drink.

@c    21:20. And God was with him:  and he grew, and dwelt in the wilderness,
@c    and became a young man, an archer.

@c    21:21. And he dwelt in the wilderness of Pharan, and his mother took a
@c    wife for him out of the land of Egypt.

@c    21:22. At the same time Abimelech, and Phicol the general of his army,
@c    said to Abraham:  God is with thee in all that thou dost.

@c    21:23. Swear therefore by God, that thou wilt not hurt me, nor my
@c    posterity, nor my stock:  but according to the kindness that I have done
@c    to thee, thou shalt do to me, and to the land wherein thou hast lived a
@c    stranger.

@c    21:24. And Abraham said:  I will swear.

@c    21:25. And he reproved Abimelech for a well of water, which his
@c    servants had taken away by force.

@c    21:26. And Abimelech answered:  I knew not who did this thing:  and thou
@c    didst not tell me, and I heard not of it till today.

@c    21:27. Then Abraham took sheep and oxen, and gave them to Abimelech:
@c    and both of them made a league.

@c    21:28. And Abraham set apart seven ewelambs of the flock.

@c    21:29. And Abimelech said to him:  What mean these seven ewelambs which
@c    thou hast set apart?

@c    21:30. But he said:  Thou shalt take seven ewelambs at my hand:  that
@c    they may be a testimony for me, that I dug this well.

@c    21:31. Therefore that place was called Bersabee; because there both of
@c    them did swear.

@c    Bersabee. . .That is, the well of oath.

@c    21:32. And they made a league for the well of oath.

@c    21:33. And Abimelech and Phicol, the general of his army, arose and
@c    returned to the land of the Palestines.  But Abraham planted a grove in
@c    Bersabee, and there called upon the name of the Lord God eternal.

@c    21:34. And he was a sojourner in the land of the Palestines many days.



@c    Genesis Chapter 22


@c    The faith and obedience of Abraham is proved in his readiness to
@c    sacrifice his son Isaac.  He is stayed from the act by an angel.  Former
@c    promises are renewed to him.  His brother Nachor's issue.

@c    22:1. After these things, God tempted Abraham, and said to him:
@c    Abraham, Abraham.  And he answered:  Here I am.

@c    God tempted, etc. . .God tempteth no man to evil, James 1.13; but by
@c    trial and experiment maketh known to the world, and to ourselves, what
@c    we are, as here by this trial the singular faith and obedience of
@c    Abraham was made manifest.

@c    22:2. He said to him:  Take thy only begotten son Isaac, whom thou
@c    lovest, and go into the land of vision; and there thou shalt offer him
@c    for an holocaust upon one of the mountains which I will shew thee.

@c    22:3. So Abraham rising up in the night, saddled his ass, and took with
@c    him two young men, and Isaac his son:  and when he had cut wood for the
@c    holocaust, he went his way to the place which God had commanded him.

@c    22:4. And on the third day, lifting up his eyes, he saw the place afar
@c    off.

@c    22:5. And he said to his young men:  Stay you here with the ass; I and
@c    the boy will go with speed as far as yonder, and after we have
@c    worshipped, will return to you.

@c    22:6. And he took the wood for the holocaust, and laid it upon Isaac
@c    his son; and he himself carried in his hands fire and a sword.  And as
@c    they two went on together,

@c    22:7. Isaac said to his father:  My father.  And he answered:  What wilt
@c    thou, son?  Behold, saith he, fire and wood:  where is the victim for the
@c    holocaust?

@c    22:8. And Abraham said:  God will provide himself a victim for an
@c    holocaust, my son.  So they went on together.

@c    22:9. And they came to the place which God had shewn him, where he
@c    built an altar, and laid the wood in order upon it; and when he had
@c    bound Isaac his son, he laid him on the altar upon the pile of wood.

@c    22:10. And he put forth his hand, and took the sword, to sacrifice his
@c    son.

@c    22:11. And behold, an angel of the Lord from heaven called to him,
@c    saying:  Abraham, Abraham.  And he answered:  Here I am.

@c    22:12. And he said to him:  Lay not thy hand upon the boy, neither do
@c    thou any thing to him:  now I know that thou fearest God, and hast not
@c    spared thy only begotten son for my sake.

@c    22:13. Abraham lifted up his eyes, and saw behind his back a ram,
@c    amongst the briers, sticking fast by the horns, which he took and
@c    offered for a holocaust instead of his son.

@c    22:14. And he called the name of that place, The Lord seeth.  Whereupon,
@c    even to this day, it is said:  In the mountain the Lord will see.

@c    22:15. And the angel of the Lord called to Abraham a second time from
@c    heaven, saying:

@c    22:16. By my own self have I sworn, saith the Lord:  because thou hast
@c    done this thing, and hast not spared thy only begotten son for my sake:

@c    22:17. I will bless thee, and I will multiply thy seed as the stars of
@c    heaven, and as the sand that is by the sea shore; thy seed shall
@c    possess the gates of their enemies.

@c    22:18. And in thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed,
@c    because thou hast obeyed my voice.

@c    22:19. Abraham returned to his young men, and they went to Bersabee
@c    together, and he dwelt there.

@c    22:20. After these things, it was told Abraham, that Melcha also had
@c    borne children to Nachor his brother.

@c    22:21. Hus, the firstborn, and Buz, his brother, and Camuel the father
@c    of the Syrians,

@c    22:22. And Cased, and Azau, and Pheldas, and Jedlaph,

@c    22:23. And Bathuel, of whom was born Rebecca:  these eight did Melcha
@c    bear to Nachor, Abraham's brother.

@c    22:24. And his concubine, named Roma, bore Tabee, and Gaham, and Tahas,
@c    and Maacha.



@c    Genesis Chapter 23


@c    Sara's death and burial in the field bought of Ephron.

@c    23:1. And Sara lived a hundred and twenty-seven years.

@c    23:2. And she died in the city of Arbee which is Hebron, in the land of
@c    Chanaan:  and Abraham came to mourn and weep for her.

@c    23:3. And after he rose up from the funeral obsequies, he spoke to the
@c    children of Heth, saying:

@c    23:4. I am a stranger and sojourner among you:  give me the right of a
@c    burying place with you, that I may bury my dead.

@c    23:5. The children of Heth answered, saying:

@c    23:6. My lord, hear us, thou art a prince of God among us:  bury thy
@c    dead in our principal sepulchres:  and no man shall have power to hinder
@c    thee from burying thy dead in his sepulchre.

@c    23:7. Abraham rose up, and bowed down to the people of the land, to
@c    wit, the children of Heth:

@c    Bowed down to the people. . .Adoravit, literally adored.  But this word
@c    here, as well as in many other places in the Latin scriptures, is used
@c    to signify only an inferior honour and reverence paid to men, expressed
@c    by a bowing down of the body.

@c    23:8. And said to them:  If it please your soul that I should bury my
@c    dead, hear me, and intercede for me to Ephron the son of Seor.

@c    23:9. That he may give me the double cave, which he hath in the end of
@c    his field:  For as much money as it is worth he shall give it me before
@c    you, for a possession of a burying place.

@c    23:10. Now Ephron dwelt in the midst of the children of Heth.  And
@c    Ephron made answer to Abraham in the hearing of all that went in at the
@c    gate of the city, saying:

@c    23:11. Let it not be so, my lord, but do thou rather hearken to what I
@c    say:  The field I deliver to thee, and the cave that is therein; in the
@c    presence of the children of my people, bury thy dead.

@c    23:12. Abraham bowed down before the people of the land.

@c    23:13. And he spoke to Ephron, in the presence of the people:  I beseech
@c    thee to hear me:  I will give money for the field; take it, and so will
@c    I bury my dead in it.

@c    23:14. And Ephron answered:

@c    23:15. My lord, hear me.  The ground which thou desirest, is worth four
@c    hundred sicles of silver:  this is the price between me and thee:  but
@c    what is this?  bury thy dead.

@c    23:16. And when Abraham had heard this, he weighed out the money that
@c    Ephron had asked, in the hearing of the children of Heth, four hundred
@c    sicles of silver, of common current money.

@c    23:17. And the field that before was Ephron's, wherein was the double
@c    cave, looking towards Mambre, both it and the cave, and all the trees
@c    thereof, in all its limits round about,

@c    23:18. Was made sure to Abraham for a possession, in the sight of the
@c    children of Heth, and of all that went in at the gate of his city.

@c    23:19. And so Abraham buried Sara, his wife, in the double cave of the
@c    field, that looked towards Mambre, this is Hebron in the land of
@c    Chanaan.

@c    23:20. And the field was made sure to Abraham, and the cave that was in
@c    it, for a possession to bury in, by the children of Heth.



@c    Genesis Chapter 24


@c    Abraham's servant, sent by him into Mesopotamia, bringeth from thence
@c    Rebecca, who is married to Isaac.

@c    24:1. Now Abraham was old, and advanced in age; and the Lord had
@c    blessed him in all things.

@c    24:2. And he said to the elder servant of his house, who was ruler over
@c    all he had:  Put thy hand under my thigh,

@c    24:3. That I may make thee swear by the Lord, the God of heaven and
@c    earth, that thou take not a wife for my son, of the daughters of the
@c    Chanaanites, among whom I dwell:

@c    24:4. But that thou go to my own country and kindred, and take a wife
@c    from thence for my son Isaac.

@c    24:5. The servant answered:  If the woman will not come with me into
@c    this land, must I bring thy son back again to the place from whence
@c    thou camest out?

@c    24:6. And Abraham said:  Beware thou never bring my son back again
@c    thither.

@c    24:7. The Lord God of heaven, who took me out of my father's house, and
@c    out of my native country, who spoke to me, and swore to me, saying:  To
@c    thy seed will I give this land:  he will send his angel before thee, and
@c    thou shalt take from thence a wife for my son.

@c    He will send his angel before thee. . .This shows that the Hebrews
@c    believed that God gave them guardian angels for their protection.

@c    24:8. But if the woman will not follow thee, thou shalt not be bound by
@c    the oath:  only bring not my son back thither again.

@c    24:9. The servant, therefore, put his hand under the thigh of Abraham,
@c    his lord, and swore to him upon his word.

@c    24:10. And he took ten camels of his master's herd, and departed,
@c    carrying something of all his goods with him, and he set forward and
@c    went on to Mesopotamia, to the city of Nachor.

@c    24:11. And when he had made the camels lie down without the town, near
@c    a well of water, in the evening, at the time when women are wont to
@c    come out to draw water, he said:

@c    24:12. O Lord, the God of my master, Abraham, meet me today, I beseech
@c    thee, and shew kindness to my master, Abraham.

@c    24:13. Behold, I stand nigh the spring of water, and the daughters of
@c    the inhabitants of this city will come out to draw water:

@c    24:14. Now, therefore, the maid to whom I shall say:  Let down thy
@c    pitcher that I may drink:  and she shall answer, Drink, and I will give
@c    thy camels drink also:  let it be the same whom thou hast provided for
@c    thy servant Isaac:  and by this, I shall understand that thou hast shewn
@c    kindness to my master.

@c    24:15. He had not yet ended these words within himself, and behold
@c    Rebecca came out, the daughter of Bathuel, son of Melcha, wife to
@c    Nachor the brother of Abraham, having a pitcher on her shoulder:

@c    24:16. An exceeding comely maid, and a most beautiful virgin, and not
@c    known to man:  and she went down to the spring, and filled her pitcher,
@c    and was coming back.

@c    24:17. And the servant ran to meet her, and said:  Give me a little
@c    water to drink of thy pitcher.

@c    24:18. And she answered:  Drink, my lord.  And quickly she let down the
@c    pitcher upon her arm, and gave him drink.

@c    24:19. And when he had drunk, she said:  I will draw water for thy
@c    camels also, till they all drink.

@c    24:20. And pouring out the pitcher into the troughs, she ran back to
@c    the well to draw water; and having drawn, she gave to all the camels.

@c    24:21. But he musing, beheld her with silence, desirous to know whether
@c    the Lord had made his journey prosperous or not.

@c    24:22. And after that the camels had drunk, the man took out golden
@c    earrings, weighing two sicles; and as many bracelets, of ten sicles
@c    weight.

@c    24:23. And he said to her:  Whose daughter art thou?  tell me:  is there
@c    any place in thy father's house to lodge?

@c    24:24. And she answered:  I am the daughter of Bathuel, the son of
@c    Melcha, whom she bore to Nachor.

@c    24:25. And she said, moreover, to him:  We have good store of both straw
@c    and hay, and a large place to lodge in.

@c    24:26. The man bowed himself down, and adored the Lord,

@c    24:27. Saying:  Blessed be the Lord God of my master Abraham, who hath
@c    not taken away his mercy and truth from my master, and hath brought me
@c    the straight way into the house of my master's brother.

@c    24:28. Then the maid ran, and told in her mother's house all that she
@c    had heard.

@c    24:29. And Rebecca had a brother, named Laban, who went out in haste to
@c    the man, to the well.

@c    24:30. And when he had seen the earrings and bracelets in his sister's
@c    hands, and had heard all that she related, saying, Thus and thus the
@c    man spoke to me:  he came to the man who stood by the camels, and near
@c    to the spring of water,

@c    24:31. And said to him:  Come in, thou blessed of the Lord; why standest
@c    thou without?  I have prepared the house, and a place for the camels.

@c    24:32. And he brought him into his lodging; and he unharnessed the
@c    camels, and gave straw and hay, and water to wash his feet, and the
@c    feet of the men that were come with him.

@c    24:33. And bread was set before him.  But he said:  I will not eat, till
@c    I tell my message.  He answered him:  Speak.

@c    24:34. And he said:  I am the servant of Abraham:

@c    24:35. And the Lord hath blessed my master wonderfully, and he is
@c    become great:  and he hath given him sheep and oxen, silver and gold,
@c    men servants and women servants, camels and asses.

@c    24:36. And Sara, my master's wife, hath borne my master a son in her
@c    old age, and he hath given him all that he had.

@c    24:37. And my master made me swear, saying:  Thou shalt not take a wife
@c    for my son of the Chanaanites, in whose land I dwell:

@c    24:38. But thou shalt go to my father's house, and shalt take a wife of
@c    my own kindred for my son:

@c    24:39. But I answered my master:  What if the woman will not come with
@c    me?

@c    24:40. The Lord, said he, in whose sight I walk, will send his angel
@c    with thee, and will direct thy way:  and thou shalt take a wife for my
@c    son of my own kindred, and of my father's house.

@c    24:41. But thou shalt be clear from my curse, when thou shalt come to
@c    my kindred, if they will not give thee one.

@c    24:42. And I came today to the well of water, and said:  O Lord God of
@c    my master, Abraham, if thou hast prospered my way, wherein I now walk,

@c    24:43. Behold, I stand by the well of water, and the virgin, that shall
@c    come out to draw water, who shall hear me say:  Give me a little water
@c    to drink of thy pitcher:

@c    24:44. And shall say to me:  Both drink thou, and I will also draw for
@c    thy camels:  let the same be the woman, whom the Lord hath prepared for
@c    my master's son.

@c    24:45. And whilst I pondered these things secretly with myself, Rebecca
@c    appeared, coming with a pitcher, which she carried on her shoulder:  and
@c    she went down to the well and drew water.  And I said to her:  Give me a
@c    little to drink.

@c    24:46. And she speedily let down the pitcher from her shoulder, and
@c    said to me:  Both drink thou, and to thy camels I will give drink.  I
@c    drank, and she watered the camels.

@c    24:47. And I asked her, and said:  Whose daughter art thou?  And she
@c    answered:  I am the daughter of Bathuel, the son of Nachor, whom Melcha
@c    bore to him.  So I put earrings on her to adorn her face, and I put
@c    bracelets on her hands.

@c    24:48. And falling down, I adored the Lord, blessing the Lord God of my
@c    master, Abraham, who hath brought me the straight way to take the
@c    daughter of my master's brother for his son.

@c    24:49. Wherefore, if you do according to mercy and truth with my
@c    master, tell me:  but if it please you otherwise, tell me that also,
@c    that I may go to the right hand, or to the left.

@c    24:50. And Laban and Bathuel answered:  The word hath proceeded from the
@c    Lord:  we cannot speak any other thing to thee but his pleasure.

@c    24:51. Behold, Rebecca is before thee, take her and go thy way, and let
@c    her be the wife of thy master's son, as the Lord hath spoken.

@c    24:52. Which when Abraham's servant heard, falling down to the ground,
@c    he adored the Lord.

@c    24:53. And bringing forth vessels of silver and gold, and garments, he
@c    gave them to Rebecca, for a present.  He offered gifts also to her
@c    brothers, and to her mother.

@c    24:54. And a banquet was made, and they ate and drank together, and
@c    lodged there.  And in the morning, the servant arose, and said:  Let me
@c    depart, that I may go to my master.

@c    24:55. And her brother and mother answered:  Let the maid stay, at
@c    least, ten days with us, and afterwards she shall depart.

@c    24:56. Stay me not, said he, because the Lord hath prospered my way:
@c    send me away, that I may go to my master.

@c    24:57. And they said:  Let us call the maid, and ask her will.

@c    Let us call the maid, and ask her will. . .Not as to her marriage, as
@c    she had already consented, but of her quitting her parents and going to
@c    her husband.

@c    24:58. And they called her, and when she was come, they asked:  Wilt
@c    thou go with this man?  She said:  I will go.

@c    24:59. So they sent her away, and her nurse, and Abraham's servant, and
@c    his company.

@c    24:60. Wishing prosperity to their sister, and saying:  Thou art our
@c    sister, mayst thou increase to thousands of thousands; and may thy seed
@c    possess the gates of their enemies.

@c    24:61. So Rebecca and her maids, being set upon camels, followed the
@c    man:  who with speed returned to his master.

@c    24:62. At the same time, Isaac was walking along the way to the well
@c    which is called Of the living and the seeing:  for he dwelt in the south
@c    country:

@c    24:63. And he was gone forth to meditate in the field, the day being
@c    now well spent:  and when he had lifted up his eyes, he saw camels
@c    coming afar off.

@c    24:64. Rebecca also, when she saw Isaac, lighted off the camel,

@c    24:65. And said to the servant:  Who is that man who cometh towards us
@c    along the field?  And he said to her:  That man is my master.  But she
@c    quickly took her cloak, and covered herself.

@c    24:66. And the servant told Isaac all that he had done.

@c    24:67. Who brought her into the tent of Sara his mother, and took her
@c    to wife:  and he loved her so much, that it moderated the sorrow which
@c    was occasioned by his mother's death.



@c    Genesis Chapter 25


@c    Abraham's children by Cetura; his death and that of Ismael.  Isaac hath
@c    Esau and Jacob twins.  Esau selleth his first birthright to Jacob.

@c    25:1. And Abraham married another wife named Cetura:

@c    25:2. Who bore him Zamram, and Jecsan, and Madan, and Madian, and
@c    Jesboc, and Sue.

@c    25:3. Jecsan also begot Saba, and Dadan.  The children of Dadan were
@c    Assurim, and Latusim, and Loomim.

@c    25:4. But of Madian was born Epha, and Opher, and Henoch, and Abida,
@c    and Eldaa:  all these were the children of Cetura.

@c    25:5. And Abraham gave all his possessions to Isaac:

@c    25:6. And to the children of the concubines he gave gifts, and
@c    separated them from Isaac his son, while he yet lived, to the east
@c    country.

@c    Concubines. . .Agar and Cetura are here called concubines, (though they
@c    were lawful wives, and in other places are so called,) because they
@c    were of an inferior degree, and such in scripture are usually called
@c    concubines.

@c    25:7. And the days of Abraham's life were a hundred and seventy-five
@c    years.

@c    25:8. And decaying he died in a good old age, and having lived a long
@c    time, and being full of days:  and was gathered to his people.

@c    25:9. And Isaac and Ismael his sons buried him in the double cave,
@c    which was situated in the field of Ephron the son of Seor the Hethite,
@c    over against Mambre,

@c    25:10. Which he had bought of the children of Heth:  there was he
@c    buried, and Sara his wife.

@c    25:11. And after his death, God blessed Isaac his son, who dwelt by the
@c    well named Of the living and seeing.

@c    25:12. These are the generations of Ismael the son of Abraham, whom
@c    Agar the Egyptian, Sara's servant, bore unto him:

@c    25:13. And these are the names of his children according to their
@c    calling and generations.  The firstborn of Ismael was Nabajoth, then
@c    Cedar, and Adbeel, and Mabsam,

@c    25:14. And Masma, and Duma, and Massa,

@c    25:15. Hadar, and Thema, and Jethur, and Naphis, and Cedma.

@c    25:16. These are the sons of Ismael:  and these are their names by their
@c    castles and towns, twelve princes of their tribes.

@c    25:17. And the years of Ismael's life were a hundred and thirty-seven,
@c    and decaying he died, and was gathered unto his people.

@c    25:18. And he dwelt from Hevila as far as Sur, which looketh towards
@c    Egypt, to them that go towards the Assyrians.  He died in the presence
@c    of all his brethren.

@c    25:19. These also are the generations of Isaac the son of Abraham:
@c    Abraham begot Isaac:

@c    25:20. Who when he was forty years old, took to wife Rebecca the
@c    daughter of Bathuel the Syrian of Mesopotamia, sister to Laban.

@c    25:21. And Isaac besought the Lord for his wife, because she was
@c    barren:  and he heard him, and made Rebecca to conceive.

@c    25:22. But the children struggled in her womb, and she said:  If it were
@c    to be so with me, what need was there to conceive?  And she went to
@c    consult the Lord.

@c    25:23. And he answering, said:  Two nations are in thy womb, and two
@c    peoples shall be divided out of thy womb, and one people shall overcome
@c    the other, and the elder shall serve the younger.

@c    25:24. And when her time was come to be delivered, behold twins were
@c    found in her womb.

@c    25:25. He that came forth first was red, and hairy like a skin:  and his
@c    name was called Esau.  Immediately the other coming forth, held his
@c    brother's foot in his hand:  and therefore he was called Jacob.

@c    25:26. Isaac was threescore years old when the children were born unto
@c    him.

@c    25:27. And when they were grown up, Esau became a skilful hunter, and a
@c    husbandman:  but Jacob, a plain man, dwelt in tents.

@c    25:28. Isaac loved Esau, because he ate of his hunting:  and Rebecca
@c    loved Jacob.

@c    25:29. And Jacob boiled pottage:  to whom Esau, coming faint out of the
@c    field,

@c    25:30. Said:  Give me of this red pottage, for I am exceeding faint.  For
@c    which reason his name was called Edom.

@c    25:31. And Jacob said to him:  Sell me thy first birthright.

@c    25:32. He answered:  Lo I die, what will the first birthright avail me?

@c    25:33. Jacob said:  Swear therefore to me.  Esau swore to him, and sold
@c    his first birthright.

@c    25:34. And so taking bread and the pottage of lentils, he ate, and
@c    drank, and went on his way; making little account of having sold his
@c    first birthright.



@c    Genesis Chapter 26


@c    Isaac sojourneth in Gerara, where God reneweth to him the promise made
@c    to Abraham.  King Abimelech maketh league with him.

@c    26:1. And when a famine came in the land, after that barrenness which
@c    had happened in the days of Abraham, Isaac went to Abimelech, king of
@c    the Palestines, to Gerara.

@c    26:2. And the Lord appeared to him, and said:  Go not down into Egypt,
@c    but stay in the land that I shall tell thee.

@c    26:3. And sojourn in it, and I will be with thee, and will bless thee:
@c    for to thee and to thy seed I will give all these countries, to fulfil
@c    the oath which I swore to Abraham thy father.

@c    26:4. And I will multiply thy seed like the stars of heaven:  and I will
@c    give to thy posterity all these countries:  and in thy seed shall all
@c    the nations of the earth be blessed.

@c    26:5. Because Abraham obeyed my voice, and kept my precepts and
@c    commandments, and observed my ceremonies and laws.

@c    26:6. So Isaac abode in Gerara.

@c    26:7. And when he was asked by the men of that place, concerning his
@c    wife, he answered:  She is my sister:  for he was afraid to confess that
@c    she was his wife, thinking lest perhaps they would kill him because of
@c    her beauty.

@c    26:8. And when very many days were passed, and he abode there,
@c    Abimelech, king of the Palestines, looking out through a window, saw
@c    him playing with Rebecca, his wife.

@c    26:9. And calling for him, he said:  It is evident she is thy wife:  why
@c    didst thou feign her to be thy sister?  He answered:  I feared lest I
@c    should die for her sake.

@c    26:10. And Abimelech said:  Why hast thou deceived us?  Some man of the
@c    people might have lain with thy wife, and thou hadst brought upon us a
@c    great sin.  And he commanded all the people, saying:

@c    26:11. He that shall touch this man's wife, shall surely be put to
@c    death.

@c    26:12. And Isaac sowed in that land, and he found that same year a
@c    hundredfold:  and the Lord blessed him.

@c    26:13. And the man was enriched, and he went on prospering and
@c    increasing, till he became exceeding great.

@c    26:14. And he had possessions of sheep and of herds, and a very great
@c    family.  Wherefore the Palestines envying him,

@c    26:15. Stopped up at that time all the wells, that the servants of his
@c    father, Abraham, had digged, filling them up with earth:

@c    26:16. Insomuch that Abimelech himself said to Isaac:  Depart from us,
@c    for thou art become much mightier than we.

@c    26:17. So he departed, and came to the torrent of Gerara, to dwell
@c    there:

@c    26:18. And he digged again other wells, which the servants of his
@c    father, Abraham, had digged, and which, after his death, the
@c    Philistines had of old stopped up:  and he called them by the same
@c    names, by which his father before had called them.

@c    26:19. And they digged in the torrent, and found living water:

@c    Torrent. . .That is, a channel where sometimes a torrent or violent
@c    stream had run.

@c    26:20. But there also the herdsmen of Gerara strove against the
@c    herdsmen of Isaac, saying:  It is our water.  Wherefore he called the
@c    name of the well, on occasion of that which had happened, Calumny.

@c    26:21. And they digged also another; and for that they quarrelled
@c    likewise, and he called the name of it, Enmity.

@c    26:22. Going forward from thence, he digged another well, for which
@c    they contended not; therefore he called the name thereof, Latitude,
@c    saying:  Now hath the Lord given us room, and made us to increase upon
@c    the earth.

@c    Latitude. . .That is, wideness, or room.

@c    26:23. And he went up from that place to Bersabee,

@c    26:24. Where the Lord appeared to him that same night, saying:  I am the
@c    God of Abraham thy father, do not fear, for I am with thee:  I will
@c    bless thee, and multiply thy seed for my servant Abraham's sake.

@c    26:25. And he built there an altar:  and called upon the name of the
@c    Lord, and pitched his tent; and commanded his servants to dig a well.

@c    26:26. To which place when Abimelech, and Ochozath his friend, and
@c    Phicol chief captain of his soldiers, came from Gerara,

@c    26:27. Isaac said to them:  Why are ye come to me, a man whom you hate,
@c    and have thrust out from you?

@c    26:28. And they answered:  We saw that the Lord is with thee, and
@c    therefore we said:  Let there be an oath between us, and let us make a
@c    covenant,

@c    26:29. That thou do us no harm, as we on our part have touched nothing
@c    of thine, nor have done any thing to hurt thee; but with peace have
@c    sent thee away, increased with the blessing of the Lord.

@c    26:30. And he made them a feast, and after they had eaten and drunk:

@c    26:31. Arising in the morning, they swore one to another:  and Isaac
@c    sent them away peaceably to their own home.

@c    26:32. And behold, the same day the servants of Isaac came, telling him
@c    of a well which they had digged, and saying:  We have found water.

@c    26:33. Whereupon he called it Abundance:  and the name of the city was
@c    called Bersabee, even to this day.

@c    26:34. And Esau being forty years old, married wives, Judith, the
@c    daughter of Beeri, the Hethite, and Basemath, the daughter of Elon, of
@c    the same place.

@c    26:35. And they both offended the mind of Isaac and Rebecca.



@c    Genesis Chapter 27


@c    Jacob, by him mother's counsel, obtaineth his father's blessing instead
@c    of Esau.  And by her is advised to fly to his uncle Laban.

@c    27:1. Now Isaac was old, and his eyes were dim, and he could not see:
@c    and he called Esau, his elder son, and said to him:  My son?  And he
@c    answered:  Here I am.

@c    27:2. And his father said to him, Thou seest that I am old, and know
@c    not the day of my death.

@c    27:3. Take thy arms, thy quiver, and bow, and go abroad; and when thou
@c    hast taken something by hunting,

@c    27:4. Make me a savoury meat thereof, as thou knowest I like, and bring
@c    it that I may eat:  and my soul may bless thee, before I die.

@c    27:5. And when Rebecca had heard this, and he was gone into the field
@c    to fulfil his father's commandment,

@c    27:6. She said to her son Jacob:  I heard thy father talking with Esau,
@c    thy brother, and saying to him:

@c    27:7. Bring me of thy hunting, and make me meats that I may eat, and
@c    bless thee in the sight of the Lord, before I die.

@c    27:8. Now therefore, my son, follow my counsel:

@c    27:9. And go thy way to the flock, bring me two kids of the best, that
@c    I may make of them meat for thy father, such as he gladly eateth.

@c    27:10. Which when thou hast brought in, and he hath eaten, he may bless
@c    thee before he die.

@c    27:11. And he answered her:  Thou knowest that Esau, my brother, is a
@c    hairy man, and I am smooth:

@c    27:12. If my father should feel me, and perceive it, I fear lest he
@c    will think I would have mocked him, and I shall bring upon me a curse
@c    instead of a blessing.

@c    27:13. And his mother said to him:  Upon me be this curse, my son:  only
@c    hear thou my voice, and go, fetch me the things which I have said.

@c    27:14. He went, and brought, and gave them to his mother.  She dressed
@c    meats, such as she knew his father liked.

@c    27:15. And she put on him very good garments of Esau, which she had at
@c    home with her:

@c    27:16. And the little skins of the kids she put about his hands, and
@c    covered the bare of his neck.

@c    27:17. And she gave him the savoury meat, and delivered him bread that
@c    she had baked.

@c    27:18. Which when he had carried in, he said:  My father?  But he
@c    answered:  I hear.  Who art thou, my son?

@c    27:19. And Jacob said:  I am Esau, thy firstborn:  I have done as thou
@c    didst command me:  arise, sit and eat of my venison, that thy soul may
@c    bless me.

@c    I am Esau thy firstborn. . .St. Augustine (L. Contra mendacium, c. 10),
@c    treating at large upon this place, excuseth Jacob from a lie, because
@c    this whole passage was mysterious, as relating to the preference which
@c    was afterwards to be given to the Gentiles before the carnal Jews,
@c    which Jacob by prophetic light might understand.  So far is certain,
@c    that the first birthright, both by divine election and by Esau's free
@c    cession belonged to Jacob:  so that if there were any lie in the case,
@c    it could be no more than an officious and venial one.

@c    27:20. And Isaac said to his son:  How couldst thou find it so quickly,
@c    my son?  He answered:  It was the will of God, that what I sought came
@c    quickly in my way:

@c    27:21. And Isaac said:  Come hither, that I may feel thee, my son, and
@c    may prove whether thou be my son Esau, or no.

@c    27:22. He came near to his father, and when he had felt him, Isaac
@c    said:  The voice indeed is the voice of Jacob; but the hands, are the
@c    hands of Esau.

@c    27:23. And he knew him not, because his hairy hands made him like to
@c    the elder.  Then blessing him,

@c    27:24. He said:  Art thou my son Esau?  He answered:  I am.

@c    27:25. Then he said:  Bring me the meats of thy hunting, my son, that my
@c    soul may bless thee.  And when they were brought, and he had eaten, he
@c    offered him wine also, which after he had drunk,

@c    27:26. He said to him:  Come near me, and give me a kiss, my son.

@c    27:27. He came near, and kissed him.  And immediately as he smelled the
@c    fragrant smell of his garments, blessing him, he said:  Behold, the
@c    smell of my son is as the smell of a plentiful field, which the Lord
@c    hath blessed.

@c    27:28. God give thee of the dew of heaven, and of the fatness of the
@c    earth, abundance of corn and wine.

@c    27:29. And let peoples serve thee, and tribes worship thee:  be thou
@c    lord of thy brethren, and let thy mother's children bow down before
@c    thee.  Cursed be he that curseth thee:  and let him that blesseth thee be
@c    filled with blessings.

@c    27:30. Isaac had scarce ended his words, when, Jacob being now gone out
@c    abroad, Esau came,

@c    27:31. And brought in to his father meats, made of what he had taken in
@c    hunting, saying:  Arise, my father, and eat of thy son's venison; that
@c    thy soul may bless me.

@c    27:32. And Isaac said to him:  Why! who art thou?  He answered:  I am thy
@c    firstborn son, Esau.

@c    27:33. Isaac was struck with fear, and astonished exceedingly; and
@c    wondering beyond what can be believed, said:  Who is he then that even
@c    now brought me venison that he had taken, and I ate of all before thou
@c    camest?  and I have blessed him, and he shall be blessed.

@c    27:34. Esau having heard his father's words, roared out with a great
@c    cry; and, being in a consternation, said:  Bless me also, my father.

@c    27:35. And he said:  Thy brother came deceitfully and got thy blessing.

@c    27:36. But he said again:  Rightly is his name called Jacob; for he hath
@c    supplanted me lo this second time:  My birthright he took away before,
@c    and now this second time he hath stolen away my blessing.  And again he
@c    said to his father:  Hast thou not reserved me also a blessing?

@c    Jacob. . .That is, a supplanter.

@c    27:37. Isaac answered:  I have appointed him thy lord, and have made all
@c    his brethren his servants:  I have established him with corn and wine,
@c    and after this, what shall I do more for thee, my son?

@c    27:38. And Esau said to him:  Hast thou only one blessing, father?  I
@c    beseech thee bless me also.  And when he wept with a loud cry,

@c    27:39. Isaac being moved, said to him:  In the fat of the earth, and in
@c    the dew of heaven from above,

@c    27:40. Shall thy blessing be.  Thou shalt live by the sword, and shalt
@c    serve thy brother:  and the time shall come, when thou shalt shake off
@c    and loose his yoke from thy neck.

@c    27:41. Esau therefore always hated Jacob, for the blessing wherewith
@c    his father had blessed him; and he said in his heart:  The days will
@c    come of the mourning for my father, and I will kill my brother Jacob.

@c    27:42. These things were told to Rebecca:  and she sent and called
@c    Jacob, her son, and said to him:  Behold Esau, thy brother, threateneth
@c    to kill thee.

@c    27:43. Now therefore, my son, hear my voice, arise and flee to Laban,
@c    my brother, to Haran:

@c    27:44. And thou shalt dwell with him a few days, till the wrath of thy
@c    brother be assuaged,

@c    27:45. And his indignation cease, and he forget the things thou hast
@c    done to him:  afterwards I will send, and bring thee from thence hither.
@c    Why shall I be deprived of both my sons in one day?

@c    27:46. And Rebecca said to Isaac:  I am weary of my life, because of the
@c    daughters of Heth:  if Jacob take a wife of the stock of this land, I
@c    choose not to live.



@c    Genesis Chapter 28


@c    Jacob's journey to Mesopotamia:  his vision and vow.

@c    28:1. And Isaac called Jacob, and blessed him, and charged him, saying:
@c    Take not a wife of the stock of Chanaan:

@c    28:2. But go, and take a journey to Mesopotamia of Syria, to the house
@c    of Bathuel, thy mother's father, and take thee a wife thence of the
@c    daughters of Laban, thy uncle.

@c    28:3. And God almighty bless thee, and make thee to increase and
@c    multiply thee:  that thou mayst be a multitude of people.

@c    28:4. And give the blessings of Araham to thee, and to thy seed after
@c    thee:  that thou mayst possess the land of thy sojournment, which he
@c    promised to thy grandfather.

@c    28:5. And when Isaac had sent him away, he took his journey and went to
@c    Mesopotamia of Syria, to Laban, the son of Bathuel, the Syrian, brother
@c    to Rebecca, his mother.

@c    28:6. And Esau seeing that his father had blessed Jacob, and had sent
@c    him into Mesopotamia of Syria, to marry a wife thence; and that after
@c    the blessing he had charged him, saying:  Thou shalt not take a wife of
@c    the daughters of Chanaan:

@c    28:7. And that Jacob obeying his parents, was gone into Syria:

@c    28:8. Experiencing also, that his father was not well pleased with the
@c    daughters of Chanaan:

@c    28:9. He went to Ismael, and took to wife, besides them he had before,
@c    Maheleth, the daughter of Ismael, Abraham's son, the sister of
@c    Nabajoth.

@c    28:10. But Jacob being departed from Bersabee, went on to Haran.

@c    28:11. And when he was come to a certain place, and would rest in it
@c    after sunset, he took of the stones that lay there, and putting under
@c    his head, slept in the same place.

@c    28:12. And he saw in his sleep a ladder standing upon the earth, and
@c    the top thereof touching heaven:  the angels also of God ascending and
@c    descending by it.

@c    28:13. And the Lord leaning upon the ladder saying to him:  I am the
@c    Lord God of Abraham thy father, and the God of Isaac:  The land, wherein
@c    thou sleepest, I will give to thee and to thy seed.

@c    28:14. And thy seed shall be as the dust of the earth:  thou shalt
@c    spread abroad to the west, and to the east, and to the north, and to
@c    the south:  and IN THEE and thy seed, all the tribes of the earth SHALL
@c    BE BLESSED.

@c    28:15. And I will be thy keeper whithersoever thou goest, and will
@c    bring thee back into this land:  neither will I leave thee, till I shall
@c    have accomplished all that I have said.

@c    28:16. And when Jacob awaked out of sleep, he said:  Indeed the Lord is
@c    in this place, and I knew it not.

@c    28:17. And trembling, he said:  How terrible is this place?  this is no
@c    other but the house of God, and the gate of heaven.

@c    28:18. And Jacob arising in the morning, took the stone which he had
@c    laid under his head, and set it up for a title, pouring oil upon the
@c    top of it.

@c    28:19. And he called the name of the city Bethel, which before was
@c    called Luza.

@c    Bethel. . .This name signifies the house of God.

@c    28:20. And he made a vow, saying:  If God shall be with me, and shall
@c    keep me in the way, by which I walk, and shall give me bread to eat,
@c    and raiment to put on,

@c    28:21. And I shall return prosperously to my father's house:  the Lord
@c    shall be my God:

@c    28:22. And this stone, which I have set up for a title, shall be called
@c    the house of God:  and of all things that thou shalt give to me, I will
@c    offer tithes to thee.



@c    Genesis Chapter 29


@c    Jacob serveth Laban seven years for Rachel:  but is deceived with Lia:
@c    he afterwards marrieth Rachel.  Lia bears him four sons.

@c    29:1. Then Jacob went on in his journey, and came into the east
@c    country.

@c    29:2. And he saw a well in the field, and three flocks of sheep lying
@c    by it:  for the beasts were watered out of it, and the mouth thereof was
@c    closed with a great stone.

@c    29:3. And the custom was, when all the sheep were gathered together, to
@c    roll away the stone, and after the sheep were watered, to put it on the
@c    mouth of the well again.

@c    29:4. And he said to the shepherds:  Brethren, whence are you?  They
@c    answered:  Of Haran.

@c    29:5. And he asked them, saying:  Know you Laban, the son of Nachor?
@c    They said:  We know him.

@c    29:6. He said:  Is he in health?  He is in health, say they:  and behold,
@c    Rachel, his daughter, cometh with his flock.

@c    29:7. And Jacob said:  There is yet much day remaining, neither is it
@c    time to bring the flocks into the folds again:  first give the sheep
@c    drink, and so lead them back to feed.

@c    29:8. They answered:  We cannot, till all the cattle be gathered
@c    together, and we remove the stone from the well's mouth, that we may
@c    water the flocks.

@c    29:9. They were yet speaking, and behold Rachel came with her father's
@c    sheep; for she fed the flock.

@c    29:10. And when Jacob saw her, and knew her to be his cousin german,
@c    and that they were the sheep of Laban, his uncle:  he removed the stone
@c    wherewith the well was closed.

@c    29:11. And having watered the flock, he kissed her:  and lifting up his
@c    voice wept.

@c    29:12. And he told her that he was her father's brother, and the son of
@c    Rebecca:  but she went in haste and told her father.

@c    29:13. Who, when he heard that Jacob his sister's son was come, ran
@c    forth to meet him:  and embracing him, and heartily kissing him, brought
@c    him into his house.  And when he had heard the causes of his journey,

@c    29:14. He answered:  Thou art my bone and my flesh.  And after the days
@c    of one month were expired,

@c    29:15. He said to him:  Because thou art my brother, shalt thou serve me
@c    without wages?  Tell me what wages thou wilt have.

@c    29:16. Now he had two daughters, the name of the elder was Lia; and the
@c    younger was called Rachel.

@c    29:17. But Lia was blear-eyed:  Rachel was well favoured, and of a
@c    beautiful countenance.

@c    29:18. And Jacob being in love with her, said:  I will serve thee seven
@c    years for Rachel, thy younger daughter.

@c    29:19. Laban answered:  It is better that I give her to thee than to
@c    another man; stay with me.

@c    29:20. So Jacob served seven years for Rachel:  and they seemed but a
@c    few days, because of the greatness of his love.

@c    29:21. And he said to Laban:  Give me my wife; for now the time is
@c    fulfilled, that I may go in unto her.

@c    29:22. And he, having invited a great number of his friends to the
@c    feast, made the marriage.

@c    29:23. And at night he brought in Lia, his daughter, to him,

@c    29:24. Giving his daughter a handmaid, named Zelpha.  Now when Jacob had
@c    gone in to her according to custom, when morning was come he saw it was
@c    Lia.

@c    29:25. And he said to his father-in-law:  What is it that thou didst
@c    mean to do?  did not I serve thee for Rachel?  why hast thou deceived me?

@c    29:26. Laban answered:  It is not the custom in this place, to give the
@c    younger in marriage first.

@c    29:27. Make up the week of days of this match:  and I will give thee her
@c    also, for the service that thou shalt render me other seven years.

@c    29:28. He yielded to his pleasure:  and after the week was past, he
@c    married Rachel:

@c    29:29. To whom her father gave Bala, for her servant.

@c    29:30. And having at length obtained the marriage he wished for, he
@c    preferred the love of the latter before the former, and served with him
@c    other seven years.

@c    29:31. And the Lord seeing that he despised Lia, opened her womb, but
@c    her sister remained barren.

@c    29:32. And she conceived and bore a son, and called his name Ruben,
@c    saying:  The Lord saw my affliction:  now my husband will love me.

@c    29:33. And again she conceived and bore a son, and said:  Because the
@c    Lord heard that I was despised, he hath given this also to me:  and she
@c    called his name Simeon.

@c    29:34. And she conceived the third time, and bore another son, and
@c    said:  Now also my husband will be joined to me, because I have borne
@c    him three sons:  and therefore she called his name Levi.

@c    29:35. The fourth time she conceived and bore a son, and said:  Now will
@c    I praise the Lord:  and for this she called him Juda.  And she left
@c    bearing.



@c    Genesis Chapter 30


@c    Rachel, being barren, delivereth her handmaid to Jacob; she beareth two
@c    sons.  Lia ceasing to bear, giveth also her handmaid, and she beareth
@c    two more.  Then Lia beareth other two sons and one daughter.  Rachel
@c    beareth Joseph.  Jacob, desirous to return home, is hired to stay for a
@c    certain part of the flock's increase, whereby he becometh exceeding
@c    rich.

@c    30:1. And Rachel seeing herself without children, envied her sister,
@c    and said to her husband:  Give me children, otherwise I shall die.

@c    30:2. And Jacob being angry with her, answered:  Am I as God, who hath
@c    deprived thee of the fruit of thy womb?

@c    30:3. But she said:  I have here my servant Bala:  go in unto her, that
@c    she may bear upon my knees, and I may have children by her.

@c    30:4. And she gave him Bala in marriage:  who,

@c    30:5. When her husband had gone in unto her, conceived and bore a son.

@c    30:6. And Rachel said:  The Lord hath judged for me, and hath heard my
@c    voice, giving me a son; and therefore she called his name Dan.

@c    30:7. And again Bala conceived, and bore another,

@c    30:8. For whom Rachel said:  God hath compared me with my sister, and I
@c    have prevailed:  and she called him Nephthali.

@c    30:9. Lia perceiving that she had left of bearing, gave Zelpha, her
@c    handmaid, to her husband.

@c    30:10. And when she had conceived, and brought forth a son,

@c    30:11. She said:  Happily.  And therefore called his name Gad.

@c    30:12. Zelpha also bore another.

@c    30:13. And Lia said:  This is for my happiness:  for women will call me
@c    blessed.  Therefore she called him Aser.

@c    30:14. And Ruben going out in the time of the wheat harvest into the
@c    field, found mandrakes:  which he brought to his mother Lia.  And Rachel
@c    said:  Give me part of thy son's mandrakes.

@c    30:15. She answered:  Dost thou think it a small matter, that thou hast
@c    taken my husband from me, unless thou take also my son's mandrakes?
@c    Rachel said:  He shall sleep with thee this night, for thy son's
@c    mandrakes.

@c    30:16. And when Jacob returned at even from the field, Lia went out to
@c    meet him, and said:  Thou shalt come in unto me, because I have hired
@c    thee for my son's mandrakes.  And he slept with her that night.

@c    30:17. And God heard her prayers; and she conceived:  and bore a fifth
@c    son:

@c    30:18. And said:  God hath given me a reward, because I gave my handmaid
@c    to my husband.  And she called his name Issachar.

@c    30:19. And Lia conceived again, and bore the sixth son,

@c    30:20. And said:  God hath endowed me with a good dowry; this turn also
@c    my husband will be with me, because I have borne him six sons:  and
@c    therefore she called his name Zabulon.

@c    30:21. After whom she bore a daughter, named Dina.

@c    30:22. The Lord also remembering Rachel, heard her, and opened her
@c    womb.

@c    30:23. And she conceived, and bore a son, saying:  God hath taken away
@c    my reproach.

@c    30:24. And she called his name Joseph:  saying:  The Lord give me also
@c    another son.

@c    30:25. And when Joseph was born, Jacob said to his father-in-law:  Send
@c    me away, that I may return into my country, and to my land.

@c    30:26. Give me my wives, and my children, for whom I have served thee,
@c    that I may depart:  thou knowest the service that I have rendered thee.

@c    30:27. Laban said to him:  Let me find favour in thy sight:  I have
@c    learned, by experience, that God hath blessed me for thy sake.

@c    30:28. Appoint thy wages which I shall give thee.

@c    30:29. But he answered:  Thou knowest how I have served thee, and how
@c    great thy possession hath been in my hands.

@c    30:30. Thou hadst but little before I came to thee, and now thou art
@c    become rich:  and the Lord hath blessed thee at my coming.  It is
@c    reasonable, therefore, that I should now provide also for my own house.

@c    30:31. And Laban said:  What shall I give thee?  But he said:  I require
@c    nothing; but if thou wilt do what I demand, I will feed and keep thy
@c    sheep again.

@c    30:32. Go round through all thy flocks, and separate all the sheep of
@c    divers colours, and speckled; and all that is brown and spotted, and of
@c    divers colours, as well among the sheep as among the goats, shall be my
@c    wages.

@c    30:33. And my justice shall answer for me tomorrow before thee, when
@c    the time of the bargain shall come; and all that is not of divers
@c    colours, and spotted, and brown, as well among the sheep as among the
@c    goats, shall accuse me of theft.

@c    30:34. And Laban said:  I like well what thou demandest.

@c    30:35. And he separated the same day the she-goats, and the sheep, and
@c    the he-goats, and the rams of divers colours, and spotted; and all the
@c    flock of one colour, that is, of white and black fleece, he delivered
@c    into the hands of his sons.

@c    30:36. And he set the space of three days journey betwixt himself and
@c    his son-in-law, who fed the rest of his flock.

@c    30:37. And Jacob took green rods of poplar, and of almond, and of
@c    plane-trees, and pilled them in part:  so when the bark was taken off,
@c    in the parts that were pilled, there appeared whiteness:  but the parts
@c    that were whole, remained green:  and by this means the colour was
@c    divers.

@c    30:38. And he put them in the troughs, where the water was poured out;
@c    that when the flocks should come to drink, they might have the rods
@c    before their eyes, and in the sight of them might conceive.

@c    30:39. And it came to pass, that in the very heat of coition, the sheep
@c    beheld the rods, and brought forth spotted, and of divers colours, and
@c    speckled.

@c    30:40. And Jacob separated the flock, and put the rods in the troughs
@c    before the eyes of the rams; and all the white and the black were
@c    Laban's, and the rest were Jacob's, when the flocks were separated one
@c    from the other.

@c    30:41. So when the ewes went first to ram, Jacob put the rods in the
@c    troughs of water before the eyes of the rams, and of the ewes, that
@c    they might conceive while they were looking upon them.

@c    30:42. But when the later coming was, and the last conceiving, he did
@c    not put them.  And those that were lateward, became Laban's; and they of
@c    the first time, Jacob's.

@c    30:43. And the man was enriched exceedingly, and he had many flocks,
@c    maid-servants and men-servants, camels and asses.



@c    Genesis Chapter 31


@c    Jacob's departure:  he is pursued and overtaken by Laban.  They make a
@c    covenant.

@c    31:1. But after that he had heard the words of the sons of Laban,
@c    saying:  Jacob hath taken away all that was our father's, and being
@c    enriched by his substance is become great.

@c    31:2. And perceiving also, that Laban's countenance was not towards him
@c    as yesterday and the other day.

@c    31:3. Especially the Lord saying to him:  Return into the land of thy
@c    fathers and to thy kindred, and I will be with thee.

@c    31:4. He sent, and called Rachel and Lia into the field, where he fed
@c    the flocks,

@c    31:5. And said to them:  I see your father's countenance is not towards
@c    me as yesterday and the other day:  but the God of my father hath been
@c    with me.

@c    31:6. And you know that I have served your father to the uttermost of
@c    my power.

@c    31:7. Yea your father hath also overreached me, and hath changed my
@c    wages ten times:  and yet God hath not suffered him to hurt me.

@c    31:8. If at any time, he said:  The speckled shall be thy wages:  all the
@c    sheep brought forth speckled:  but when he said on the contrary:  Thou
@c    shalt take all the white one for thy wages:  all the flocks brought
@c    forth white ones.

@c    31:9. And God hath taken your father's substance, and given it to me.

@c    31:10. For after the time came of the ewes conceiving, I lifted up my
@c    eyes, and saw in my sleep, that the males which leaped upon the females
@c    were of divers colours, and spotted, and speckled.

@c    31:11. And the angel of God said to me in my sleep:  Jacob.  And I
@c    answered:  Here I am.

@c    31:12. And he said:  Lift up thy eyes, and see that all the males
@c    leaping upon the females, are of divers colours, spotted and speckled.
@c    For I have seen all that Laban hath done to thee.

@c    31:13. I am the God of Bethel, where thou didst anoint the stone, and
@c    make a vow to me.  Now therefore arise, and go out of this land, and
@c    return into thy native country.

@c    31:14. And Rachel and Lia answered:  Have we any thing left among the
@c    goods and inheritance of our father's house?

@c    31:15. Hath he not counted us as strangers, and sold us, and eaten up
@c    the price of us?

@c    31:16. But God hath taken our father's riches, and delivered them to
@c    us, and to our children:  wherefore, do all that God hath commanded
@c    thee.

@c    31:17. Then Jacob rose up, and having set his children and wives upon
@c    camels, went his way.

@c    31:18. And he took all his substance, and flocks, and whatsoever he had
@c    gotten in Mesopotamia, and went forward to Isaac, his father, to the
@c    land of Chanaan.

@c    31:19. At that time Laban was gone to shear his sheep, and Rachel stole
@c    away her father's idols.

@c    Her father's idols. . .By this it appears that Laban was an idolater;
@c    and some of the fathers are of opinion that Rachel stole away these
@c    idols to withdraw him from idolatry, removing the occasion of his sin.

@c    31:20. And Jacob would not confess to his father-in-law that he was
@c    flying away.

@c    31:21. And when he was gone, together with all that belonged to him,
@c    and having passed the river, was going on towards mount Galaad,

@c    31:22. It was told Laban on the third day, that Jacob fled.

@c    31:23. And he took his brethren with him, and pursued after him seven
@c    days; and overtook him in the mount of Galaad.

@c    31:24. And he saw in a dream God, saying to him:  Take heed thou speak
@c    not any thing harshly against Jacob.

@c    31:25. Now Jacob had pitched his tent in the mountain:  and when he,
@c    with his brethren, had overtaken him, he pitched his tent in the same
@c    mount of Galaad.

@c    31:26. And he said to Jacob:  Why hast thou done thus, to carry away,
@c    without my knowledge, my daughters as captives taken with the sword?

@c    31:27. Why wouldst thou run away privately, and not acquaint me, that I
@c    might have brought thee on the way with joy, and with songs, and with
@c    timbrels, and with harps?

@c    31:28. Thou hast not suffered me to kiss my sons and daughters; thou
@c    hast done foolishly; and now indeed,

@c    31:29. It is in my power to return thee evil; but the God of your
@c    father said to me yesterday:  Take heed thou speak not any thing harshly
@c    against Jacob.

@c    31:30. Suppose thou didst desire to go to thy friends, and hadst a
@c    longing after thy father's house:  why hast thou stolen away my gods?

@c    31:31. Jacob answered:  That I departed unknown to thee, it was for fear
@c    lest thou wouldst take away thy daughters by force.

@c    31:32. But, whereas, thou chargest me with theft:  with whomsoever thou
@c    shalt find thy gods, let him be slain before our brethren.  Search, and
@c    if thou find any of thy things with me, take them away.  Now when he
@c    said this, he knew not that Rachel had stolen the idols.

@c    31:33. So Laban went into the tent of Jacob, and of Lia, and of both
@c    the handmaids, and found them not.  And when he was entered into
@c    Rachel's tent,

@c    31:34. She, in haste, hid the idols under the camel's furniture, and
@c    sat upon them:  and when he had searched all the tent, and found
@c    nothing,

@c    31:35. She said:  Let not my lord be angry that I cannot rise up before
@c    thee, because it has now happened to me according to the custom of
@c    women.  So his careful search was in vain.

@c    31:36. And Jacob being angry, said in a chiding manner:  For what fault
@c    of mine, and for what offence on my part hast thou so hotly pursued me,

@c    31:37. And searched all my household stuff?  What hast thou found of all
@c    the substance of thy house?  lay it here before my brethren, and thy
@c    brethren, and let them judge between me and thee.

@c    31:38. Have I, therefore, been with thee twenty years?  thy ewes and
@c    goats were not barren, the rams of thy flocks I did not eat:

@c    31:39. Neither did I shew thee that which the beast had torn; I made
@c    good all the damage:  whatsoever was lost by theft, thou didst exact it
@c    of me:

@c    31:40. Day and night was I parched with heat, and with frost, and sleep
@c    departed from my eyes.

@c    31:41. And in this manner have I served thee in thy house twenty years,
@c    fourteen for thy daughters, and six for thy flocks:  thou hast changed
@c    also my wages ten times.

@c    31:42. Unless the God of my father, Abraham, and the fear of Isaac, had
@c    stood by me, peradventure now thou hadst sent me away naked:  God beheld
@c    my affliction and the labour of my hands, and rebuked thee yesterday.

@c    31:43. Laban answered him:  The daughters are mine, and the children,
@c    and thy flocks, and all things that thou seest are mine:  what can I do
@c    to my children, and grandchildren?

@c    31:44. Come, therefore, let us enter into a league; that it may be for
@c    a testimony between me and thee.

@c    31:45. And Jacob took a stone, and set it up for a title.

@c    31:46. And he said to his brethren:  Bring hither stones.  And they,
@c    gathering stones together, made a heap, and they ate upon it.

@c    31:47. And Laban called it, The witness heap; and Jacob, The hillock of
@c    testimony:  each of them according to the propriety of his language.

@c    31:48. And Laban said:  This heap shall be a witness between me and thee
@c    this day, and therefore the name thereof was called Galaad, that is,
@c    The witness heap.

@c    31:49. The Lord behold and judge between us, when we shall be gone one
@c    from the other.

@c    31:50. If thou afflict my daughters, and if thou bring in other wives
@c    over them:  none is witness of our speech but God, who is present and
@c    beholdeth.

@c    31:51. And he said again to Jacob:  Behold this heap, and the stone
@c    which I have set up between me and thee,

@c    31:52. Shall be a witness:  this heap, I say, and the stone, be they for
@c    a testimony, if either I shall pass beyond it going towards thee, or
@c    thou shalt pass beyond it thinking harm to me.

@c    31:53. The God of Abraham, and the God of Nachor, the God of their
@c    father, judge between us.  And Jacob swore by the fear of his father
@c    Isaac:

@c    31:54. And after he had offered sacrifices in the mountain, he called
@c    his brethren to eat bread.  And when they had eaten, they lodged there:

@c    31:55. But Laban arose in the night, and kissed his sons and daughters,
@c    and blessed them:  and returned to his place.



@c    Genesis Chapter 32


@c    Jacob's vision of angels; his message and presents to Esau; his
@c    wrestling with an angel.

@c    32:1. Jacob also went on the journey he had begun:  and the angels of
@c    God met him.

@c    32:2. And when he saw them, he said:  These are the camps of God, and he
@c    called the name of that place Mahanaim, that is, Camps.

@c    32:3. And he sent messengers before him to Esau, his brother, to the
@c    land of Seir, to the country of Edom:

@c    32:4. And he commanded them, saying:  Thus shall ye speak to my lord
@c    Esau:  Thus saith thy brother Jacob:  I have sojourned with Laban, and
@c    have been with him until this day:

@c    32:5. I have oxen, and asses, and sheep, and menservants, and
@c    womenservants:  and now I send a message to my lord, that I may find
@c    favour in thy sight.

@c    32:6. And the messengers returned to Jacob, saying:  We came to Esau,
@c    thy brother, and behold he cometh with speed to meet thee with four
@c    hundred men.

@c    32:7. Then Jacob was greatly afraid; and in his fear divided the people
@c    that was with him, and the flocks, and the sheep, and the oxen, and the
@c    camels, into two companies,

@c    32:8. Saying:  If Esau come to one company, and destroy it, the other
@c    company that is left, shall escape.

@c    32:9. And Jacob said:  O God of my father Abraham, and God of my father
@c    Isaac:  O Lord who saidst to me, Return to thy land, and to the place of
@c    thy birth, and I will do well for thee.

@c    32:10. I am not worthy of the least of all thy mercies, and of thy
@c    truth which thou hast fulfilled to thy servant.  With my staff I passed
@c    over this Jordan; and now I return with two companies.

@c    32:11. Deliver me from the hand of my brother Esau, for I am greatly
@c    afraid of him; lest perhaps he come, and kill the mother with the
@c    children.

@c    32:12. Thou didst say, that thou wouldst do well by me, and multiply my
@c    seed like the sand of the sea, which cannot be numbered for multitude.

@c    32:13. And when he had slept there that night, he set apart, of the
@c    things which he had, presents for his brother Esau,

@c    32:14. Two hundred she-goats, twenty he-goats, two hundred ewes, and
@c    twenty rams,

@c    32:15. Thirty milch camels with their colts, forty kine, and twenty
@c    bulls, twenty she-asses, and ten of their foals.

@c    32:16. And he sent them by the hands of his servants, every drove by
@c    itself, and he said to his servants:  Go before me, and let there be a
@c    space between drove and drove.

@c    32:17. And he commanded the first, saying:  If thou meet my brother
@c    Esau, and he ask thee:  Whose art thou?  or whither goest thou?  or whose
@c    are these before thee?

@c    32:18. Thou shalt answer:  Thy servant Jacob's:  he hath sent them as a
@c    present to my lord Esau; and he cometh after us.

@c    32:19. In like manner he commanded the second, and the third, and all
@c    that followed the droves, saying:  Speak ye the same words to Esau, when
@c    ye find him.

@c    32:20. And ye shall add:  Thy servant Jacob himself also followeth after
@c    us; for he said:  I will appease him with the presents that go before,
@c    and afterwards I will see him, perhaps he will be gracious to me.

@c    32:21. So the presents went before him, but himself lodged that night
@c    in the camp.

@c    32:22. And rising early, he took his two wives and his two handmaids,
@c    with his eleven sons, and passed over the ford of Jaboc.

@c    32:23. And when all things were brought over that belonged to him,

@c    32:24. He remained alone; and behold, a man wrestled with him till
@c    morning.

@c    A man, etc. . .This was an angel in human shape, as we learn from Osee
@c    12.4. He is called God, ver. 28 and 30, because he represented the
@c    person of the Son of God.  This wrestling, in which Jacob, assisted by
@c    God, was a match for an angel, was so ordered (ver. 28,) that he might
@c    learn by this experiment of the divine assistance, that neither Esau,
@c    nor any other man, should have power to hurt him.--It was also
@c    spiritual, as appeareth by his earnest prayer, urging and at last
@c    obtaining the angel's blessing.

@c    32:25. And when he saw that he could not overcome him, he touched the
@c    sinew of his thigh, and forthwith it shrank.

@c    32:26. And he said to him:  Let me go, for it is break of day.  He
@c    answered:  I will not let thee go, except thou bless me.

@c    32:27. And he said:  What is thy name?  He answered:  Jacob.

@c    32:28. But he said:  Thy name shall not be called Jacob, but Israel; for
@c    if thou hast been strong against God, how much more shalt thou prevail
@c    against men?

@c    32:29. Jacob asked him:  Tell me by what name art thou called?  He
@c    answered:  Why dost thou ask my name?  And he blessed him in the same
@c    place.

@c    32:30. And Jacob called the name of the place Phanuel, saying:  I have
@c    seen God face to face, and my soul has been saved.

@c    Phanuel. . .This word signifies the face of God, or the sight, or seeing
@c    of God.

@c    32:31. And immediately the sun rose upon him, after he was past
@c    Phanuel; but he halted on his foot.

@c    32:32. Therefore the children of Israel, unto this day, eat not the
@c    sinew, that shrank in Jacob's thigh:  because he touched the sinew of
@c    his thigh and it shrank.



@c    Genesis Chapter 33


@c    Jacob and Esau meet:  Jacob goeth to Salem, where he raiseth an altar.

@c    33:1. And Jacob lifting up his eyes, saw Esau coming, and with him four
@c    hundred men:  and he divided the children of Lia and of Rachel, and of
@c    the two handmaids.

@c    33:2. And he put both the handmaids and their children foremost:  and
@c    Lia and her children in the second place:  and Rachel and Joseph last.

@c    33:3. And he went forward and bowed down with his face to the ground
@c    seven times, until his brother came near.

@c    33:4. Then Esau ran to meet his brother, and embraced him:  and clasping
@c    him fast about the neck, and kissing him, wept.

@c    33:5. And lifting up his eyes, he saw the women and their children, and
@c    said:  What mean these?  And do they belong to thee?  He answered:  They
@c    are the children which God hath given to me, thy servant.

@c    33:6. Then the handmaids and their children came near and bowed
@c    themselves.

@c    33:7. Lia also, with her children, came near and bowed down in like
@c    manner; and last of all, Joseph and Rachel bowed down.

@c    33:8. And Esau said:  What are the droves that I met?  He answered:  That
@c    I might find favour before my lord.

@c    33:9. But he said:  I have plenty, my brother, keep what is thine for
@c    thyself.

@c    33:10. And Jacob said:  Do not so I beseech thee, but if I have found
@c    favour in thy eyes, receive a little present at my hands:  for I have
@c    seen thy face, as if I should have seen the countenance of God:  be
@c    gracious to me,

@c    33:11. And take the blessing which I have brought thee, and which God
@c    hath given me, who giveth all things.  He took it with much ado at his
@c    brother's earnest pressing him,

@c    33:12. And said:  Let us go on together, and I will accompany thee in
@c    thy journey.

@c    33:13. And Jacob said:  My lord, thou knowest that I have with me tender
@c    children, and sheep, and kine with young:  which if I should cause to be
@c    overdriven, in one day all the flocks will die.

@c    33:14. May it please my lord to go before his servant:  and I will
@c    follow softly after him, as I shall see my children to be able, until I
@c    come to my lord in Seir.

@c    33:15. Esau answered:  I beseech thee, that some of the people, at
@c    least, who are with me, may stay to accompany thee in the way.  And he
@c    said:  There is no necessity:  I want nothing else but only to find
@c    favour, my lord, in thy sight.

@c    33:16. So Esau returned that day, the way that he came, to Seir.

@c    33:17. And Jacob came to Socoth:  where having built a house, and
@c    pitched tents, he called the name of the place Socoth, that is, Tents.

@c    33:18. And he passed over to Salem, a city of the Sichemites, which is
@c    in the land of Chanaan, after he returned from Mesopotamia of Syria:
@c    and he dwelt by the town.

@c    33:19. And he bought that part of the field, in which he pitched his
@c    tents, of the children of Hemor, the father of Sichem, for a hundred
@c    lambs.

@c    33:20. And raising an altar there, he invoked upon it the most mighty
@c    God of Israel.



@c    Genesis Chapter 34


@c    Dina is ravished, for which the Sichemites are destroyed.

@c    34:1. And Dina the daughter of Lia went out to see the women of that
@c    country.

@c    34:2. And when Sichem the son of Hemor the Hevite, the prince of that
@c    land, saw her, he was in love with her:  and took her away, and lay with
@c    her, ravishing the virgin.

@c    34:3. And his soul was fast knit unto her; and whereas she was sad, he
@c    comforted her with sweet words.

@c    34:4. And going to Hemor his father, he said:  Get me this damsel to
@c    wife.

@c    34:5. But when Jacob had heard this, his sons being absent, and
@c    employed in feeding the cattle, he held his peace till they came back.

@c    34:6. And when Hemor the father of Sichem was come out to speak to
@c    Jacob,

@c    34:7. Behold his sons came from the field:  and hearing what had passed,
@c    they were exceeding angry, because he had done a foul thing in Israel,
@c    and committed an unlawful act, in ravishing Jacob's daughter.

@c    34:8. And Hemor spoke to them:  The soul of my son Sichem has a longing
@c    for your daughter:  give her him to wife:

@c    34:9. And let us contract marriages one with another:  give us your
@c    daughters, and take you our daughters.

@c    34:10. And dwell with us:  the land is at your command, till, trade, and
@c    possess it.

@c    34:11. Sichem also said to her father and to her brethren:  Let me find
@c    favour in your sight, and whatsoever you shall appoint I will give:

@c    34:12. Raise the dowry, and ask gifts, and I will gladly give what you
@c    shall demand:  only give me this damsel to wife.

@c    34:13. The sons of Jacob answered Sichem and his father deceitfully,
@c    being enraged at the deflowering of their sister:

@c    Deceitfully. . .The sons of Jacob, on this occasion, were guilty of a
@c    grievous sin, as well by falsely pretending religion, as by excess of
@c    revenge:  though otherwise their zeal against so foul a crime was
@c    commendable.

@c    34:14. We cannot do what you demand, nor give our sister to one that is
@c    uncircumcised; which with us is unlawful and abominable.

@c    34:15. But in this we may be allied with you, if you will be like us,
@c    and all the male sex among you be circumcised:

@c    34:16. Then will we mutually give and take your daughters, and ours;
@c    and we will dwell with you, and will be one people:

@c    34:17. But if you will not be circumcised, we will take our daughter
@c    and depart.

@c    34:18. Their offer pleased Hemor, and Sichem, his son:

@c    34:19. And the young man made no delay, but forthwith fulfilled what
@c    was required:  for he loved the damsel exceedingly, and he was the
@c    greatest man in all his father's house.

@c    34:20. And going into the gate of the city, they spoke to the people:

@c    34:21. These men are peaceable, and are willing to dwell with us:  let
@c    them trade in the land, and till it, which being large and wide wanteth
@c    men to till it:  we shall take their daughters for wives, and we will
@c    give them ours.

@c    34:22. One thing there is for which so great a good is deferred:  We
@c    must circumcise every male among us, following the manner of the
@c    nation.

@c    34:23. And their substance, and cattle, and all that they possess,
@c    shall be ours; only in this let us condescend, and by dwelling
@c    together, we shall make one people.

@c    34:24. And they all agreed, and circumcised all the males.

@c    34:25. And behold the third day, when the pain of the wound was
@c    greatest:  two of the sons of Jacob, Simeon and Levi, the brothers of
@c    Dina, taking their swords, entered boldly into the city and slew all
@c    the men.

@c    34:26. And they killed also Hemor and Sichem, and took away their
@c    sister Dina out of Sichem's house.

@c    34:27. And when they were gone out, the other sons of Jacob came upon
@c    the slain; and plundered the city in revenge of the rape.

@c    34:28. And they took their sheep, and their herds, and their asses,
@c    wasting all they had in their houses and in their fields.

@c    34:29. And their children and wives they took captive.

@c    34:30. And when they had boldly perpetrated these things, Jacob said to
@c    Simeon and Levi:  You have troubled me, and made me hateful to the
@c    Chanaanites and Pherezites, the inhabitants of this land.  We are few:
@c    they will gather themselves together and kill me; and both I, and my
@c    house shall be destroyed.

@c    34:31. They answered:  Should they abuse our sister as a strumpet?



@c    Genesis Chapter 35


@c    Jacob purgeth his family from idols:  goeth by God's commandment to
@c    Bethel, and there buildeth an altar.  God appearing again to Jacob
@c    blesseth him, and changeth his name into Israel.  Rachel dieth in
@c    childbirth.  Isaac also dieth.

@c    35:1. In the mean time God said to Jacob:  Arise and go up to Bethel,
@c    and dwell there, and make there an altar to God, who appeared to thee
@c    when thou didst flee from Esau, thy brother.

@c    35:2. And Jacob having called together all his household, said:  Cast
@c    away the strange gods that are among you, and be cleansed, and change
@c    your garments.

@c    35:3. Arise, and let us go up to Bethel, that we may make there an
@c    altar to God; who heard me in the day of my affliction, and accompained
@c    me in my journey.

@c    35:4. So they gave him all the strange gods they had, and the earrings
@c    which were in their ears:  and he buried them under the turpentine tree,
@c    that is behind the city of Sichem.

@c    35:5. And when they were departed, the terror of God fell upon all the
@c    cities round about, and they durst not pursue after them as they went
@c    away.

@c    35:6. And Jacob came to Luza, which is in the land of Chanaan, surnamed
@c    Bethel:  he and all the people that were with him.

@c    35:7. And he built there an altar, and called the name of that place,
@c    The house of God:  for there God appeared to him when he fled from his
@c    brother.

@c    35:8. At the same time Debora, the nurse of Rebecca, died, and was
@c    buried at the foot of Bethel, under an oak, and the name of that place
@c    was called, The oak of weeping.

@c    35:9. And God appeared again to Jacob, after he returned from
@c    Mesopotamia of Syria, and he blessed him,

@c    35:10. Saying:  Thou shalt not be called any more Jacob, but Israel
@c    shall be thy name.  And he called him Israel.

@c    Israel. . .This name signifieth one that prevaileth with God.

@c    35:11. And said to him:  I am God almighty, increase thou and be
@c    multiplied.  Nations and peoples of nations shall be from thee, and
@c    kings shall come out of thy loins.

@c    35:12. And the land which I gave to Abraham and Isaac, I will give to
@c    thee, and to thy seed after thee.

@c    35:13. And he departed from him.

@c    35:14. But he set up a monument of stone, in the place where God had
@c    spoken to him:  pouring drink-offerings upon it, and pouring oil
@c    thereon:

@c    35:15. And calling the name of that place Bethel.

@c    35:16. And going forth from thence, he came in the spring time to the
@c    land which leadeth to Ephrata:  wherein when Rachel was in travail,

@c    35:17. By reason of her hard labour, she began to be in danger, and the
@c    midwife said to her:  Fear not, for thou shalt have this son also.

@c    35:18. And when her soul was departing for pain, and death was now at
@c    hand, she called the name of her son Benoni, that is, the son of my
@c    pain:  but his father called him Benjamin, that is, the son of the right
@c    hand.

@c    35:19. So Rachel died, and was buried in the highway that leadeth to
@c    Ephrata, this is Bethlehem.

@c    35:20. And Jacob erected a pillar over her sepulchre:  this is the
@c    pillar of Rachel's monument, to this day.

@c    35:21. Departing thence, he pitched his tent beyond the Flock tower.

@c    35:22. And when he dwelt in that country, Ruben went, and slept with
@c    Bala the concubine of his father:  which he was not ignorant of.  Now the
@c    sons of Jacob were twelve.

@c    The concubine. . .She was his lawful wife; but, according to the style
@c    of the Hebrews, is called concubine, because of her servile extraction.

@c    35:23. The sons of Lia:  Ruben the first born, and Simeon, and Levi, and
@c    Juda, and Issachar, and Zabulon.

@c    35:24. The sons of Rachel:  Joseph and Benjamin.

@c    35:25. The sons of Bala, Rachel's handmaid:  Dan and Nephthali.

@c    35:26. The sons of Zelpha, Lia's handmaid:  Gad and Aser:  these are the
@c    sons of Jacob, that were born to him in Mesopotamia of Syria.

@c    35:27. And he came to Isaac his father in Mambre, the city of Arbee,
@c    this is Hebron:  wherein Abraham and Isaac sojourned.

@c    35:28. And the days of Isaac were a hundred and eighty years.

@c    35:29. And being spent with age he died, and was gathered to his
@c    people, being old and full of days:  and his sons Esau and Jacob buried
@c    him.



@c    Genesis Chapter 36


@c    Esau with his wives and children parteth from Jacob.  An account of his
@c    descendants, and of the first kings of Edom.

@c    36:1. And these are the generations of Esau, the same is Edom.

@c    36:2. Esau took wives of the daughters of Chanaan:  Ada the daughter of
@c    Elon the Hethite, and Oolibama the daughter of Ana, the daughter of
@c    Sebeon the Hevite:

@c    Ada. . .These wives of Esau are called by other names, Gen. 26.  But it
@c    was very common amongst the ancients for the same persons to have two
@c    names, as Esau himself was also called Edom.

@c    36:3. And Basemath, the daughter of Ismael, sister of Nabajoth.

@c    36:4. And Ada bore Eliphaz:  Basemath bore Rahuel.

@c    36:5. Oolibama bore Jehus, and Ihelon, and Core.  These are the sons of
@c    Esau, that were born to him in the land of Chanaan.

@c    36:6. And Esau took his wives, and his sons and daughters, and every
@c    soul of his house, and his substance, and cattle, and all that he was
@c    able to acquire in the land of Chanaan:  and went into another country,
@c    and departed from his brother Jacob.

@c    36:7. For they were exceeding rich, and could not dwell together:
@c    neither was the land in which they sojourned able to bear them, for the
@c    multitude of their flocks.

@c    36:8. And Esau dwelt in mount Seir:  he is Edom.

@c    36:9. And these are the generations of Esau, the father of Edom, in
@c    mount Seir.

@c    36:10. And these the names of his sons:  Eliphaz the son of Ada, the
@c    wife of Esau:  and Rahuel, the son of Basemath, his wife.

@c    36:11. And Eliphaz had sons:  Theman, Omar, Sepho, and Gatham and Cenez.

@c    36:12. And Thamna was the concubine of Eliphaz, the son of Esau:  and
@c    she bore him Amalech.  These are the sons of Ada, the wife of Esau.

@c    36:13. And the sons of Rahuel were Nahath and Zara, Samma and Meza.
@c    These were the sons of Basemath, the wife of Esau.

@c    36:14. And these were the sons of Oolibama, the daughter of Ana, the
@c    daughter of Sebeon, the wife of Esau, whom she bore to him, Jehus, and
@c    Ihelon, and Core.

@c    36:15. These were dukes of the sons of Esau:  the sons of Eliphaz, the
@c    firstborn of Esau:  duke Theman, duke Omar, duke Sepho, duke Cenez,

@c    36:16. Duke Core, duke Gatham, duke Amalech:  these are the sons of
@c    Eliphaz, in the land of Edom, and these the sons of Ada.

@c    36:17. And these were the sons of Rahuel, the son of Esau:  duke Nahath,
@c    duke Zara, duke Samma, duke Meza.  And these are the dukes of Rahuel, in
@c    the land of Edom:  these the sons of Basemath, the wife of Esau.

@c    36:18. And these the sons of Oolibama, the wife of Esau:  duke Jehus,
@c    duke Ihelon, duke Core.  These are the dukes of Oolibama, the daughter
@c    of Ana, and wife of Esau.

@c    36:19. These are the sons of Esau, and these the dukes of them:  the
@c    same is Edom.

@c    36:20. These are the sons of Seir, the Horrite, the inhabitants of the
@c    land:  Lotan, and Sobal, and Sebeon, and Ana,

@c    36:21. And Dison, and Eser, and Disan.  These are dukes of the Horrites,
@c    the sons of Seir, in the land of Edom.

@c    36:22. And Lotan had sons:  Hori and Heman.  And the sister of Lotan was
@c    Thamna.

@c    36:23. And these the sons of Sobal:  Alvan, and Manahat, and Ebal, and
@c    Sepho, and Onam.

@c    36:24. And these the sons of Sebeon:  Aia and Ana.  This is Ana that
@c    found the hot waters in the wilderness, when he fed the asses of
@c    Sebeon, his father:

@c    36:25. And he had a son Dison, and a daughter Oolibama.

@c    36:26. And these were the sons of Dison:  Hamdan, and Eseban, and
@c    Jethram, and Charan.

@c    36:27. These also were the sons of Eser:  Balaan, and Zavan, and Acan.

@c    36:28. And Dison had sons:  Hus and Aram.

@c    36:29. These were dukes of the Horrites:  duke Lotan, duke Sobal, duke
@c    Sebeon, duke Ana,

@c    36:30. Duke Dison, duke Eser, duke Disan:  these were dukes of the
@c    Horrites that ruled in the land of Seir.

@c    36:31. And the kings that ruled in the land of Edom, before the
@c    children of Israel had a king, were these:

@c    36:32. Bela the son of Beor, and the name of his city Denaba.

@c    36:33. And Bela died, and Jobab, the son of Zara, of Bosra, reigned in
@c    his stead.

@c    36:34. And when Jobab was dead, Husam, of the land of the Themanites,
@c    reigned in his stead.

@c    36:35. And after his death, Adad, the son of Badad, reigned in his
@c    stead, who defeated the Madianites in the country of Boab; and the name
@c    of his city was Avith.

@c    36:36. And when Adad was dead, there reigned in his stead, Semla, of
@c    Masreca.

@c    36:37. And he being dead, Saul, of the river Rohoboth, reigned in his
@c    stead.

@c    36:38. And when he also was dead, Balanan, the son of Achobor,
@c    succeeded to the kingdom.

@c    36:39. This man also being dead, Adar reigned in his place; and the
@c    name of his city was Phau:  and his wife was called Meetabel, the
@c    daughter of Matred, daughter of Mezaab.

@c    36:40. And these are the names of the dukes of Esau in their kindreds,
@c    and places, and callings:  duke Thamna, duke Alva, duke Jetheth,

@c    36:41. Duke Oolibama, duke Ela, duke Phinon,

@c    36:42. Duke Cenez, duke Theman, duke Mabsar,

@c    36:43. Duke Magdiel, duke Hiram:  these are the dukes of Edom dwelling
@c    in the land of their government; the same is Esau, the father of the
@c    Edomites.



@c    Genesis Chapter 37


@c    Joseph's dreams:  he is sold by his brethren, and carried into Egypt.

@c    37:1. And Jacob dwelt in the land of Chanaan, wherein his father
@c    sojourned.

@c    37:2. And these are his generations:  Joseph, when he was sixteen years
@c    old, was feeding the flock with his brethren, being but a boy:  and he
@c    was with the sons of Bala and of Zelpha his father's wives:  and he
@c    accused his brethren to his father of a most wicked crime.

@c    37:3. Now Israel loved Joseph above all his sons, because he had him in
@c    his old age:  and he made him a coat of divers colours.

@c    37:4. And his brethren seeing that he was loved by his father, more
@c    than all his sons, hated hem, and could not speak peaceably to him.

@c    37:5. Now it fell out also that he told his brethren a dream, that he
@c    had dreamed:  which occasioned them to hate him the more.

@c    A dream. . .These dreams of Joseph were prophetical, and sent from God;
@c    as were also those which he interpreted, Gen. 40. and 41.; otherwise
@c    generally speaking, the observing of dreams is condemned in the
@c    Scripture, as superstitious and sinful.  See Deut. 18.10; Eccli. 34.2,3.

@c    37:6. And he said to them:  Hear my dream which I dreamed.

@c    37:7. I thought we were binding sheaves in the field:  and my sheaf
@c    arose as it were, and stood, and your sheaves standing about bowed down
@c    before my sheaf.

@c    37:8. His brethren answered:  Shalt thou be our king?  or shall we be
@c    subject to thy dominion?  Therefore this matter of his dreams and words
@c    ministered nourishment to their envy and hatred.

@c    37:9. He dreamed also another dream, which he told his brethren,
@c    saying:  I saw in a dream, as it were the sun, and the moon, and eleven
@c    stars worshipping me.

@c    37:10. And when he had told this to his father, and brethren, his
@c    father rebuked him and said:  What meaneth this dream that thou hast
@c    dreamed?  shall I and thy mother, and thy brethren worship thee upon the
@c    earth?

@c    Worship. . .This word is not used here to signify divine worship, but an
@c    inferior veneration, expressed by the bowing of the body, and that,
@c    according to the manner of the eastern nations, down to the ground.

@c    37:11. His brethren therefore envied him:  but his father considered the
@c    thing with himself.

@c    37:12. And when his brethren abode in Sechem, feeding their father's
@c    flocks,

@c    37:13. Israel said to him:  Thy brethren feed the sheep in Sichem:  come,
@c    I will send thee to them.  And when he answered:

@c    37:14. I am ready:  he said to him:  Go, and see if all things be well
@c    with thy brethren, and the cattle:  and bring me word again what is
@c    doing.  So being sent from the vale of Hebron, he came to Sichem:

@c    37:15. And a man found him there wandering in the field, and asked what
@c    he sought.

@c    37:16. But he answered:  I seek my brethren, tell me where they feed the
@c    flocks.

@c    37:17. And the man said to him:  They are departed from this place:  for
@c    I heard them say:  Let us go to Dothain.  And Joseph went forward after
@c    his brethren, and found them in Dothain.

@c    37:18. And when they saw him afar off, before he came nigh them, they
@c    thought to kill him:

@c    37:19. And said one to another:  Behold the dreamer cometh.

@c    37:20. Come, let us kill him, and cast him into some old pit:  and we
@c    will say:  Some evil beast hath devoured him:  and then it shall appear
@c    what his dreams avail him:

@c    37:21. And Ruben hearing this, endeavoured to deliver him out of their
@c    hands, and said:

@c    37:22. Do not take away his life, nor shed his blood:  but cast him into
@c    this pit, that is in the wilderness, and keep your hands harmless:  now
@c    he said this, being desirous to deliver him out of their hands and to
@c    restore him to his father.

@c    37:23. And as soon as he came to his brethren, they forthwith stript
@c    him of his outside coat, that was of divers colours:

@c    37:24. And cast him into an old pit where there was not water.

@c    37:25. And sitting down to eat bread, they saw some Ismaelites on their
@c    way coming from Galaad, with their camels, carrying spices, and balm,
@c    and myrrh to Egypt.

@c    37:26. And Juda said to his brethren:  What will it profit us to kill
@c    our brother, and conceal his blood?

@c    37:27. It is better that he be sold to the Ismaelites, and that our
@c    hands be not defiled:  for he is our brother and our flesh.  His brethren
@c    agreed to his words.

@c    37:28. And when the Madianite merchants passed by, they drew him out of
@c    the pit, and sold him to the Ismaelites, for twenty pieces of silver:
@c    and they led him into Egypt.

@c    37:29. And Ruben returning to the pit, found not the boy:

@c    37:30. And rending his garments he went to his brethren, and said:  The
@c    boy doth not appear, and whither shall I go?

@c    37:31. And they took his coat, and dipped it in the blood of a kid,
@c    which they had killed:

@c    37:32. Sending some to carry it to their father, and to say:  This we
@c    have found:  see whether it be thy son's coat, or not.

@c    37:33. And the father acknowledging it, said:  It is my son's coat, an
@c    evil wild beast hath eaten him, a beast hath devoured Joseph.

@c    37:34. And tearing his garments, he put on sackcloth, mourning for his
@c    son a long time.

@c    37:35. And all his children being gathered together to comfort their
@c    father in his sorrow, he would not receive comfort, but said:  I will go
@c    down to my son into hell, mourning.  And whilst he continued weeping,

@c    Into hell. . .That is, into limbo, the place where the souls of the just
@c    were received before the death of our Redeemer.  For allowing that the
@c    word hell sometimes is taken for the grave, it cannot be so taken in
@c    this place; since Jacob did not believe his son to be in the grave,
@c    (whom he supposed to be devoured by a wild beast,) and therefore could
@c    not mean to go down to him thither:  but certainly meant the place of
@c    rest where he believed his soul to be.

@c    37:36. The Madianites sold Joseph in Egypt to Putiphar, an eunuch of
@c    Pharao, captain of the soldiers.

@c    An eunuch. . .This word sometimes signifies a chamberlain, courtier, or
@c    officer of the king:  and so it is taken in this place.



@c    Genesis Chapter 38


@c    The sons of Juda:  the death of Her and Onan:  the birth of Phares and
@c    Zara.

@c    38:1. At that time Juda went down from his brethren, and turned in to a
@c    certain Odollamite, named Hiras.

@c    38:2. And he saw there the daughter of a man of Chanaan, called Sue:
@c    and taking her to wife, he went in unto her.

@c    38:3. And she conceived, and bore a son, and called his name Her.

@c    38:4. And conceiving again, she bore a son, and called him Onan.

@c    38:5. She bore also a third:  whom she called Sela.  After whose birth,
@c    she ceased to bear any more.

@c    38:6. And Juda took a wife for Her, his first born, whose name was
@c    Thamar.

@c    38:7. And Her, the first born of Juda, was wicked in the sight of the
@c    Lord:  and was slain by him.

@c    38:8. Juda, therefore, said to Onan his son:  Go in to thy brother's
@c    wife and marry her, that thou mayst raise seed to thy brother.

@c    38:9. He knowing that the children should not be his, when he went in
@c    to his brother's wife, he spilled his seed upon the ground, lest
@c    children should be born in his brother's name.

@c    38:10. And therefore the Lord slew him, because he did a detestable
@c    thing:

@c    38:11. Wherefore Juda said to Thamar his daughter-in-law:  Remain a
@c    widow in thy father's house, till Sela my son grow up:  for he was
@c    afraid lest he also might die, as his brethren did.  She went her way,
@c    and dwelt in her father's house.

@c    38:12. And after many days were past:  the daughter of Sue the wife of
@c    Juda died:  and when he had taken comfort after his mourning, he went up
@c    to Thamnas, to the shearers of his sheep, he and Hiras the Odollamite,
@c    the shepherd of his flock.

@c    38:13. And it was told Thamar that her father-in-law was come up to
@c    Thamnas to shear his sheep.

@c    38:14. And she put off the garments of her widowhood, and took a veil:
@c    and changing her dress, sat in the cross way, that leadeth to Thamnas:
@c    because Sela was grown up, and she had not been married to him.

@c    38:15. When Juda saw her, he thought she was a harlot:  for she had
@c    covered her face, lest she should be known.

@c    38:16. And going to her, he said:  Suffer me to lie with thee:  for he
@c    knew her not to be his daughter-in-law.  And she answered:  What wilt
@c    thou give me to enjoy my company?

@c    38:17. He said:  I will send thee a kid out of the flock.  And when she
@c    said again:  I will suffer what thou wilt, if thou give me a pledge,
@c    till thou send what thou promisest.

@c    38:18. Juda said:  What wilt thou have for a pledge?  She answered:  Thy
@c    ring and bracelet, and the staff which thou holdest in thy hand.  The
@c    woman therefore at one copulation conceived.

@c    38:19. And she arose and went her way:  and putting off the apparel
@c    which she had taken, put on the garments of her widowhood.

@c    38:20. And Juda sent a kid by his shepherd, the Odollamite, that he
@c    might receive the pledge again, which he had given to the woman:  but
@c    he, not finding her,

@c    38:21. Asked the men of that place:  Where is the woman that sat in the
@c    cross way?  And when they all made answer:  There was no harlot in this
@c    place,

@c    38:22. He returned to Juda, and said to him:  I have not found her;
@c    moreover, the men of that place said to me, that there never sat a
@c    harlot there.

@c    38:23. Juda said:  Let her take it to herself, surely she cannot charge
@c    us with a lie, I sent the kid which I promised:  and thou didst not find
@c    her.

@c    38:24. And behold, after three months, they told Juda, saying:  Thamar,
@c    thy daughter-in-law, hath played the harlot, and she appeareth to have
@c    a big belly.  And Juda said:  Bring her out that she may be burnt.

@c    38:25. But when she was led to execution, she sent to her father in
@c    law, saying:  By the man, to whom these things belong, I am with child.
@c    See whose ring, and bracelet, and staff this is.

@c    38:26. But he acknowledging the gifts, said:  She is juster than I:
@c    because I did not give her to Sela, my son.  However he knew her no
@c    more.

@c    38:27. And when she was ready to be brought to bed, there appeared
@c    twins in her womb:  and in the very delivery of the infants, one put
@c    forth a hand, whereon the midwife tied a scarlet thread, saying:

@c    38:28. This shall come forth the first.

@c    38:29. But he drawing back his hand, the other came forth:  and the
@c    woman said:  Why is the partition divided for thee?  and therefore called
@c    his name Phares.

@c    Phares. . .That is, a breach or division.

@c    38:30. Afterwards his brother came out, on whose hand was the scarlet
@c    thread:  and she called his name Zara.



@c    Genesis Chapter 39


@c    Joseph hath charge of his master's house:  rejecteth his mistress's
@c    solicitations:  is falsely accused by her, and cast into prison, where
@c    he hath the charge of all the prisoners.

@c    39:1. And Joseph was brought into Egypt, and Putiphar, an eunuch of
@c    Pharao, chief captain of the army, an Egyptian, bought him of the
@c    Ismaelites, by whom he was brought.

@c    39:2. And the Lord was with him, and he was a prosperous man in all
@c    things:  and he dwelt in his master's house:

@c    39:3. Who knew very well that the Lord was with him, and made all that
@c    he did to prosper in his hand.

@c    39:4. And Joseph found favour in the sight of his master, and
@c    ministered to him:  and being set over all by him, he governed the house
@c    committed to him, and all things that were delivered to him:

@c    39:5. And the Lord blessed the house of the Egyptian for Joseph's sake,
@c    and multiplied all his substance, both at home and in the fields.

@c    39:6. Neither knew he any other thing, but the bread which he ate.  And
@c    Joseph was of a beautiful countenance, and comely to behold.

@c    39:7. And after many days, his mistress cast her eyes on Joseph, and
@c    said:  Lie with me.

@c    39:8. But he in no wise consenting to that wicked act said to her:
@c    Behold, my master hath delivered all things to me, and knoweth not what
@c    he hath in his own house:

@c    39:9. Neither is there any thing which is not in my power, or that he
@c    hath not delivered to me, but thee, who art his wife; how then can I do
@c    this wicked thing, and sin against my God?

@c    39:10. With such words as these day by day, both the woman was
@c    importunate with the young man, and he refused the adultery.

@c    39:11. Now it happened on a certain day, that Joseph went into the
@c    house, and was doing some business, without any man with him:

@c    39:12. And she catching the skirt of his garment, said:  Lie with me.
@c    But he leaving the garment in her hand, fled, and went out.

@c    39:13. And when the woman saw the garment in her hands, and herself
@c    disregarded,

@c    39:14. She called to her the men of her house, and said to them:  See,
@c    he hath brought in a Hebrew, to abuse us:  he came in to me, to lie with
@c    me; and when I cried out,

@c    39:15. And he heard my voice, he left the garment that I held, and got
@c    him out.

@c    39:16. For a proof therefore of her fidelity, she kept the garment, and
@c    shewed it to her husband when he returned home:

@c    A proof of her fidelity. . .or an argument to gain credit, argumentum
@c    fidei.

@c    39:17. And said:  The Hebrew servant, whom thou hast brought, came to me
@c    to abuse me.

@c    39:18. And when he heard me cry, he left the garment which I held, and
@c    fled out.

@c    39:19. His master hearing these things, and giving too much credit to
@c    his wife's words, was very angry,

@c    39:20. And cast Joseph into the prison, where the king's prisoners were
@c    kept, and he was there shut up.

@c    39:21. But the Lord was with Joseph, and having mercy upon him gave him
@c    favour in the sight of the chief keeper of the prison:

@c    39:22. Who delivered into his hand all the prisoners that were kept in
@c    custody:  and whatsoever was done, was under him.

@c    39:23. Neither did he himself know any thing, having committed all
@c    things to him:  for the Lord was with him, and made all that he did to
@c    prosper.



@c    Genesis Chapter 40


@c    Joseph interpreteth the dreams of two of Pharao's servants in prison:
@c    the event declareth the interpretations to be true, but Joseph is
@c    forgotten.

@c    40:1. After this, it came to pass, that two eunuchs, the butler and the
@c    baker of the king of Egypt, offended their lord.

@c    40:2. And Pharao being angry with them, (now the one was chief butler,
@c    the other chief baker,)

@c    40:3. He sent them to the prison of the commander of the soldiers, in
@c    which Joseph also was prisoner.

@c    40:4. But the keeper of the prison delivered them to Joseph, and he
@c    served them.  Some little time passed, and they were kept in custody.

@c    40:5. And they both dreamed a dream the same night, according to the
@c    interpretation agreeing to themselves:

@c    40:6. And when Joseph was come into them in the morning, and saw them
@c    sad,

@c    40:7. He asked them, saying:  Why is your countenance sadder today than
@c    usual?

@c    40:8. They answered:  We have dreamed a dream, and there is nobody to
@c    interpret it to us.  And Joseph said to them:  Doth not interpretation
@c    belong to God?  Tell me what you have dreamed:

@c    Doth not interpretation belong to God?. . .When dreams are from God, as
@c    these were, the interpretation of them is a gift of God.  But the
@c    generality of dreams are not of this sort; but either proceed from the
@c    natural complexions and dispositions of persons, or the roving of their
@c    imaginations in the day on such objects as they are much affected with,
@c    or from their mind being disturbed with cares and troubles, and
@c    oppressed with bodily infirmities:  or they are suggested by evil
@c    spirits, to flatter, or to terrify weak minds, in order to gain belief,
@c    and so draw them into error or superstition; or at least to trouble
@c    them in their sleep, whom they cannot move when they are awake:  so that
@c    the general rule, with regard to dreams, is not to observe them, nor to
@c    give any credit to them.

@c    40:9. The chief butler first told his dream:  I saw before me a vine,

@c    40:10. On which were three branches, which by little and little sent
@c    out buds, and after the blossoms brought forth ripe grapes:

@c    40:11. And the cup of Pharao was in my hand:  and I took the grapes, and
@c    pressed them into the cup which I held, and I gave the cup to Pharao.

@c    40:12. Joseph answered:  This is the interpretation of the dream:  The
@c    three branches, are yet three days:

@c    40:13. After which Pharao will remember thy service, and will restore
@c    thee to thy former place:  and thou shalt present him the cup according
@c    to thy office, as before thou was wont to do.

@c    40:14. Only remember me when it shall be well with thee, and do me this
@c    kindness:  to put Pharao in mind to take me out of this prison:

@c    40:15. For I was stolen away out of the land of the Hebrews, and here
@c    without any fault was cast into the dungeon.

@c    40:16. The chief baker seeing that he had wisely interpreted the dream,
@c    said:  I also dreamed a dream, That I had three baskets of meal upon my
@c    head:

@c    40:17. And that in one basket which was uppermost, I carried all meats
@c    that are made by the art of baking, and that the birds ate out of it.

@c    40:18. Joseph answered:  This is the interpretation of the dream:  The
@c    three baskets, are yet three days:

@c    40:19. After which Pharao will take thy head from thee, and hang thee
@c    on a cross, and the birds shall tear thy flesh.

@c    40:20. The third day after this was the birthday of Pharao:  and he made
@c    a great feast for his servants, and at the banquet remembered the chief
@c    butler, and the chief baker.

@c    40:21. And he restored the one to his place, to present him the cup:

@c    40:22. The other he hanged on a gibbet, that the truth of the
@c    interpreter might be shewn.

@c    40:23. But the chief butler, when things prospered with him, forgot his
@c    interpreter.



@c    Genesis Chapter 41


@c    Joseph interpreteth the two dreams of Pharao:  he is made ruler over all
@c    Egypt.

@c    41:1. After two years Pharao had a dream.  He thought he stood by the
@c    river,

@c    41:2. Out of which came up seven kine, very beautiful and fat:  and they
@c    fed in marshy places.

@c    41:3. Other seven also came up out of the river, ill-favoured, and lean
@c    fleshed:  and they fed on the very bank of the river, in green places:

@c    41:4. And they devoured them, whose bodies were very beautiful and well
@c    conditioned.  So Pharao awoke.

@c    41:5. He slept again, and dreamed another dream:  Seven ears of corn
@c    came up upon one stalk full and fair:

@c    41:6. Then seven other ears sprung up thin and blasted,

@c    41:7. And devoured all the beauty of the former.  Pharao awaked after
@c    his rest:

@c    41:8. And when morning was come, being struck with fear, he sent to all
@c    the interpreters of Egypt, and to all the wise men:  and they being
@c    called for, he told them his dream, and there was not any one that
@c    could interpret it.

@c    41:9. Then at length the chief butler remembering, said:  I confess my
@c    sin:

@c    41:10. The king being angry with his servants, commanded me and the
@c    chief baker to be cast into the prison of the captain of the soldiers.

@c    41:11. Where in one night both of us dreamed a dream foreboding things
@c    to come.

@c    41:12. There was there a young man a Hebrew, servant to the same
@c    captain of the soldiers:  to whom we told our dreams,

@c    41:13. And we heard what afterwards the event of the thing proved to be
@c    so.  For I was restored to my office:  and he was hanged upon a gibbet.

@c    41:14. Forthwith at the king's command Joseph was brought out of the
@c    prison, and they shaved him:  and changing his apparel brought him in to
@c    him.

@c    41:15. And he said to him:  I have dreamed dreams, and there is no one
@c    that can expound them:  Now I have heard that thou art very wise at
@c    interpreting them:

@c    41:16. Joseph answered:  Without me, God shall give Pharao a prosperous
@c    answer.

@c    41:17. So Pharao told what he had dreamed:  Methought I stood upon the
@c    bank of the river,

@c    41:18. And seven kine came up out of the river, exceeding beautiful and
@c    full of flesh:  and they grazed on green places in a marshy pasture.

@c    41:19. And behold, there followed these, other seven kine, so very
@c    ill-favoured and lean, that I never saw the like in the land of Egypt:

@c    41:20. And they devoured and consumed the former,

@c    41:21. And yet gave no mark of their being full:  but were as lean and
@c    ill-favoured as before.  I awoke, and then fell asleep again,

@c    41:22. And dreamed a dream:  Seven ears of corn grew up upon one stalk,
@c    full and very fair.

@c    41:23. Other seven also thin and blasted, sprung of the stalk:

@c    41:24. And they devoured the beauty of the former:  I told this dream to
@c    the conjecturers, and there is no man that can expound it.

@c    41:25. Joseph answered:  The king's dream is one:  God hath shewn to
@c    Pharao what he is about to do.

@c    41:26. The seven beautiful kine, and the seven full ears, are seven
@c    years of plenty:  and both contain the same meaning of the dream.

@c    41:27. And the seven lean and thin kine that came up after them, and
@c    the seven thin ears that were blasted with the burning wind, are seven
@c    years of famine to come:

@c    41:28. Which shall be fulfilled in this order.

@c    41:29. Behold, there shall come seven years of great plenty in the
@c    whole land of Egypt:

@c    41:30. After which shall follow other seven years of so great scarcity,
@c    that all the abundance before shall be forgotten:  for the famine shall
@c    consume all the land,

@c    41:31. And the greatness of the scarcity shall destroy the greatness of
@c    the plenty.

@c    41:32. And for that thou didst see the second time a dream pertaining
@c    to the same thing:  it is a token of the certainty, and that the word of
@c    God cometh to pass, and is fulfilled speedily.

@c    41:33. Now therefore let the king provide a wise and industrious man,
@c    and make him ruler over the land of Egypt:

@c    41:34. That he may appoint overseers over all the countries:  and gather
@c    into barns the fifth part of the fruits, during the seven fruitful
@c    years,

@c    41:35. That shall now presently ensue:  and let all the corn be laid up,
@c    under Pharao's hands, and be reserved in the cities.

@c    41:36. And let it be in readiness, against the famine of seven years to
@c    come, which shall oppress Egypt, and the land shall not be consumed
@c    with scarcity.

@c    41:37. The counsel pleased Pharao, and all his servants.

@c    41:38. And he said to them:  Can we find such another man, that is full
@c    of the spirit of God?

@c    41:39. He said therefore to Joseph:  Seeing God hath shewn thee all that
@c    thou hast said, can I find one wiser and one like unto thee?

@c    41:40. Thou shalt be over my house, and at the commandment of thy mouth
@c    all the people shall obey:  only in the kingly throne will I be above
@c    thee.

@c    41:41. And again Pharao said to Joseph:  Behold, I have appointed thee
@c    over the whole land of Egypt.

@c    41:42. And he took his ring from his own hand, and gave it into his
@c    hand:  and he put upon him a robe of silk, and put a chain of gold about
@c    his neck.

@c    41:43. And he made him go up into his second chariot, the crier
@c    proclaiming that all should bow their knee before him, and that they
@c    should know he was made governor over the whole land of Egypt.

@c    41:44. And the king said to Joseph:  I am Pharao:  without thy
@c    commandment no man shall move hand or foot in all the land of Egypt.

@c    41:45. And he turned his name, and called him in the Egyptian tongue
@c    the saviour of the world.  And he gave him to wife Aseneth, the daughter
@c    of Putiphare, priest of Heliopolis.  Then Joseph went out to the land of
@c    Egypt.

@c    The saviour of the world. . .Zaphnah paaneah.

@c    41:46. (Now he was thirty years old when he stood before king Pharao),
@c    and he went round all the countries of Egypt.

@c    41:47. And the fruitfulness of the seven years came:  and the corn being
@c    bound up into sheaves, was gathered together into the barns of Egypt.

@c    41:48. And all the abundance of grain was laid up in every city.

@c    41:49. And there was so great abundance of wheat, that it was equal to
@c    the sand of the sea, and the plenty exceeded measure.

@c    41:50. And before the famine came, Joseph had two sons born:  whom
@c    Aseneth, the daughter of Putiphare, priest of Heliopolis, bore unto
@c    him.

@c    41:51. And he called the name of the firstborn Manasses, saying:  God
@c    hath made me to forget all my labours, and my father's house.

@c    Manasses. . .That is, oblivion, or forgetting.

@c    41:52. And he named the second Ephraim, saying:  God hath made me to
@c    grow in the land of my poverty.

@c    Ephraim. . .That is, fruitful, or growing.

@c    41:53. Now when the seven years of plenty that had been in Egypt were
@c    passed:

@c    41:54. The seven years of scarcity, which Joseph had foretold, began to
@c    come:  and the famine prevailed in the whole world, but there was bread
@c    in all the land of Egypt.

@c    41:55. And when there also they began to be famished, the people cried
@c    to Pharao, for food.  And he said to them:  Go to Joseph:  and do all
@c    that he shall say to you.

@c    41:56. And the famine increased daily in all the land:  and Joseph
@c    opened all the barns, and sold to the Egyptians:  for the famine had
@c    oppressed them also.

@c    41:57. And all provinces came into Egypt, to buy food, and to seek some
@c    relief of their want.



@c    Genesis Chapter 42


@c    Jacob sendeth his ten sons to buy corn in Egypt.  Their treatment by
@c    Joseph.

@c    42:1. And Jacob hearing that food was sold in Egypt, said to his sons:
@c    Why are ye careless?

@c    42:2. I have heard that wheat is sold in Egypt:  Go ye down, and buy us
@c    necessaries, that we may live, and not be consumed with want.

@c    42:3. So the ten brethren of Joseph went down, to buy corn in Egypt:

@c    42:4. Whilst Benjamin was kept at home by Jacob, who said to his
@c    brethren:  Lest perhaps he take any harm in the journey.

@c    42:5. And they entered into the land of Egypt with others that went to
@c    buy.  For the famine was in the land of Chanaan.

@c    42:6. And Joseph was governor in the land of Egypt, and corn was sold
@c    by his direction to the people.  And when his brethren had bowed down to
@c    him,

@c    42:7. And he knew them, he spoke as it were to strangers, somewhat
@c    roughly, asking them:  Whence came you?  They answered:  From the land of
@c    Chanaan, to buy necessaries of life.

@c    42:8. And though he knew his brethren, he was not known by them.

@c    42:9. And remembering the dreams, which formerly he had dreamed, he
@c    said to them:  You are spies.  You are come to view the weaker parts of
@c    the land.

@c    You are spies. . .This he said by way of examining them, to see what
@c    they would answer.

@c    42:10. But they said:  It is not so, my lord; but thy servants are come
@c    to buy food.

@c    42:11. We are all the sons of one man:  we are come as peaceable men,
@c    neither do thy servants go about any evil.

@c    42:12. And he answered them:  It is otherwise:  you are come to consider
@c    the unfenced parts of this land.

@c    42:13. But they said:  We thy servants are twelve brethren, the sons of
@c    one man in the land of Chanaan:  the youngest is with our father, the
@c    other is not living.

@c    42:14. He saith, This is it that I said:  You are spies.

@c    42:15. I shall now presently try what you are:  by the health of Pharao,
@c    you shall not depart hence, until your youngest brother come.

@c    42:16. Send one of you to fetch him:  and you shall be in prison, till
@c    what you have said be proved, whether it be true or false:  or else by
@c    the health of Pharao you are spies.

@c    Or else by the health of Pharao you are spies. . .That is, if these
@c    things you say be proved false, you are to be held for spies for your
@c    lying, and shall be treated as such.  Joseph dealt in this manner with
@c    his brethren, to bring them by the means of affliction to a sense of
@c    their former sin, and a sincere repentance for it.

@c    42:17. So he put them in prison three days.

@c    42:18. And the third day he brought them out of prison, and said:  Do as
@c    I have said, and you shall live:  for I fear God.

@c    42:19. If you be peaceable men, let one of your brethren be bound in
@c    prison:  and go ye your ways, and carry the corn that you have bought,
@c    unto your houses.

@c    42:20. And bring your youngest brother to me, that I may find your
@c    words to be true, and you may not die.  They did as he had said.

@c    42:21. And they talked one to another:  We deserve to suffer these
@c    things, because we have sinned against our brother, seeing the anguish
@c    of his soul, when he besought us, and we would not hear:  therefore is
@c    this affliction come upon us.

@c    42:22. And Ruben, one of them, said:  Did not I say to you:  Do not sin
@c    against the boy; and you would not hear me?  Behold his blood is
@c    required.

@c    42:23. And they knew not that Joseph understood, because he spoke to
@c    them by an interpreter.

@c    42:24. And he turned himself away a little while, and wept:  and
@c    returning, he spoke to them.

@c    42:25. And taking Simeon, and binding him in their presence, he
@c    commanded his servants to fill their sacks with wheat, and to put every
@c    man's money again in their sacks, and to give them besides provisions
@c    for the way:  and they did so.

@c    42:26. But they having loaded their asses with the corn went their way.

@c    42:27. And one of them opening his sack, to give his beast provender in
@c    the inn, saw the money in the sack's mouth,

@c    42:28. And said to his brethren:  My money is given me again; behold it
@c    is in the sack.  And they were astonished, and troubled, and said to one
@c    another:  What is this that God hath done unto us?

@c    42:29. And they came to Jacob their father in the land of Chanaan, and
@c    they told him all things that had befallen them, saying:

@c    42:30. The lord of the land spoke roughly to us, and took us to be
@c    spies of the country.

@c    42:31. And we answered him:  We are peaceable men, and we mean no plot.

@c    42:32. We are twelve brethren born of one father:  one is not living,
@c    the youngest is with our father in the land of Chanaan.

@c    42:33. And he said to us:  Hereby shall I know that you are peaceable
@c    men:  Leave one of your brethren with me, and take ye necessary
@c    provision for your houses, and go your ways,

@c    42:34. And bring your youngest brother to me, that I may know you are
@c    not spies:  and you may receive this man again, that is kept in prison:
@c    and afterwards may have leave to buy what you will.

@c    42:35. When they had told this, they poured out their corn, and every
@c    man found his money tied in the mouth of his sack:  and all being
@c    astonished together,

@c    42:36. Their father Jacob said:  You have made me to be without
@c    children:  Joseph is not living, Simeon is kept in bonds, and Benjamin
@c    you will take away:  all these evils are fallen upon me.

@c    42:37. And Ruben answered him:  Kill my two sons, if I bring him not
@c    again to thee:  deliver him into my hand, and I will restore him to
@c    thee.

@c    42:38. But he said:  My son shall not go down with you:  his brother is
@c    dead, and he is left alone:  if any mischief befall him in the land to
@c    which you go, you will bring down my grey hairs with sorrow to hell.

@c    To hell. . .That is, to that place, where the souls then remained, as
@c    above, chapter 37. ver. 35.



@c    Genesis Chapter 43


@c    The sons of Jacob go again into Egypt with Benjamin.  They are
@c    entertained by Joseph.

@c    43:1. In the mean time the famine was heavy upon all the land.

@c    43:2. And when they had eaten up all the corn, which they had brought
@c    out of Egypt, Jacob said to his sons:  Go again, and buy us a little
@c    food.

@c    43:3. Juda answered:  The man declared unto us with the attestation of
@c    an oath, saying:  You shall not see my face, unless you bring your
@c    youngest brother with you.

@c    43:4. If therefore thou wilt send him with us, we will set out
@c    together, and will buy necessaries for thee.

@c    43:5. But if thou wilt not, we will not go:  for the man, as we have
@c    often said, declared unto us, saying:  You shall not see my face without
@c    your youngest brother.

@c    43:6. Israel said to them:  You have done this for my misery, in that
@c    you told him you had also another brother.

@c    43:7. But they answered:  The man asked us in order concerning our
@c    kindred:  if our father lived:  if we had a brother:  and we answered him
@c    regularly, according to what he demanded:  could we know that he would
@c    say:  Bring hither your brother with you?

@c    43:8. And Juda said to his father:  Send the boy with me, that we may
@c    set forward, and may live:  lest both we and our children perish.

@c    43:9. I take the boy upon me, require him at my hand:  unless I bring
@c    him again, and restore him to thee, I will be guilty of sin against
@c    thee for ever.

@c    43:10. If delay had not been made, we had been here again the second
@c    time.

@c    43:11. Then Israel said to them:  If it must needs be so, do what you
@c    will:  take of the best fruits of the land in your vessels, and carry
@c    down presents to the man, a little balm, and honey, and storax, myrrh,
@c    turpentine, and almonds.

@c    Balm. . .Literally rosin, resinae; but here by that name is meant balm.

@c    43:12. And take with you double money, and carry back what you found in
@c    your sacks, lest perhaps it was done by mistake.

@c    43:13. And take also your brother, and go to the man.

@c    43:14. And may my almighty God make him favourable to you:  and send
@c    back with you your brother, whom he keepeth, and this Benjamin:  and as
@c    for me I shall be desolate without children.

@c    43:15. So the men took the presents, and double money, and Benjamin:
@c    and went down into Egypt, and stood before Joseph.

@c    43:16. And when he had seen them, and Benjamin with them, he commanded
@c    the steward of his house, saying:  Bring in the men into the house, and
@c    kill victims, and prepare a feast:  because they shall eat with me at
@c    noon.

@c    43:17. He did as he was commanded, and brought the men into the house.

@c    43:18. And they being much afraid, said there one to another:  Because
@c    of the money, which we carried back the first time in our sacks, we are
@c    brought in:  that he may bring upon us a false accusation, and by
@c    violence make slaves of us and our asses.

@c    43:19. Wherefore, going up to the steward of the house, at the door,

@c    43:20. They said:  Sir, we desire thee to hear us.  We came down once
@c    before to buy food:

@c    43:21. And when we had bought, and were come to the inn, we opened our
@c    sacks, and found our money in the mouths of the sacks:  which we have
@c    now brought again in the same weight.

@c    43:22. And we have brought other money besides, to buy what we want:  we
@c    cannot tell who put it in our bags.

@c    43:23. But he answered:  Peace be with you, fear not:  your God, and the
@c    God of your father, hath given you treasure in your sacks.  For the
@c    money, which you gave me, I have for good.  And he brought Simeon out to
@c    them.

@c    43:24. And having brought them into the house, he fetched water, and
@c    they washed their feet, and he gave provender to their asses.

@c    43:25. But they made ready the presents, against Joseph came at noon:
@c    for they had heard that they should eat bread there.

@c    43:26. Then Joseph came in to his house, and they offered him the
@c    presents, holding them in their hands; and they bowed down with their
@c    face to the ground.

@c    43:27. But he courteously saluting them again, asked them, saying:  Is
@c    the old man your father in health, of whom you told me?  Is he yet
@c    living?

@c    43:28. And they answered:  Thy servant our father, is in health; he is
@c    yet living.  And bowing themselves, they made obeisance to him.

@c    43:29. And Joseph lifting up his eyes, saw Benjamin, his brother by the
@c    same mother, and said:  Is this your young brother, of whom you told me?
@c    And he said:  God be gracious to thee, my son.

@c    43:30. And he made haste, because his heart was moved upon his brother,
@c    and tears gushed out:  and going into his chamber, he wept.

@c    43:31. And when he had washed his face, coming out again, he refrained
@c    himself, and said:  Set bread on the table.

@c    43:32. And when it was set on, for Joseph apart, and for his brethren
@c    apart, for the Egyptians also that ate with him apart, (for it is
@c    unlawful for the Egyptians to eat with the Hebrews, and they think such
@c    a feast profane):

@c    43:33. They sat before him, the firstborn according to his birthright,
@c    and the youngest according to his age.  And they wondered very much;

@c    43:34. Taking the messes which they received of him:  and the greater
@c    mess came to Benjamin, so that it exceeded by five parts.  And they
@c    drank, and were merry with him.



@c    Genesis Chapter 44


@c    Joseph's contrivance to stop his brethren.  The humble supplication of
@c    Juda.

@c    44:1. And Joseph commanded the steward of his house, saying:  Fill their
@c    sacks with corn, as much as they can hold:  and put the money of every
@c    one in the top of his sack.

@c    44:2. And in the mouth of the younger's sack put my silver cup, and the
@c    price which he gave for the wheat.  And it was so done.

@c    44:3. And when the morning arose, they were sent away with their asses.

@c    44:4. And when they were now departed out of the city, and had gone
@c    forward a little way:  Joseph sending for the steward of his house,
@c    said:  Arise, and pursue after the men:  and when thou hast overtaken
@c    them, say to them:  Why have you returned evil for good?

@c    44:5. The cup which you have stolen, is that in which my lord drinketh,
@c    and in which he is wont to divine:  you have done a very evil thing.

@c    44:6. He did as he had commanded him.  And having overtaken them, he
@c    spoke to them the same words.

@c    44:7. And they answered:  Why doth our lord speak so, as though thy
@c    servants had committed so heinous a fact?

@c    44:8. The money, that we found in the top of our sacks, we brought back
@c    to thee from the land of Chanaan:  how then should it be that we should
@c    steal out of thy lord's house, gold or silver?

@c    44:9. With whomsoever of thy servants shall be found that which thou
@c    seekest, let him die, and we will be the bondmen of my lord.

@c    44:10. And he said to them:  Let it be according to your sentence:  with
@c    whomsoever it shall be found, let him be my servant, and you shall be
@c    blameless.

@c    44:11. Then they speedily took down their sacks to the ground, and
@c    every man opened his sack.

@c    44:12. Which when he had searched, beginning at the eldest, and ending
@c    at the youngest, he found the cup in Benjamin's sack.

@c    44:13. Then they rent their garments, and loading their asses again,
@c    returned into the town.

@c    44:14. And Juda at the head of his brethren went in to Joseph (for he
@c    was not yet gone out of the place) and they all together fell down
@c    before him on the ground.

@c    44:15. And he said to them:  Why would you do so?  know you not that
@c    there is no one like me in the science of divining.

@c    The science of divining. . .He speaks of himself according to what he
@c    was esteemed in that kingdom.  And indeed, he being truly a prophet,
@c    knew more without comparison than any of the Egyptian sorcerers.

@c    44:16. And Juda said to him:  What shall we answer my lord?  or what
@c    shall we say, or be able justly to allege?  God hath found out the
@c    iniquity of thy servants:  behold, we are all bondmen to my lord, both
@c    we, and he with whom the cup was found.

@c    44:17. Joseph answered:  God forbid that I should do so:  he that stole
@c    the cup, he shall be my bondman:  and go you away free to your father.

@c    44:18. Then Juda coming nearer, said boldly:  I beseech thee, my lord,
@c    let thy servant speak a word in thy ears, and be not angry with thy
@c    servant:  for after Pharao thou art.

@c    44:19. My lord.  Thou didst ask thy servants the first time:  Have you a
@c    father or a brother.

@c    44:20. And we answered thee, my lord:  We have a father an old man, and
@c    a young boy, that was born in his old age; whose brother by the mother
@c    is dead; and he alone is left of his mother, and his father loveth him
@c    tenderly.

@c    44:21. And thou saidst to thy servants:  Bring him hither to me, and I
@c    will set my eyes on him.

@c    44:22. We suggested to my lord:  The boy cannot leave his father:  for if
@c    he leave him, he will die.

@c    44:23. And thou saidst to thy servants:  Except your youngest brother
@c    come with you, you shall see my face no more.

@c    44:24. Therefore when we were gone up to thy servant our father, we
@c    told him all that my lord had said.

@c    44:25. And our father said:  Go again, and buy us a little wheat.

@c    44:26. And we said to him:  We cannot go:  if our youngest brother go
@c    down with us, we will set out together:  otherwise, without him we dare
@c    not see the man's face.

@c    44:27. Whereunto he answered:  You know that my wife bore me two.

@c    44:28. One went out, and you said:  A beast devoured him; and hitherto
@c    he appeareth not.

@c    44:29. If you take this also, and any thing befall him in the way, you
@c    will bring down my grey hairs with sorrow unto hell.

@c    44:30. Therefore, if I shall go to thy servant, our father, and the boy
@c    be wanting, (whereas his life dependeth upon the life of him,)

@c    44:31. And he shall see that he is not with us, he will die, and thy
@c    servants shall bring down his grey hairs with sorrow unto hell.

@c    His gray hairs. . .That is, his person, now far advanced in years.--With
@c    sorrow unto hell. . .The Hebrew word for hell is here sheol, the Greek
@c    hades:  it is not taken for the hell of the damned; but for that place
@c    of souls below where the servants of God were kept before the coming of
@c    Christ.  Which place, both in the Scripture and in the creed, is named
@c    hell.

@c    44:32. Let me be thy proper servant, who took him into my trust, and
@c    promised, saying:  If I bring him not again, I will be guilty of sin
@c    against my father for ever.

@c    44:33. Therefore I, thy servant, will stay instead of the boy in the
@c    service of my lord, and let the boy go up with his brethren.

@c    44:34. For I cannot return to my father without the boy, lest I be a
@c    witness of the calamity that will oppress my father.



@c    Genesis Chapter 45


@c    Joseph maketh himself known to his brethren:  and sendeth for his
@c    father.

@c    45:1. Joseph could no longer refrain himself before many that stood by:
@c    whereupon he commanded that all should go out, and no stranger be
@c    present at their knowing one another.

@c    45:2. And he lifted up his voice with weeping, which the Egyptians, and
@c    all the house of Pharao heard.

@c    45:3. And he said to his brethren:  I am Joseph:  Is my father yet
@c    living?  His brethren could not answer him, being struck with exceeding
@c    great fear.

@c    45:4. And he said mildly to them:  Come nearer to me.  And when they were
@c    come near him, he said:  I am Joseph, your brother, whom you sold into
@c    Egypt.

@c    45:5. Be not afraid, and let it not seem to you a hard case that you
@c    sold me into these countries:  for God sent me before you into Egypt for
@c    your preservation.

@c    45:6. For it is two years since the famine began to be upon the land,
@c    and five years more remain, wherein there can be neither ploughing nor
@c    reaping.

@c    45:7. And God sent me before, that you may be preserved upon the earth,
@c    and may have food to live.

@c    45:8. Not by your counsel was I sent hither, but by the will of God:
@c    who hath made me as it were a father to Pharao, and lord of his whole
@c    house, and governor in all the land of Egypt.

@c    45:9. Make haste, and go ye up to my father, and say to him:  Thus saith
@c    thy son Joseph:  God hath made me lord of the whole land of Egypt; come
@c    down to me, linger not.

@c    45:10. And thou shalt dwell in the land of Gessen:  and thou shalt be
@c    near me, thou and thy sons, and thy sons' sons, thy sheep, and thy
@c    herds, and all things that thou hast.

@c    45:11. And there I will feed thee, (for there are yet five years of
@c    famine remaining) lest both thou perish, and thy house, and all things
@c    that thou hast.

@c    45:12. Behold, your eyes, and the eyes of my brother Benjamin, see that
@c    it is my mouth that speaketh to you.

@c    45:13. You shall tell my father of all my glory, and all things that
@c    you have seen in Egypt:  make haste and bring him to me.

@c    45:14. And falling upon the neck of his brother Benjamin, he embraced
@c    him and wept:  and Benjamin in like manner wept also on his neck.

@c    45:15. And Joseph kissed all his brethren, and wept upon every one of
@c    them:  after which they were emboldened to speak to him.

@c    45:16. And it was heard, and the fame was spread abroad in the king's
@c    court:  The brethren of Joseph are come; and Pharao with all his family
@c    was glad.

@c    45:17. And he spoke to Joseph that he should give orders to his
@c    brethren, saying:  Load your beasts, and go into the land of Chanaan,

@c    45:18. And bring away from thence your father and kindred, and come to
@c    me; and I will give you all the good things of Egypt, that you may eat
@c    the marrow of the land.

@c    45:19. Give orders also that they take wagons out of the land of Egypt,
@c    for the carriage of their children and their wives; and say:  Take up
@c    your father, and make haste to come with all speed:

@c    45:20. And leave nothing of your household stuff; for all the riches of
@c    Egypt shall be yours.

@c    45:21. And the sons of Israel did as they were bid.  And Joseph gave
@c    them wagons according to Pharao's commandment:  and provisions for the
@c    way.

@c    45:22. He ordered also to be brought out for every one of them two
@c    robes:  but to Benjamin he gave three hundred pieces of silver, with
@c    five robes of the best:

@c    45:23. Sending to his father as much money and raiment; adding besides,
@c    ten he-asses, to carry off all the riches of Egypt, and as many
@c    she-asses, carrying wheat and bread for the journey.

@c    45:24. So he sent away his brethren, and at their departing said to
@c    them:  Be not angry in the way.

@c    45:25. And they went up out of Egypt, and came into the land of
@c    Chanaan, to their father Jacob.

@c    45:26. And they told him, saying:  Joseph, thy son, is living; and he is
@c    ruler in all the land of Egypt.  Which when Jacob heard, he awaked as it
@c    were out of a deep sleep, yet did not believe them.

@c    45:27. They, on the other side, told the whole order of the thing.  And
@c    when he saw the wagons, and all that he had sent, his spirit revived,

@c    45:28. And he said:  It is enough for me if Joseph, my son, be yet
@c    living:  I will go and see him before I die.



@c    Genesis Chapter 46


@c    Israel, warranted by a vision from God, goeth down into Egypt with all
@c    his family.

@c    46:1. And Israel taking his journey, with all that he had, came to the
@c    well of the oath, and killing victims there to the God of his father
@c    Isaac,

@c    The well of the oath. . .Bersabee.

@c    46:2. He heard him, by a vision in the night, calling him, and saying
@c    to him:  Jacob, Jacob.  And he answered him:  Lo, here I am.

@c    46:3. God said to him:  I am the most mighty God of thy father; fear
@c    not, go down into Egypt, for I will make a great nation of thee there.

@c    46:4. I will go down with thee thither, and will bring thee back again
@c    from thence:  Joseph also shall put his hands upon thy eyes.

@c    46:5. And Jacob rose up from the well of the oath:  and his sons took
@c    him up, with their children and wives in the wagons, which Pharao had
@c    sent to carry the old man,

@c    46:6. And all that he had in the land of Chanaan:  and he came into
@c    Egypt with all his seed;

@c    46:7. His sons, and grandsons, daughters, and all his offspring
@c    together.

@c    46:8. And these are the names of the children of Israel, that entered
@c    into Egypt, he and his children.  His firstborn Ruben,

@c    46:9. The sons of Ruben:  Henoch and Phallu, and Hesron and Charmi.

@c    46:10. The sons of Simeon:  Jamuel and Jamin and Ahod, and Jachin and
@c    Sohar, and Saul, the son of a woman of Chanaan.

@c    46:11. The sons of Levi:  Gerson and Caath, and Merari.

@c    46:12. The sons of Juda:  Her and Onan, and Sela, and Phares and Zara.
@c    And Her and Onan died in the land of Chanaan.  And sons were born to
@c    Phares:  Hesron and Hamul.

@c    46:13. The sons of Issachar:  Thola and Phua, and Job and Semron.

@c    46:14. The sons of Zabulon:  Sared, and Elon, and Jahelel.

@c    46:15. These are the sons of Lia, whom she bore in Mesopotamia of
@c    Syria, with Dina, his daughter.  All the souls of her sons and
@c    daughters, thirty-three.

@c    46:16. The sons of Gad:  Sephion and Haggi, and Suni and Esebon, and
@c    Heri and Arodi, and Areli.

@c    46:17. The sons of Aser:  Jamne and Jesua, and Jessuri and Beria, and
@c    Sara their sister.  The sons of Beria:  Heber and Melchiel.

@c    46:18. These are the sons of Zelpha, whom Laban gave to Lia, his
@c    daughter.  And these she bore to Jacob, sixteen souls.

@c    46:19. The sons of Rachel, Jacob's wife:  Joseph and Benjamin.

@c    46:20. And sons were born to Joseph, in the land of Egypt, whom
@c    Aseneth, the daughter of Putiphare, priest of Heliopolis, bore him:
@c    Manasses and Ephraim.

@c    46:21. The sons of Benjamin:  Bela and Bechor, and Asbel and Gera, and
@c    Naaman and Echi, and Ross and Mophim, and Ophim and Ared.

@c    46:22. These are the sons of Rachel, whom she bore to Jacob:  all the
@c    souls, fourteen.

@c    46:23. The sons of Dan:  Husim.

@c    46:24. The sons of Nephthali:  Jaziel and Guni, and Jeser and Sallem.

@c    46:25. These are the sons of Bala, whom Laban gave to Rachel, his
@c    daughter:  and these she bore to Jacob:  all the souls, seven.

@c    46:26. All the souls that went with Jacob into Egypt, and that came out
@c    of his thigh, besides his sons' wives, sixty-six.

@c    46:27. And the sons of Joseph, that were born to him in the land of
@c    Egypt, two souls.  All the souls of the house of Jacob, that entered
@c    into Egypt, were seventy.

@c    46:28. And he sent Juda before him to Joseph, to tell him; and that he
@c    should meet him in Gessen.

@c    46:29. And when he was come thither, Joseph made ready his chariot, and
@c    went up to meet his father in the same place:  and seeing him, he fell
@c    upon his neck, and embracing him, wept.

@c    46:30. And the father said to Joseph:  Now shall I die with joy, because
@c    I have seen thy face, and leave thee alive.

@c    46:31. And Joseph said to his brethren, and to all his father's house:
@c    I will go up, and will tell Pharao, and will say to him:  My brethren,
@c    and my father's house, that were in the land of Chanaan, are come to
@c    me:

@c    46:32. And the men are shepherds, and their occupation is to feed
@c    cattle; their flocks, and herds, and all they have, they have brought
@c    with them.

@c    46:33. And when he shall call you, and shall say:  What is your
@c    occupation?

@c    46:34. You shall answer:  We, thy servants, are shepherds, from our
@c    infancy until now, both we and our fathers.  And this you shall say,
@c    that you may dwell in the land of Gessen, because the Egyptians have
@c    all shepherds in abomination.



@c    Genesis Chapter 47


@c    Jacob and his sons are presented before Pharao:  he giveth them the land
@c    of Gessen.  The famine forceth the Egyptians to sell all their
@c    possessions to the king.

@c    47:1. Then Joseph went in and told Pharao, saying:  My father and
@c    brethren, their sheep and their herds, and all that they possess, are
@c    come out of the land of Chanaan:  and behold they stay in the land of
@c    Gessen.

@c    47:2. Five men also, the last of his brethren, he presented before the
@c    king:

@c    The last. . .xtremos.  Some interpret this word of the chiefest, and most
@c    rightly:  but Joseph seems rather to have chosen out such as had the
@c    meanest appearance, that Pharao might not think of employing them at
@c    court, with danger of their morals and religion.

@c    47:3. And he asked them:  What is your occupation?  They answered:  We,
@c    thy servants, are shepherds, both we and our fathers.

@c    47:4. We are come to sojourn in thy land, because there is no grass for
@c    the flocks of thy servants, the famine being very grievous in the land
@c    of Chanaan:  and we pray thee to give orders that we thy servants may be
@c    in the land of Gessen.

@c    47:5. The king therefore said to Joseph:  Thy father and thy brethren
@c    are come to thee.

@c    47:6. The land of Egypt is before thee:  and make them dwell in the best
@c    place, and give them the land of Gessen.  And if thou knowest that there
@c    are industrious men among them, make them rulers over my cattle.

@c    47:7. After this Joseph brought in his father to the king, and
@c    presented him before him:  and he blessed him.

@c    47:8. And being asked by him:  How many are the days of the years of thy
@c    life?

@c    47:9. He answered:  The days of my pilgrimage are a hundred and thirty
@c    years, few, and evil, and they are not come up to the days of the
@c    pilgrimage of my fathers.

@c    47:10. And blessing the king, he went out.

@c    47:11. But Joseph gave a possession to his father and his brethren in
@c    Egypt, in the best place of the land, in Ramesses, as Pharao had
@c    commanded.

@c    47:12. And he nourished them, and all his father's house, allowing food
@c    to every one.

@c    47:13. For in the whole world there was want of bread, and a famine had
@c    oppressed the land, more especially of Egypt and Chanaan;

@c    47:14. Out of which he gathered up all the money for the corn which
@c    they bought, and brought it in to the king's treasure.

@c    47:15. And when the buyers wanted money, all Egypt came to Joseph,
@c    saying:  Give us bread:  why should we die in thy presence, having now no
@c    money?

@c    47:16. And he answered them:  Bring me your cattle, and for them I will
@c    give you food, if you have no money.

@c    47:17. And when they had brought them, he gave them food in exchange
@c    for their horses, and sheep, and oxen, and asses:  and he maintained
@c    them that year for the exchange of their cattle.

@c    47:18. And they came the second year, and said to him:  We will not hide
@c    from our lord, how that our money is spent, and our cattle also are
@c    gone:  neither art thou ignorant that we have nothing now left but our
@c    bodies and our lands.

@c    47:19. Why therefore shall we die before thy eyes?  we will be thine,
@c    both we and our lands:  buy us to be the king's servants, and give us
@c    seed, lest for want of tillers the land be turned into a wilderness.

@c    47:20. So Joseph bought all the land of Egypt, every man selling his
@c    possessions, because of the greatness of the famine.  And he brought it
@c    into Pharao's hands:

@c    47:21. And all its people from one end of the borders of Egypt, even to
@c    the other end thereof,

@c    47:22. Except the land of the priests, which had been given them by the
@c    king:  to whom also a certain allowance of food was given out of the
@c    public stores, and therefore they were not forced to sell their
@c    possessions.

@c    47:23. Then Joseph said to the people:  Behold, as you see, both you and
@c    your lands belong to Pharao; take seed and sow the fields,

@c    47:24. That you may have corn.  The fifth part you shall give to the
@c    king; the other four you shall have for seed, and for food for your
@c    families and children.

@c    47:25. And they answered:  our life is in thy hand; only let my lord
@c    look favourably upon us, and we will gladly serve the king.

@c    47:26. From that time unto this day, in the whole land of Egypt, the
@c    fifth part is paid to the kings, and it is become as a law, except the
@c    land of the priests, which was free from this covenant.

@c    47:27. So Israel dwelt in Egypt, that is, in the land of Gessen, and
@c    possessed it; and grew, and was multiplied exceedingly.

@c    47:28. And he lived in it seventeen years:  and all the days of his life
@c    came to a hundred and forty-seven years.

@c    47:29. And when he saw that the day of his death drew nigh, he called
@c    his son Joseph, and said to him:  If I have found favour in thy sight,
@c    put thy hand under my thigh; and thou shalt shew me this kindness and
@c    truth, not to bury me in Egypt.

@c    47:30. But I will sleep with my fathers, and thou shalt take me away
@c    out of this land, and bury me in the burying place of my ancestors.  And
@c    Joseph answered him:  I will do what thou hast commanded.

@c    47:31. And he said:  Swear then to me.  And as he was swearing, Israel
@c    adored God, turning to the bed's head.

@c    To the bed's head. . .St. Paul, Heb. 11.21, following the Greek
@c    translation of the Septuagint, reads adored the top of his rod.  Where
@c    note, that the same word in the Hebrew, according to the different
@c    pointing of it, signifies both a bed and a rod.  And to verify both
@c    these sentences, we must understand that Jacob leaning on Joseph's rod
@c    adored, turning towards the head of his bed:  which adoration, inasmuch
@c    as it was referred to God, was an absolute and sovereign worship:  but
@c    inasmuch as it was referred to the rod of Joseph, as a figure of the
@c    sceptre, that is, of the royal dignity of Christ, was only an inferior
@c    and relative honour.



@c    Genesis Chapter 48


@c    Joseph visiteth his father in his sickness, who adopteth his two sons
@c    Manasses and Ephraim, and blesseth them, preferring the younger before
@c    the elder.

@c    48:1. After these things, it was told Joseph that his father was sick;
@c    and he set out to go to him, taking his two sons Manasses and Ephraim.

@c    48:2. And it was told the old man:  Behold thy son Joseph cometh to
@c    thee.  And being strengthened, he sat on his bed.

@c    48:3. And when Joseph was come in to him, he said:  God almighty
@c    appeared to me at Luza, which is in the land of Chanaan, and he blessed
@c    me,

@c    48:4. And said:  I will cause thee to increase and multiply, and I will
@c    make of thee a multitude of people:  and I will give this land to thee,
@c    and to thy seed after thee for an everlasting possession.

@c    48:5. So thy two sons, who were born to thee in the land of Egypt
@c    before I came hither to thee, shall be mine:  Ephraim and Manasses shall
@c    be reputed to me as Ruben and Simeon.

@c    48:6. But the rest whom thou shalt have after them, shall be thine, and
@c    shall be called by the name of their brethren in their possessions.

@c    48:7. For, when I came out of Mesopotamia, Rachel died from me in the
@c    land of Chanaan in the very journey, and it was spring time:  and I was
@c    going to Ephrata, and I buried her near the way of Ephrata, which by
@c    another name is called Bethlehem.

@c    48:8. Then seeing his sons, he said to him:  Who are these?

@c    48:9. He answered:  They are my sons, whom God hath given me in this
@c    place.  And he said:  Bring them to me, that I may bless them.

@c    48:10. For Israel's eyes were dim by reason of his great age, and he
@c    could not see clearly.  And when they were brought to him, he kissed and
@c    embraced them,

@c    48:11. And said to his son:  I am not deprived of seeing thee; moreover
@c    God hath shewn me thy seed.

@c    48:12. And when Joseph had taken them from his father's lap, he bowed
@c    down with his face to the ground.

@c    48:13. And he set Ephraim on his right hand, that is, towards the left
@c    hand of Israel; but Manasses on his left hand, to wit, towards his
@c    father's right hand, and brought them near to him.

@c    48:14. But he, stretching forth his right hand, put it upon the head of
@c    Ephraim, the younger brother; and the left upon the head of Manasses,
@c    who was the elder, changing his hands.

@c    48:15. And Jacob blessed the sons of Joseph, and said:  God, in whose
@c    sight my fathers Abraham and Isaac walked, God that feedeth me from my
@c    youth until this day:

@c    48:16. The angel that delivereth me from all evils, bless these boys:
@c    and let my name be called upon them, and the names of my fathers
@c    Abraham and Isaac; and may they grow into a multitude upon the earth.

@c    48:17. And Joseph seeing that his father had put his right hand upon
@c    the head of Ephraim, was much displeased:  and taking his father's hand,
@c    he tried to lift it from Ephraim's head, and to remove it to the head
@c    of Manasses.

@c    48:18. And he said to his father:  It should not be so, my father; for
@c    this is the firstborn, put thy right hand upon his head.

@c    48:19. But he refusing, said:  I know, my son, I know:  and this also
@c    shall become a people, and shall be multiplied; but his younger brother
@c    shall be greater than he; and his seed shall grow into nations.

@c    48:20. And he blessed them at that time, saying:  In thee shall Israel
@c    be blessed, and it shall be said:  God do to thee as to Ephraim, and as
@c    to Manasses.  And he set Ephraim before Manasses.

@c    48:21. And he said to Joseph, his son:  Behold I die, and God will be
@c    with you, and will bring you back into the land of your fathers.

@c    48:22. I give thee a portion above thy brethren, which I took out of
@c    the hand of the Amorrhite with my sword and bow.



@c    Genesis Chapter 49


@c    Jacob's prophetical blessings of his twelve sons:  his death.

@c    49:1. And Jacob called his sons, and said to them:  Gather yourselves
@c    together, that I may tell you the things that shall befall you in the
@c    last days.

@c    49:2. Gather yourselves together, and hear, O ye sons of Jacob, hearken
@c    to Israel, your father:

@c    49:3. Ruben, my firstborn, thou art my strength, and the beginning of
@c    my sorrow; excelling in gifts, greater in command.

@c    My strength, etc. . .He calls him his strength, as being born whilst his
@c    father was in his full strength and vigour:  he calls him the beginning
@c    of his sorrow, because cares and sorrows usually come on with the birth
@c    of children.  Excelling in gifts, etc., because the firstborn had a
@c    title to a double portion, and to have the command over his brethren,
@c    which Ruben forfeited by his sin; being poured out as water, that is,
@c    spilt and lost.

@c    49:4. Thou art poured out as water, grow thou not; because thou wentest
@c    up to thy father's bed, and didst defile his couch.

@c    Grow thou not. . .This was not meant by way of a curse or imprecation;
@c    but by way of a prophecy foretelling that the tribe of Ruben should not
@c    inherit the pre-eminences usually annexed to the first birthright,
@c    viz., the double portion, the being prince or lord over the other
@c    brethren, and the priesthood:  of which the double portion was given to
@c    Joseph, the princely office to Juda, and the priesthood to Levi.

@c    49:5. Simeon and Levi brethren:  vessels of iniquity waging war.

@c    49:6. Let not my soul go into their counsel, nor my glory be in their
@c    assembly:  because in their fury they slew a man, and in their self-will
@c    they undermined a wall.

@c    Slew a man,. . .viz., Sichem the son of Hemor, with all his people, Gen.
@c    34.; mystically and prophetically it alludes to Christ, whom their
@c    posterity, viz., the priests and the scribes, put to death.

@c    49:7. Cursed be their fury, because it was stubborn:  and their wrath,
@c    because it was cruel:  I will divide them in Jacob, and will scatter
@c    them in Israel.

@c    49:8. Juda, thee shall thy brethren praise:  thy hand shall be on the
@c    necks of thy enemies; the sons of thy father shall bow down to thee.

@c    49:9. Juda is a lion's whelp:  to the prey, my son, thou art gone up:
@c    resting thou hast couched as a lion, and as a lioness, who shall rouse
@c    him?

@c    A lion's whelp, etc. . .This blessing of Juda foretelleth the strength
@c    of his tribe, the fertility of his inheritance; and principally that
@c    the sceptre and legislative power should not be utterly taken away from
@c    his race till about the time of the coming of Christ:  as in effect it
@c    never was:  which is a demonstration against the modern Jews, that the
@c    Messiah is long since come; for the sceptre has long since been utterly
@c    taken away from Juda.

@c    49:10. The sceptre shall not be taken away from Juda, nor a ruler from
@c    his thigh, till he come that is to be sent, and he shall be the
@c    expectation of nations.

@c    49:11. Tying his foal to the vineyard, and his ass, O my son, to the
@c    vine.  He shall wash his robe in wine, and his garment in the blood of
@c    the grape.

@c    49:12. His eyes are more beautiful than wine, and his teeth whiter than
@c    milk.

@c    49:13. Zabulon shall dwell on the seashore, and in the road of ships,
@c    reaching as far as Sidon.

@c    49:14. Issachar shall be a strong ass, lying down between the borders.

@c    49:15. He saw rest that it was good:  and the land that it was
@c    excellent:  and he bowed his shoulder to carry, and became a servant
@c    under tribute.

@c    49:16. Dan shall judge his people like another tribe in Israel.

@c    Dan shall judge, etc. . .This was verified in Samson, who was of the
@c    tribe of Dan, and began to deliver Israel.  Judges 13.5.  But as this
@c    deliverance was but temporal and very imperfect, the holy patriarch
@c    (ver. 18) aspires after another kind of deliverer, saying:  I will look
@c    for thy salvation, O Lord.

@c    49:17. Let Dan be a snake in the way, a serpent in the path, that
@c    biteth the horse's heels, that his rider may fall backward.

@c    49:18. I will look for thy salvation, O Lord.

@c    49:19. Gad, being girded, shall fight before him:  and he himself shall
@c    be girded backward.

@c    Gad being girded, etc. . .It seems to allude to the tribe of Gad; when
@c    after they had received for their lot the land of Galaad, they marched
@c    in arms before the rest of the Israelites, to the conquest of the land
@c    of Chanaan:  from whence they afterwards returned loaded with spoils.
@c    See Jos. 4. and 12.

@c    49:20. Aser, his bread shall be fat, and he shall yield dainties to
@c    kings.

@c    49:21. Nephthali, a hart let loose, and giving words of beauty.

@c    49:22. Joseph is a growing son, a growing son and comely to behold:  the
@c    daughters run to and fro upon the wall;

@c    Run to and fro, etc. . .To behold his beauty; whilst his envious
@c    brethren turned their darts against him, etc.

@c    49:23. But they that held darts, provoked him, and quarrelled with him,
@c    and envied him.

@c    49:24. His bow rested upon the strong, and the bands of his arms and
@c    his hands were loosed, by the hands of the mighty one of Jacob:  thence
@c    he came forth a pastor, the stone of Israel.

@c    His bow rested upon the strong, etc. . .That is, upon God, who was his
@c    strength:  who also loosed his bands, and brought him out of prison to
@c    be the pastor, that is, the feeder and ruler of Egypt, and the stone,
@c    that is, the rock and support of Israel.

@c    49:25. The God of thy father shall be thy helper, and the Almighty
@c    shall bless thee with the blessings of heaven above, with the blessings
@c    of the deep that lieth beneath, with the blessings of the breasts and
@c    of the womb.

@c    49:26. The blessings of thy father are strengthened with the blessings
@c    of his fathers:  until the desire of the everlasting hills should come:
@c    may they be upon the head of Joseph, and upon the crown of the Nazarite
@c    among his brethren.

@c    The blessings of thy father, etc. . .That is, thy father's blessings are
@c    made more prevalent and effectual in thy regard, by the additional
@c    strength they receive from his inheriting the blessings of his
@c    progenitors Abraham and Isaac.  The desire of the everlasting hills,
@c    etc. . .These blessings all looked forward towards Christ, called the
@c    desire of the everlasting hills, as being longed for, as it were, by
@c    the whole creation.  Mystically, the patriarchs and prophets are called
@c    the everlasting hills, by reason of the eminence of their wisdom and
@c    holiness.  The Nazarite. . .This word signifies one separated; and agrees
@c    to Joseph, as being separated from, and more eminent than, his
@c    brethren.  As the ancient Nazarites were so called from their being set
@c    aside for God, and vowed to him.

@c    49:27. Benjamin a ravenous wolf, in the morning shall eat the prey, and
@c    in the evening shall divide the spoil.

@c    49:28. All these are the twelve tribes of Israel:  these things their
@c    father spoke to them, and he blessed every one with their proper
@c    blessings.

@c    49:29. And he charged them, saying:  I am now going to be gathered to my
@c    people:  bury me with my fathers in the double cave, which is in the
@c    field of Ephron the Hethite,

@c    To be gathered to my people. . .That is, I am going to die, and so to
@c    follow my ancestors that are gone before me, and to join their company
@c    in another world.

@c    49:30. Over against Mambre, in the land of Chanaan, which Abraham
@c    bought together with the field, of Ephron the Hethite, for a possession
@c    to bury in.

@c    49:31. There they buried him, and Sara his wife:  there was Isaac buried
@c    with Rebecca, his wife:  there also Lia doth lie buried.

@c    49:32. And when he had ended the commandments, wherewith he instructed
@c    his sons, he drew up his feet upon the bed, and died:  and he was
@c    gathered to his people.



@c    Genesis Chapter 50


@c    The mourning for Jacob, and his interment.  Joseph's kindness towards
@c    his brethren.  His death.

@c    50:1. And when Joseph saw this, he fell upon his father's face, weeping
@c    and kissing him.

@c    50:2. And he commanded his servants, the physicians, to embalm his
@c    father.

@c    50:3. And while they were fulfilling his commands, there passed forty
@c    days:  for this was the manner with bodies that were embalmed, and Egypt
@c    mourned for him seventy days.

@c    50:4. And the time of the mourning being expired, Joseph spoke to the
@c    family of Pharao:  If I have found favour in your sight, speak in the
@c    ears of Pharao:

@c    50:5. For my father made me swear to him, saying:  Behold I die; thou
@c    shalt bury me in my sepulchre which I have digged for myself in the
@c    land of Chanaan.  So I will go up and bury my father, and return.

@c    50:6. And Pharao said to him:  Go up and bury thy father according as he
@c    made thee swear.

@c    50:7. So he went up, and there went with him all the ancients of
@c    Pharao's house, and all the elders of the land of Egypt.

@c    50:8. And the house of Joseph with his brethren, except their children,
@c    and their flocks and herds, which they left in the land of Gessen.

@c    50:9. He had also in his train chariots and horsemen:  and it was a
@c    great company.

@c    50:10. And they came to the threshing floor of Atad, which is situated
@c    beyond the Jordan:  where celebrating the exequies with a great and
@c    vehement lamentation, they spent full seven days.

@c    50:11. And when the inhabitants of Chanaan saw this, they said:  This is
@c    a great mourning to the Egyptians.  And therefore the name of that place
@c    was called, The mourning of Egypt.

@c    50:12. So the sons of Jacob did as he had commanded them.

@c    50:13. And carrying him into the land of Chanaan, they buried him in
@c    the double cave, which Abraham had bought together with the field for a
@c    possession of a burying place, of Ehpron, the Hethite, over against
@c    Mambre.

@c    50:14. And Joseph returned into Egypt with his brethren, and all that
@c    were in his company, after he had buried his father.

@c    50:15. Now he being dead, his brethren were afraid, and talked one with
@c    another:  Lest perhaps he should remember the wrong he suffered, and
@c    requite us all the evil that we did to him.

@c    50:16. And they sent a message to him, saying:  Thy father commanded us
@c    before he died,

@c    50:17. That we should say thus much to thee from him:  I beseech thee to
@c    forget the wickedness of thy brethren, and the sin and malice they
@c    practised against thee:  we also pray thee, to forgive the servants of
@c    the God of thy father this wickedness.  And when Joseph heard this, he
@c    wept.

@c    50:18. And his brethren came to him; and worshipping prostrate on the
@c    ground, they said:  We are thy servants.

@c    50:19. And he answered them:  Fear not:  can we resist the will of God?

@c    50:20. You thought evil against me:  but God turned it into good, that
@c    he might exalt me, as at present you see, and might save many people.

@c    50:21. Fear not:  I will feed you and your children.  And he comforted
@c    them, and spoke gently and mildly.

@c    50:22. And he dwelt in Egypt with all his father's house; and lived a
@c    hundred and ten years.  And he saw the children of Ephraim to the third
@c    generation.  The children also of Machir, the sons of Manasses, were
@c    born on Joseph's knees.

@c    50:23. After which he told his brethren:  God will visit you after my
@c    death, and will make you go up out of this land, to the land which he
@c    swore to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob.

@c    50:24. And he made them swear to him, saying:  God will visit you, carry
@c    my bones with you out of this place:

@c    50:25. And he died, being a hundred and ten years old.  And being
@c    embalmed, he was laid in a coffin in Egypt.
