@c    THE PROPHECY OF HABACUC



@c    HABACUC was a native of Bezocher, and prophesied in JUDA, some time
@c    before the invasion of the CHALDEANS, which he foretold.  He lived to
@c    see this prophecy fulfilled, and for many years after, according to the
@c    general opinion, which supposes him to be the same that was brought by
@c    the ANGEL to DANIEL in BABYLON, Dan. 14.



@c    Habacuc Chapter 1


@c    The prophet complains of the wickedness of the people:  God reveals to
@c    him the vengeance he is going to take of them by the Chaldeans.

@c    1:1. The burden that Habacuc the prophet saw.

@c    Burden. . .Such prophecies more especially are called burdens, as
@c    threaten grievous evils and punishments.

@c    1:2. How long, O Lord, shall I cry, and thou wilt not hear?  shall I cry
@c    out to thee suffering violence, and thou wilt not save?

@c    1:3. Why hast thou shewn me iniquity and grievance, to see rapine and
@c    injustice before me?  and there is a judgment, but opposition is more
@c    powerful.

@c    1:4. Therefore the law is torn in pieces, and judgment cometh not to
@c    the end:  because the wicked prevaileth against the just, therefore
@c    wrong judgment goeth forth.

@c    1:5. Behold ye among the nations, and see:  wonder, and be astonished:
@c    for a work is done in your days, which no man will believe when it
@c    shall be told.

@c    1:6. For behold, I will raise up the Chaldeans, a bitter and swift
@c    nation, marching upon the breadth of the earth, to possess the dwelling
@c    places that are not their own.

@c    1:7. They are dreadful, and terrible:  from themselves shall their
@c    judgment, and their burden proceed.

@c    1:8. Their horses are lighter than leopards, and swifter than evening
@c    wolves; and their horsemen shall be spread abroad:  for their horsemen
@c    shall come from afar, they shall fly as an eagle that maketh haste to
@c    eat.

@c    1:9. They shall all come to the prey, their face is like a burning
@c    wind:  and they shall gather together captives as the sand.

@c    1:10. And their prince shall triumph over kings, and princes shall be
@c    his laughingstock:  and he shall laugh at every strong hold, and shall
@c    cast up a mount, and shall take it.

@c    1:11. Then shall his spirit be changed, and he shall pass, and fall:
@c    this is his strength of his god.

@c    Then shall his spirit, etc. . .Viz., the spirit of the king of Babylon.
@c    It alludes to the judgment of God upon Nabuchodonosor, recorded Dan.
@c    4., and to the speedy fall of the Chaldean empire.

@c    1:12. Wast thou not from the beginning, O Lord my God, my holy one, and
@c    we shall not die?  Lord, thou hast appointed him for judgment:  and made
@c    him strong for correction.

@c    1:13. Thy eyes are too pure to behold evil, and thou canst not look on
@c    iniquity.  Why lookest thou upon them that do unjust things, and holdest
@c    thy peace when the wicked devoureth the man that is more just than
@c    himself?

@c    1:14. And thou wilt make men as the fishes of the sea, and as the
@c    creeping things that have no ruler.

@c    1:15. He lifted up all them with his hook, he drew them in his drag,
@c    and gathered them into his net:  for this he will be glad and rejoice.

@c    1:16. Therefore will he offer victims to his drag, and he will
@c    sacrifice to his net:  because through them his portion is made fat, and
@c    his meat dainty.

@c    1:17. For this cause therefore he spreadeth his net, and will not spare
@c    continually to slay the nations.



@c    Habacuc Chapter 2


@c    The prophet is admonished to wait with faith.  The enemies of God's
@c    people shall assuredly be punished.

@c    2:1. I will stand upon my watch, and fix my foot upon the tower:  and I
@c    will watch, to see what will be said to me, and what I may answer to
@c    him that reproveth me.

@c    Will stand, etc. . .Waiting to see what the Lord will answer to my
@c    complaint, viz., that the Chaldeans, who are worse than the Jews, and
@c    who attribute all their success to their own strength, or to their
@c    idols, should nevertheless prevail over the people of the Lord.  The
@c    Lord's answer is, that the prophet must wait with patience and faith:
@c    that all should be set right in due time; and the enemies of God and
@c    his people punished according to their deserts.

@c    2:2. And the Lord answered me, and said:  Write the vision, and make it
@c    plain upon tables:  that he that readeth it may run over it.

@c    2:3. For as yet the vision is far off, and it shall appear at the end,
@c    and shall not lie:  if it make any delay, wait for it:  for it shall
@c    surely come, and it shall not be slack.

@c    2:4. Behold, he that is unbelieving, his soul shall not be right in
@c    himself:  but the just shall live in his faith.

@c    2:5. And as wine deceiveth him that drinketh it:  so shall the proud man
@c    be, and he shall not be honoured:  who hath enlarged his desire like
@c    hell:  and is himself like death, and he is never satisfied:  but will
@c    gather together unto him all nations, and heap together unto him all
@c    people.

@c    As wine deceiveth, etc. . .Viz., by affording only a short passing
@c    pleasure; followed by the evils and disgrace that are the usual
@c    consequences of drunkenness; so shall it be with the proud enemies of
@c    the people of God; whose success affordeth them only a momentary
@c    pleasure, followed by innumerable and everlasting evils.

@c    2:6. Shall not all these take up a parable against him, and a dark
@c    speech concerning him:  and it shall be said:  Woe to him that heapeth
@c    together that which is not his own?  how long also doth he load himself
@c    with thick clay?

@c    Thick clay. . .Ill-gotten goods, that, like mire, both burden and defile
@c    the soul.

@c    2:7. Shall they not rise up suddenly that shall bite thee:  and they be
@c    stirred up that shall tear thee, and thou shalt be a spoil to them?

@c    2:8. Because thou hast spoiled many nations, all that shall be left of
@c    the people shall spoil thee:  because of men's blood, and for the
@c    iniquity of the land, of the city, and of all that dwell therein.

@c    2:9. Woe to him that gathereth together an evil covetousness to his
@c    house, that his nest may be on high, and thinketh he may be delivered
@c    out of the hand of evil.

@c    2:10. Thou hast devised confusion to thy house, thou hast cut off many
@c    people, and thy soul hath sinned.

@c    2:11. For the stone shall cry out of the wall:  and the timber that is
@c    between the joints of the building, shall answer.

@c    2:12. Woe to him that buildeth a town with blood, and prepareth a city
@c    by iniquity.

@c    2:13. Are not these things from the Lord of hosts?  for the people shall
@c    labour in a great fire:  and the nations in vain, and they shall faint.

@c    Are not these things, etc. . .That is, shall not these punishments that
@c    are here recorded, come from the Lord upon him that is guilty of such
@c    crimes.--Ibid.  The people shall labour, etc. . .Viz., the enemies of
@c    God's people.

@c    2:14. For the earth shall be filled, that men may know the glory of the
@c    Lord, as waters covering the sea.

@c    2:15. Woe to him that giveth drink to his friend, and presenteth his
@c    gall, and maketh him drunk, that he may behold his nakedness.

@c    2:16. Thou art filled with shame instead of glory:  drink thou also, and
@c    fall fast asleep:  the cup of the right hand of the Lord shall compass
@c    thee, and shameful vomiting shall be on thy glory.

@c    2:17. For the iniquity of Libanus shall cover thee, and the ravaging of
@c    beasts shall terrify them because of the blood of men, and the iniquity
@c    of the land, and of the city, and of all that dwell therein.

@c    The iniquity of Libanus. . .That is, the iniquity committed by the
@c    Chaldeans against the temple of God, signified here by the name of
@c    Libanus.

@c    2:18. What doth the graven thing avail, because the maker thereof hath
@c    graven it, a molten, and a false image?  because the forger thereof hath
@c    trusted in a thing of his own forging, to make dumb idols.

@c    2:19. Woe to him that saith to wood:  Awake:  to the dumb stone:  Arise:
@c    can it teach?  Behold, it is laid over with gold, and silver, and there
@c    is no spirit in the bowels thereof.

@c    2:20. But the Lord is in his holy temple:  let all the earth keep
@c    silence before him.



@c    Habacuc Chapter 3


@c    3:1. A PRAYER OF HABACUC THE PROPHET FOR IGNORANCES.

@c    For ignorances. . .That is, for the sins of his people.  In the Hebrew,
@c    it is Sigionoth:  which some take to signify a musical instrument, or
@c    tune; with which this sublime prayer and canticle was to be sung.

@c    3:2. O Lord, I have heard thy hearing, and was afraid.  O Lord, thy
@c    work, in the midst of the years bring it to life:  In the midst of the
@c    years thou shalt make it known:  when thou art angry, thou wilt remember
@c    mercy.

@c    Thy hearing, etc. . .That is, thy oracles, the great and wonderful
@c    things thou hast revealed to me; and I was struck with a reverential
@c    fear and awe.--Ibid.  Thy work. . .The great work of the redemption of
@c    man, which thou wilt bring to life and light in the midst of the years,
@c    when our calamities and miseries shall be at their height.

@c    3:3. God will come from the south, and the holy one from mount Pharan:
@c    His glory covered the heavens, and the earth is full of his praise.

@c    God will come from the south, etc. . .God himself will come to give us
@c    his law, and to conduct us into the true land of promise:  as heretofore
@c    he came from the South (in the Hebrew Theman) and from mount Pharan to
@c    give his law to his people in the desert.  See Deut. 33.2.

@c    3:4. His brightness shall be as the light:  horns are in his hands:
@c    There is his strength hid:

@c    Horns, etc. . .That is, strength and power, which, by a Hebrew phrase,
@c    are called horns.  Or beams of light, which come forth from his hands.
@c    Or it may allude to the cross, in the horns of which the hands of
@c    Christ were fastened, where his strength was hidden, by which he
@c    overcame the world, and drove out death and the devil.

@c    3:5. Death shall go before his face.  And the devil shall go forth
@c    before his feet.

@c    Death shall go before his face, etc. . .Both death and the devil shall
@c    be the executioners of his justice against his enemies:  as they were
@c    heretofore against the Egyptians and Chanaanites.

@c    3:6. He stood and measured the earth.  He beheld, and melted the
@c    nations:  and the ancient mountains were crushed to pieces.  The hills of
@c    the world were bowed down by the journeys of his eternity.

@c    He beheld, etc. . .One look of his eye is enough to melt all the
@c    nations, and to reduce them to nothing.  For all heaven and earth
@c    disappear when they come before his light.  Apoc. 20.11.  Ibid.  The
@c    ancient mountains, etc. . .By the mountains and hills are signified the
@c    great ones of the world, that persecute the church, whose power was
@c    quickly crushed by the Almighty.

@c    3:7. I saw the tents of Ethiopia for their iniquity, the curtains of
@c    the land of Madian shall be troubled.

@c    Ethiopia. . .the land of the Blacks, and Madian, are here taken for the
@c    enemies of God and his people:  who shall perish for their iniquity.

@c    3:8. Wast thou angry, O Lord, with the rivers?  or was thy wrath upon
@c    the rivers?  or thy indignation in the sea?  Who will ride upon thy
@c    horses:  and thy chariots are salvation.

@c    With the rivers, etc. . .He alludes to the wonders wrought heretofore by
@c    the Lord in favour of his people Israel, when the waters of the rivers,
@c    viz., of Arnon and Jordan, and of the Red Sea, retired before their
@c    face:  when he came as it were with his horses and chariots to save them
@c    when he took up his bow for their defence, in consequence of the oath
@c    he had made to their tribes:  when the mountains trembled, and the deep
@c    stood with its waves raised up in a heap, as with hands lifted up to
@c    heaven:  when the sun and the moon stood still at his command, etc., to
@c    comply with his anger, not against the rivers and sea, but against the
@c    enemies of his people.  How much more will he do in favour of his Son:
@c    and against the enemies of his church?

@c    3:9. Thou wilt surely take up thy bow:  according to the oaths which
@c    thou hast spoken to the tribes.  Thou wilt divide the rivers of the
@c    earth.

@c    3:10. The mountains saw thee, and were grieved:  the great body of
@c    waters passed away.  The deep put forth its voice:  the deep lifted up
@c    its hands.

@c    3:11. The sun and the moon stood still in their habitation, in the
@c    light of thy arrows, they shall go in the brightness of thy glittering
@c    spear.

@c    3:12. In thy anger thou wilt tread the earth under foot:  in thy wrath
@c    thou wilt astonish the nations.

@c    3:13. Thou wentest forth for the salvation of thy people:  for salvation
@c    with thy Christ.  Thou struckest the head of the house of the wicked:
@c    thou hast laid bare his foundation even to the neck.

@c    The head of the house of the wicked. . .Such was Pharao heretofore:  such
@c    shall Antichrist be hereafter.

@c    3:14. Thou hast cursed his sceptres, the head of his warriors, them
@c    that came out as a whirlwind to scatter me.  Their joy was like that of
@c    him that devoureth the poor man in secret.

@c    3:15. Thou madest a way in the sea for thy horses, in the mud of many
@c    waters.

@c    Thou madest a way in the sea, etc. . .To deliver thy people from the
@c    Egyptian bondage:  and thou shalt work the like wonders in the spiritual
@c    way, to rescue the children of the church from their enemies.

@c    3:16. I have heard and my bowels were troubled:  my lips trembled at the
@c    voice.  Let rottenness enter into my bones, and swarm under me.  That I
@c    may rest in the day of tribulation:  that I may go up to our people that
@c    are girded.

@c    I have heard, etc. . .Viz., the evils that are now coming upon the
@c    Israelites for their sins; and that shall come hereafter upon all
@c    impenitent sinners; and the foresight that I have of these miseries
@c    makes me willing to die, that I may be at rest, before this general
@c    tribulation comes, in which all good things shall be withdrawn from the
@c    wicked.--Ibid.  That I may go up to our people, etc. . .That I may join
@c    the happy company in the bosom of Abraham, that are girded, that is,
@c    prepared for their journey, by which they shall attend their Lord, when
@c    he shall ascend into heaven.  To which high and happy place, my Jesus,
@c    that is, my Saviour, the great conqueror of death and hell, shall one
@c    day conduct me rejoicing and singing psalms of praise, ver. 18 and 19.

@c    3:17. For the fig tree shall not blossom:  and there shall be no spring
@c    in the vines.  The labour of the olive tree shall fail:  and the fields
@c    shall yield no food:  the flock shall be cut off from the fold, and
@c    there shall be no herd in the stalls.

@c    3:18. But I will rejoice in the Lord:  and I will joy in God my Jesus.

@c    3:19. The Lord God is my strength:  and he will make my feet like the
@c    feet of harts:  and he the conqueror will lead me upon my high places
@c    singing psalms.
