@c    THE PROPHECY OF ISAIAS



@c    This inspired writer is called by the Holy Ghost, the great prophet,
@c    (Ecclesiasticus 48.25,) from the greatness of his prophetic spirit, by
@c    which he hath foretold so long before, and in so clear a manner, the
@c    coming of Christ, the mysteries of our redemption, the calling of the
@c    Gentiles, and the glorious establishment, and perpetual flourishing of
@c    the church of Christ:  insomuch that he may seem to have been rather an
@c    evangelist than a prophet.  His very name is not without mystery; for
@c    Isaias in Hebrew signifies the salvation of the Lord, or Jesus is the
@c    Lord.  He was, according to the tradition of the Hebrews, of the blood
@c    royal of the kings of Juda:  and after a most holy life, ended his days
@c    by a glorious martyrdom; being sawed in two, at the command of his
@c    wicked son in law, King Manasses, for reproving his evil ways.



@c    Isaias Chapter 1


@c    The prophet complains of the sins of Juda and Jerusalem, and exhorts
@c    them to a sincere conversion.

@c    1:1. The vision of Isaias the Son of Amos, which he saw concerning Juda
@c    and Jerusalem in the days of Ozias, Joathan, Achaz, and Ezechias, kings
@c    of Juda.

@c    1:2. Hear, O ye heavens, and give ear, O earth, for the Lord hath
@c    spoken.  I have brought up children, and exalted them:  but they have
@c    despised me.

@c    1:3. The ox knoweth his owner, and the ass his master's crib:  but
@c    Israel hath not known me, and my people hath not understood.

@c    1:4. Woe to the sinful nation, a people laden with iniquity, a wicked
@c    seed, ungracious children:  they have forsaken the Lord, they have
@c    blasphemed the Holy One of Israel, they are gone away backwards.

@c    1:5. For what shall I strike you any more, you that increase
@c    transgression?  the whole head is sick, and the whole heart is sad.

@c    1:6. From the sole of the foot unto the top of the head, there is no
@c    soundness therein:  wounds and bruises and swelling sores:  they are not
@c    bound up, nor dressed, nor fomented with oil.

@c    1:7. Your land is desolate, your cities are burnt with fire:  your
@c    country strangers devour before your face, and it shall be desolate as
@c    when wasted by enemies.

@c    1:8. And the daughter of Sion shall be left as a covert in a vineyard,
@c    and as a lodge in a garden of cucumbers, and as a city that is laid
@c    waste.

@c    1:9. Except the Lord of hosts had left us seed, we had been as Sodom,
@c    and we should have been like to Gomorrha.

@c    1:10. Hear the word of the Lord, ye rulers of Sodom, give ear to the
@c    law of our God, ye people of Gomorrha.

@c    1:11. To what purpose do you offer me the multitude of your victims,
@c    saith the Lord?  I am full, I desire not holocausts of rams, and fat of
@c    fatlings, and blood of calves, and lambs, and buck goats.

@c    1:12. When you came to appear before me, who required these things at
@c    your hands, that you should walk in my courts?

@c    1:13. Offer sacrifice no more in vain:  incense is an abomination to me.
@c    The new moons, and the sabbaths and other festivals I will not abide,
@c    your assemblies are wicked.

@c    1:14. My soul hateth your new moons, and your solemnities:  they are
@c    become troublesome to me, I am weary of bearing them.

@c    1:15. And when you stretch forth your hands, I will turn away my eyes
@c    from you:  and when you multiply prayer, I will not hear:  for your hands
@c    are full of blood.

@c    1:16. Wash yourselves, be clean, take away the evil of your devices
@c    from my eyes, cease to do perversely,

@c    1:17. Learn to do well:  seek judgment, relieve the oppressed, judge for
@c    the fatherless, defend the widow.

@c    1:18. And then come, and accuse me, saith the Lord:  if your sins be as
@c    scarlet, they shall be made as white as snow:  and if they be red as
@c    crimson, they shall be white as wool.

@c    1:19. If you be willing, and will hearken to me, you shall eat the good
@c    things of the land.

@c    1:20. But if you will not, and will provoke me to wrath:  the sword
@c    shall devour you because the mouth of the Lord hath spoken it.

@c    1:21. How is the faithful city, that was full of judgment, become a
@c    harlot?  justice dwelt in it, but now murderers.

@c    1:22. Thy silver is turned into dross:  thy wine is mingled with water.

@c    1:23. Thy princes are faithless, companions of thieves:  they all love
@c    bribes, they run after rewards.  They judge not for the fatherless:  and
@c    the widow's cause cometh not in to them.

@c    1:24. Therefore saith the Lord the God of hosts, the mighty one of
@c    Israel:  Ah! I will comfort myself over my adversaries:  and I will be
@c    revenged of my enemies.

@c    1:25. And I will turn my hand to thee, and I will clean purge away thy
@c    dross, and I will take away all thy tin.

@c    1:26. And I will restore thy judges as they were before, and thy
@c    counsellors as of old.  After this thou shalt be called the city of the
@c    just, a faithful city.

@c    1:27. Sion shall be redeemed in judgment, and they shall bring her back
@c    in justice.

@c    1:28. And he shall destroy the wicked, and the sinners together:  and
@c    they that have forsaken the Lord, shall be consumed.

@c    1:29. For they shall be confounded for the idols, to which they have
@c    sacrificed:  and you shall be ashamed of the gardens which you have
@c    chosen.

@c    1:30. When you shall be as an oak with the leaves falling off, and as a
@c    garden without water.

@c    1:31. And your strength shall be as the ashes of tow, and your work as
@c    a spark:  and both shall burn together, and there shall be none to
@c    quench it.



@c    Isaias Chapter 2


@c    All nations shall flow to the church of Christ.  The Jews shall be
@c    rejected for their sins.  Idolatry shall be destroyed.

@c    2:1. The word that Isaias the son of Amos saw, concerning Juda and
@c    Jerusalem.

@c    2:2. And in the last days the mountain of the house of the Lord shall
@c    be prepared on the top of mountains, and it shall be exalted above the
@c    hills, and all nations shall flow unto it.

@c    The last days. . .The whole time of the new law, from the coming of
@c    Christ till the end of the world, is called in the scripture the last
@c    days; because no other age or time shall come after it, but only
@c    eternity.--Ibid.  On the top of mountains, etc. . .This shews the
@c    perpetual visibility of the church of Christ:  for a mountain upon the
@c    top of mountains cannot be hid.

@c    2:3. And many people shall go, and say:  Come and let us go up to the
@c    mountain of the Lord, and to the house of the God of Jacob, and he will
@c    teach us his ways, and we will walk in his paths:  for the law shall
@c    come forth from Sion, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem.

@c    2:4. And he shall judge the Gentiles, and rebuke many people:  and they
@c    shall turn their swords into ploughshares, and their spears into
@c    sickles:  nation shall not lift up sword against nation, neither shall
@c    they be exercised any more to war.

@c    2:5. O house of Jacob, come ye, and let us walk in the light of the
@c    Lord.

@c    2:6. For thou hast cast off thy people, the house of Jacob:  because
@c    they are filled as in times past, and have had soothsayers as the
@c    Philistines, and have adhered to strange children.

@c    2:7. Their land is filled with silver and gold:  and there is no end of
@c    their treasures.

@c    2:8. And their land is filled with horses:  and their chariots are
@c    innumerable.  Their land also is full of idols:  they have adored the
@c    work of their own hands, which their own fingers have made.

@c    2:9. And man hath bowed himself down, and man hath been debased:
@c    therefore forgive them not.

@c    2:10. Enter thou into the rock, and hide thee in the pit from the face
@c    of the fear of the Lord, and from the glory of his majesty.

@c    2:11. The lofty eyes of man are humbled, and the haughtiness of men
@c    shall be made to stoop:  and the Lord alone shall be exalted in that
@c    day.

@c    2:12. Because the day of the Lord of hosts shall be upon every one that
@c    is proud and highminded, and upon every one that is arrogant, and he
@c    shall be humbled.

@c    2:13. And upon all the tall and lofty cedars of Libanus, and upon all
@c    the oaks of Basan.

@c    2:14. And upon all the high mountains and upon all the elevated hills.

@c    2:15. And upon every high tower, and every fenced wall.

@c    2:16. And upon all the ships of Tharsis, and upon all that is fair to
@c    behold.

@c    2:17. And the loftiness of men shall be bowed down, and the haughtiness
@c    of men shall be humbled, and the Lord alone shall be exalted in that
@c    day.

@c    2:18. And idols shall be utterly destroyed.

@c    Idols shall be utterly destroyed. . .or utterly pass away.  This was
@c    verified by the establishment of Christianity.  And by this and other
@c    texts of the like nature, the wild system of some modern sectaries is
@c    abundantly confuted, who charge the whole Christian church with
@c    worshipping idols, for many ages.

@c    2:19. And they shall go into the holes of rocks, and into the caves of
@c    the earth from the face of the fear of the Lord, and from the glory of
@c    his majesty, when he shall rise up to strike the earth.

@c    2:20. In that day a man shall cast away his idols of silver, and his
@c    idols of gold, which he had made for himself to adore, moles and bats.

@c    2:21. And he shall go into the clefts of rocks, and into the holes of
@c    stones from the face of the fear of the Lord, and from the glory of his
@c    majesty, when he shall rise up to strike the earth.

@c    2:22. Cease ye therefore from the man, whose breath is in his nostrils,
@c    for he is reputed high.



@c    Isaias Chapter 3


@c    The confusion and other evils that shall come upon the Jews for their
@c    sins.  The pride of their women shall be punished.

@c    3:1. For behold the sovereign Lord of hosts shall take away from
@c    Jerusalem, and from Juda the valiant and the strong, the whole strength
@c    of bread, and the whole strength of water.

@c    3:2. The strong man, and the man of war, the judge, and the prophet and
@c    the cunning man, and the ancient.

@c    3:3. The captain over fifty, and the honourable in countenance, and the
@c    counsellor, and the architect, and the skilful in eloquent speech.

@c    3:4. And I will give children to be their princes, and the effeminate
@c    shall rule over them.

@c    3:5. And the people shall rush one upon another, and every man against
@c    his neighbour:  the child shall make a tumult against the ancient, and
@c    the base against the honourable.

@c    3:6. For a man shall take hold of his brother, one of the house of his
@c    father, saying:  Thou hast a garment, be thou our ruler, and let this
@c    ruin be under thy hand.

@c    3:7. In that day he shall answer, saying:  I am no healer, and in my
@c    house there is no bread, nor clothing:  make me not ruler of the people.

@c    3:8. For Jerusalem is ruined, and Juda is fallen:  because their tongue,
@c    and their devices are against the Lord, to provoke the eyes of his
@c    majesty.

@c    3:9. The shew of their countenance hath answered them:  and they have
@c    proclaimed abroad their sin as Sodom, and they have not hid it:  woe to
@c    their souls, for evils are rendered to them.

@c    3:10. Say to the just man that it is well, for he shall eat the fruit
@c    of his doings.

@c    3:11. Woe to the wicked unto evil:  for the reward of his hands shall be
@c    given him.

@c    3:12. As for my people, their oppressors have stripped them, and women
@c    have ruled over them.  O my people, they that call thee blessed, the
@c    same deceive thee, and destroy the way of thy steps.

@c    3:13. The Lord standeth up to judge, and he standeth to judge the
@c    people.

@c    3:14. The Lord will enter into judgment with the ancients of his
@c    people, and its princes:  for you have devoured the vineyard, and the
@c    spoil of the poor is in your house.

@c    3:15. Why do you consume my people, and grind the faces of the poor?
@c    saith the Lord the God of hosts.

@c    3:16. And the Lord said:  Because the daughters of Sion are haughty, and
@c    have walked with stretched out necks, and wanton glances of their eyes,
@c    and made a noise as they walked with their feet and moved in a set
@c    pace:

@c    3:17. The Lord will make bald the crown of the head of the daughters of
@c    Sion, and the Lord will discover their hair.

@c    3:18. In that day the Lord will take away the ornaments of shoes, and
@c    little moons,

@c    3:19. And chains and necklaces, and bracelets, and bonnets,

@c    3:20. And bodkins, and ornaments of the legs, and tablets, and sweet
@c    balls, and earrings,

@c    3:21. And rings, and jewels hanging on the forehead,

@c    3:22. And changes of apparel, and short cloaks, and fine linen, and
@c    crisping pins,

@c    3:23. And lookingglasses, and lawns, and headbands, and fine veils.

@c    3:24. And instead of a sweet smell there shall be stench, and instead
@c    of a girdle, a cord, and instead of curled hair, baldness, and instead
@c    of a stomacher, haircloth.

@c    3:25. Thy fairest men also shall fall by the sword, and thy valiant
@c    ones in battle.

@c    3:26. And her gates shall lament and mourn, and she shall sit desolate
@c    on the ground.



@c    Isaias Chapter 4


@c    After an extremity of evils that shall fall upon the Jews, a remnant
@c    shall be comforted by Christ.

@c    4:1. And in that day seven women shall take hold of one man, saying:  We
@c    will eat our own bread, and wear our own apparel:  only let us be called
@c    by thy name, take away our reproach.

@c    4:2. In that day the bud of the Lord shall be in magnificence and
@c    glory, and the fruit of the earth shall be high, and a great joy to
@c    them that shall have escaped of Israel.

@c    The bud of the Lord. . .That is, Christ.

@c    4:3. And it shall come to pass, that every one that shall be left in
@c    Sion, and that shall remain in Jerusalem, shall be called holy, every
@c    one that is written in life in Jerusalem.

@c    4:4. If the Lord shall wash away the filth of the daughters of Sion,
@c    and shall wash away the blood of Jerusalem out of the midst thereof, by
@c    the spirit of judgment, and by the spirit of burning.

@c    4:5. And the Lord will create upon every place of mount Sion, and where
@c    he is called upon, a cloud by day, and a smoke and the brightness of a
@c    flaming fire in the night:  for over all the glory shall be a
@c    protection.

@c    4:6. And there shall be a tabernacle for a shade in the daytime from
@c    the heat, and for a security and covert from the whirlwind, and from
@c    rain.



@c    Isaias Chapter 5


@c    The reprobation of the Jews is foreshewn under the parable of a
@c    vineyard.  A woe is pronounced against sinners:  the army of God shall
@c    send against them.

@c    5:1. I will sing to my beloved the canticle of my cousin concerning his
@c    vineyard.  My beloved had a vineyard on a hill in a fruitful place.

@c    My cousin. . .So the prophet calls Christ, as being of his family and
@c    kindred, by descending from the house of David.  Ibid.  On a hill,
@c    etc. . .Literally, in the horn, the son of oil.

@c    5:2. And he fenced it in, and picked the stones out of it, and planted
@c    it with the choicest vines, and built a tower in the midst thereof, and
@c    set up a winepress therein:  and he looked that it should bring forth
@c    grapes, and it brought forth wild grapes.

@c    5:3. And now, O ye inhabitants of Jerusalem, and ye men of Juda, judge
@c    between me and my vineyard.

@c    5:4. What is there that I ought to do more to my vineyard, that I have
@c    not done to it?  was it that I looked that it should bring forth grapes,
@c    and it hath brought forth wild grapes?

@c    5:5. And now I will shew you what I will do to my vineyard.  I will take
@c    away the hedge thereof, and it shall be wasted:  I will break down the
@c    wall thereof, and it shall be trodden down.

@c    5:6. And I will make it desolate:  it shall not be pruned, and it shall
@c    not be digged:  but briers and thorns shall come up:  and I will command
@c    the clouds to rain no rain upon it.

@c    5:7. For the vineyard of the Lord of hosts is the house of Israel:  and
@c    the man of Juda, his pleasant plant:  and I looked that he should do
@c    judgment, and behold iniquity:  and do justice, and behold a cry.

@c    5:8. Woe to you that join house to house and lay field to field, even
@c    to the end of the place:  shall you alone dwell in the midst of the
@c    earth?

@c    5:9. These things are in my ears, saith the Lord of hosts:  Unless many
@c    great and fair houses shall become desolate, without an inhabitant.

@c    5:10. For ten acres of vineyard shall yield one little measure, and
@c    thirty bushels of seed shall yield three bushels.

@c    5:11. Woe to you that rise up early in the morning to follow
@c    drunkenness, and to drink in the evening, to be inflamed with wine.

@c    5:12. The harp, and the lyre, and, the timbrel and the pipe, and wine
@c    are in your feasts:  and the work of the Lord you regard not, nor do you
@c    consider the works of his hands.

@c    5:13. Therefore is my people led away captive, because they had not
@c    knowledge, and their nobles have perished with famine, and their
@c    multitude were dried up with thirst.

@c    5:14. Therefore hath hell enlarged her soul, and opened her mouth
@c    without any bounds, and their strong ones, and their people, and their
@c    high and glorious ones shall go down into it.

@c    5:15. And man shall be brought down, and man shall be humbled, and the
@c    eyes of the lofty shall be brought low.

@c    5:16. And the Lord of hosts shall be exalted in judgment, and the holy
@c    God shall be sanctified in justice.

@c    5:17. And the lambs shall feed according to their order, and strangers
@c    shall eat the deserts turned into fruitfulness.

@c    5:18. Woe to you that draw iniquity with cords of vanity, and sin as
@c    the rope of a cart.

@c    5:19. That say:  Let him make haste, and let his work come quickly, that
@c    we may see it:  and let the counsel of the Holy One of Israel come, that
@c    we may know it.

@c    5:20. Woe to you that call evil good, and good evil:  that put darkness
@c    for light, and light for darkness:  that put bitter for sweet, and sweet
@c    for bitter.

@c    5:21. Woe to you that are wise in your own eyes, and prudent in your
@c    own conceits.

@c    5:22. Woe to you that are mighty to drink wine, and stout men at
@c    drunkenness.

@c    5:23. That justify the wicked for gifts, and take away the justice of
@c    the just from him.

@c    5:24. Therefore as the tongue of the fire devoureth the stubble, and
@c    the heat of the flame consumeth it:  so shall their root be as ashes,
@c    and their bud shall go up as dust:  for they have cast away the law of
@c    the Lord of hosts, and have blasphemed the word of the Holy One of
@c    Israel.

@c    5:25. Therefore is the wrath of the Lord kindled against his people,
@c    and he hath stretched out his hand upon them, and struck them:  and the
@c    mountains were troubles, and their carcasses became as dung in the
@c    midst of the streets.  For after this his anger is not turned away, but
@c    his hand is stretched out still.

@c    5:26. And he will lift up a sign to the nations afar off, and will
@c    whistle to them from the ends of the earth:  and behold they shall come
@c    with speed swiftly.

@c    5:27. There is none that shall faint, nor labour among them:  they shall
@c    not slumber nor sleep, neither shall the girdle of their loins be
@c    loosed, nor the latchet of their shoes be broken.

@c    5:28. Their arrows are sharp, and all their bows are bent.  The hoofs of
@c    their horses shall be like the flint, and their wheels like the
@c    violence of a tempest.

@c    5:29. Their roaring like that of a lion, they shall roar like young
@c    lions:  yea they shall roar, and take hold of the prey, and they shall
@c    keep fast hold of it, and there shall be none to deliver it.

@c    5:30. And they shall make a noise against them that day, like the
@c    roaring of the sea; we shall look towards the land, and behold darkness
@c    of tribulation, and the light is darkened with the mist thereof.



@c    Isaias Chapter 6


@c    A glorious vision, in which the prophet's lips are cleansed:  he
@c    foretelleth the obstinacy of the Jews.

@c    6:1. In the year that king Ozias died, I saw the Lord sitting upon a
@c    throne high and elevated:  and his train filled the temple.

@c    6:2. Upon it stood the seraphims:  the one had six wings, and the other
@c    had six wings:  with two they covered his face, and with two they
@c    covered his feet, and with two they flew.

@c    6:3. And they cried one to another, and said:  Holy, holy, holy, the
@c    Lord God of hosts, all the earth is full of his glory,

@c    6:4. And the lintels of the doors were moved at the voice of him that
@c    cried, and the house was filled with smoke.

@c    6:5. And I said:  Woe is me, because I have held my peace; because I am
@c    a man of unclean lips, and I dwell in the midst of a people that hath
@c    unclean lips, and I have seen with my eyes the King the Lord of hosts.

@c    6:6. And one of the seraphims flew to me, and in his hand was a live
@c    coal, which he had taken with the tongs off the altar.

@c    6:7. And he touched my mouth, and said:  Behold this hath touched thy
@c    lips, and thy iniquities shall be taken away, and thy sin shall be
@c    cleansed.

@c    6:8. And I heard the voice of the Lord, saying:  Whom shall I send?  and
@c    who shall go for us?  And I said:  Lo, here am I, send me.

@c    6:9. And he said:  Go, and thou shalt say to this people:  Hearing, hear,
@c    and understand not:  and see the vision, and know it not.

@c    6:10. Blind the heart of this people, and make their ears heavy, and
@c    shut their eyes:  lest they see with their eyes, and hear with their
@c    ears, and understand with their heart, and be converted and I heal
@c    them.

@c    6:11. And I said:  How long, O Lord?  And he said:  Until the cities be
@c    wasted without inhabitant, and the houses without man, and the land
@c    shall be left desolate.

@c    6:12. And the Lord shall remove men far away, and she shall be
@c    multiplied that was left in the midst of the earth.

@c    6:13. And there shall be still a tithing therein, and she shall turn,
@c    and shall be made a show as a turpentine tree, and as an oak that
@c    spreadeth its branches:  that which shall stand therein, shall be a holy
@c    seed.



@c    Isaias Chapter 7


@c    The prophet assures king Achaz that the two kings his enemies shall not
@c    take Jerusalem.  A virgin shall conceive and bear a son.

@c    7:1. And it came to pass in the days of Achaz the son of Joathan, the
@c    son of Ozias, king of Juda, that Rasin king of Syria and Phacee the son
@c    of Romelia king of Israel, came up to Jerusalem, to fight against it:
@c    but they could not prevail over it.

@c    7:2. And they told the house of David, saying:  Syria hath rested upon
@c    Ephraim, and his heart was moved, and the heart of his people, as the
@c    trees of the woods are moved with the wind.

@c    7:3. And the Lord said to Isaias:  Go forth to meet Achaz, thou and
@c    Jasub thy son that is left, to the conduit of the upper pool in the way
@c    of the fuller's field.

@c    7:4. And thou shalt say to him:  See thou be quiet:  fear not, and let
@c    not thy heart be afraid of the two tails of these firebrands, smoking
@c    with the wrath of the fury of Rasin king of Syria, and of the son of
@c    Romelia.

@c    7:5. Because Syria hath taken counsel against thee, unto the evil of
@c    Ephraim and the son of Romelia, saying:

@c    7:6. Let us go up to Juda, and rouse it up, and draw it away to us, and
@c    make the son of Tabeel king in the midst thereof.

@c    7:7. Thus saith the Lord God:  It shall not stand, and this shall not
@c    be.

@c    7:8. But the head of Syria is Damascus, and the head of Damascus is
@c    Rasin:  and within threescore and five years, Ephraim shall cease to be
@c    a people:

@c    7:9. And the head of Ephraim is Samaria, and the head of Samaria is the
@c    son of Romelia.  If you will not believe, you shall not continue.

@c    7:10. And the Lord spoke again to Achaz, saying:

@c    7:11. Ask thee a sign of the Lord thy God, either unto the depth of
@c    hell, or unto the height above.

@c    7:12. And Achaz said:  I will not ask, and I will not tempt the Lord.

@c    7:13. And he said:  Hear ye therefore, O house of David:  Is it a small
@c    thing for you to be grievous to men, that you are grievous to my God
@c    also?

@c    7:14. Therefore the Lord himself shall give you a sign.  Behold a virgin
@c    shall conceive, and bear a son and his name shall be called Emmanuel.

@c    7:15. He shall eat butter and honey, that he may know to refuse the
@c    evil, and to choose the good.

@c    7:16. For before the child know to refuse the evil and to choose the
@c    good, the land which thou abhorrest shall be forsaken of the face of
@c    her two kings.

@c    7:17. The Lord shall bring upon thee, and upon thy people, and upon the
@c    house of thy father, days that have not come since the time of the
@c    separation of Ephraim from Juda with the king of the Assyrians.

@c    7:18. And it shall come to pass in that day, that the Lord shall hiss
@c    for the fly, that is in the uttermost parts of the rivers of Egypt, and
@c    for the bee that is in the land of Assyria.

@c    7:19. And they shall come, and shall all of them rest in the torrents
@c    of the valleys, and in the holes of the rocks, and upon all places set
@c    with shrubs, and in all hollow places.

@c    7:20. In that day the Lord shall shave with a razor that is hired by
@c    them that are beyond the river, by the king of the Assyrians, the head
@c    and the hairs of the feet, and the whole beard.

@c    7:21. And it shall come to pass in that day, that a man shall nourish a
@c    young cow, and two sheep.

@c    7:22. And for the abundance of milk he shall eat butter:  for butter and
@c    honey shall every one eat that shall be left in the midst of the land.

@c    7:23. And it shall come to pass in that day, that every place where
@c    there were a thousand vines, at a thousand pieces of silver, shall
@c    become thorns and briers.

@c    7:24. With arrows and with bows they shall go in thither:  for briers
@c    and thorns shall be in all the land.

@c    7:25. And as for the hills that shall be raked with a rake, the fear of
@c    thorns and briers shall not come thither, but they shall be for the ox
@c    to feed on, and the lesser cattle to tread upon.



@c    Isaias Chapter 8


@c    The name of a child that is to be born:  many evils shall come upon the
@c    Jews for their sins.

@c    8:1. And the Lord said to me:  Take thee a great book, and write in it
@c    with a man's pen.  Take away the spoils with speed, quickly take the
@c    prey.

@c    8:2. And I took unto me faithful witnesses, Urias the priest, and
@c    Zacharias the son of Barachias.

@c    8:3. And I went to the prophetess, and she conceived, and bore a son.
@c    And the Lord said to me:  Call his name, Hasten to take away the spoils:
@c    Make hast to take away the prey.

@c    8:4. For before the child know to call his father and his mother, the
@c    strength of Damascus, and the spoils of Samaria shall be taken away
@c    before the king of the Assyrians.

@c    8:5. And the Lord spoke to me again, saying:

@c    8:6. Forasmuch as this people hath cast away the waters of Siloe, that
@c    go with silence, and hath rather taken Rasin, and the son of Romelia:

@c    8:7. Therefore behold the Lord will bring upon them the waters of the
@c    river strong and many, the king of the Assyrians, and all his glory:
@c    and he shall come up over all his channels, and shall overflow all his
@c    banks.

@c    8:8. And shall pass through Juda, overflowing, and going over shall
@c    reach even to the neck.  And the stretching out of his wings shall fill
@c    the breadth of thy, land, O Emmanuel.

@c    8:9. Gather yourselves together, O ye people, and be overcome, and give
@c    ear, all ye lands afar off:  strengthen yourselves, and be overcome,
@c    gird yourselves, and be overcome.

@c    8:10. Take counsel together, and it shall be defeated:  speak a word,
@c    and it shall not be done:  because God is with us.

@c    8:11. For thus saith the Lord to me:  As he hath taught me, with a
@c    strong arm, that I should not walk in the way of this people, saying:

@c    8:12. Say ye not:  A conspiracy:  for all that this people speaketh, is a
@c    conspiracy:  neither fear ye their fear, nor be afraid.

@c    8:13. Sanctify the Lord of hosts himself:  and let him be your fear, and
@c    let him be your dread.

@c    8:14. And he shall be a sanctification to you.  But for a stone of
@c    stumbling, and for a rock of offence to the two houses of Israel, for a
@c    snare and a ruin to the inhabitants of Jerusalem.

@c    8:15. And very many of them shall stumble and fall, and shall be broken
@c    in pieces, and shall be snared, and taken.

@c    8:16. Bind up the testimony, seal the law among my disciples.

@c    8:17. And I will wait for the Lord, who hath hid his face from the
@c    house of Jacob, and I will look for him.

@c    8:18. Behold I and my children, whom the Lord hath given me for a sign,
@c    and for a wonder in Israel from the Lord of hosts, who dwelleth in
@c    mount Sion.

@c    8:19. And when they shall say to you:  Seek of pythons, and of diviners,
@c    who mutter in their enchantments:  should not the people seek of their
@c    God, for the living of the dead?

@c    Seek of pythons. . .That is, people pretending to tell future things by
@c    a prophesying spirit.--Ibid.  Should not the people seek of their God,
@c    for the living of the dead?. . .Here is signified, that it is to God we
@c    should pray to be directed, and not to seek of the dead, (that is, of
@c    fortune-tellers dead in sin,) for the health of the living.

@c    8:20. To the law rather, and to the testimony.  And if they speak not
@c    according to this word, they shall not have the morning light.

@c    8:21. And they shall pass by it, they shall fall, and be hungry:  and
@c    when they shall be hungry, they will be angry, and curse their king,
@c    and their God, and look upwards.

@c    8:22. And they shall look to the earth, and behold trouble and
@c    darkness, weakness and distress, and a mist following them, and they
@c    cannot fly away from their distress.



@c    Isaias Chapter 9


@c    What joy shall come after afflictions by the birth and kingdom of
@c    Christ; which shall flourish for ever.  Judgments upon Israel for their
@c    sins.

@c    9:1. At the first time the land of Zabulon, and the land of Nephtali
@c    was lightly touched:  and at the last the way of the sea beyond the
@c    Jordan of the Galilee of the Gentiles was heavily loaded.

@c    9:2. The people that walked in darkness, have seen a great light:  to
@c    them that dwelt in the region of the shadow of death, light is risen.

@c    9:3. Thou hast multiplied the nation, and hast not increased the joy.
@c    They shall rejoice before thee, as they that rejoice in the harvest, as
@c    conquerors rejoice after taking a prey, when they divide the spoils.

@c    9:4. For the yoke of their burden, and the rod of their shoulder, and
@c    the sceptre of their oppressor thou hast overcome, as in the day of
@c    Madian.

@c    9:5. For every violent taking of spoils, with tumult, and garment
@c    mingled with blood, shall be burnt, and be fuel for the fire.

@c    9:6. For a CHILD IS BORN to us, and a son is given to us, and the
@c    government is upon his shoulder:  and his name shall be called
@c    Wonderful, Counsellor, God the Mighty, the Father of the world to come,
@c    the Prince of Peace.

@c    9:7. His empire shall be multiplied, and there shall be no end of
@c    peace:  he shall sit upon the throne of David, and upon his kingdom; to
@c    establish it and strengthen it with judgment and with justice, from
@c    henceforth and for ever:  the zeal of the Lord of hosts will perform
@c    this.

@c    9:8. The Lord sent a word into Jacob, and it hath lighted upon Israel.

@c    9:9. And all the people of Ephraim shall know, and the inhabitants of
@c    Samaria that say in the pride and haughtiness of their heart:

@c    9:10. The bricks are fallen down, but we will build with square stones:
@c    they have cut down the sycamores, but we will change them for cedars.

@c    9:11. And the Lord shall set up the enemies of Rasin over him, and
@c    shall bring on his enemies in a crowd:

@c    9:12. The Syrians from the east, and, the Philistines from the west:
@c    and they shall devour Israel with open mouth.  For all this his
@c    indignation is not turned away, but his hand is stretched out still.

@c    9:13. And the people are not returned to him who hath struck them, and
@c    have not sought after the Lord of hosts.

@c    9:14. And the Lord shall destroy out of Israel the head and the tail,
@c    him that bendeth down, and him that holdeth back, in one day.

@c    9:15. The aged and honourable, he is the head:  and the prophet that
@c    teacheth lies, he is the tail.

@c    9:16. And they that call this people blessed, shall cause them to err:
@c    and they that are called blessed, shall be thrown down, headlong.

@c    9:17. Therefore the Lord shall have no joy in their young men:  neither
@c    shall he have mercy on their fatherless, and widows:  for every one is a
@c    hypocrite and wicked, and every mouth hath spoken folly.  For all this
@c    his indignation is not turned away, but his hand is stretched out
@c    still.

@c    9:18. For wickedness is kindled as a fire, it shall devour the brier
@c    and the thorn:  and shall kindle in the thicket of the forest, and it
@c    shall be wrapped up in smoke ascending on high.

@c    9:19. By the wrath of the Lord of hosts the land is troubled, and the
@c    people shall be as fuel for the fire:  no man shall spare his brother.

@c    9:20. And he shall turn to the right hand, and shall be hungry:  and
@c    shall eat on the left hand, and shall not be filled:  every one shall
@c    eat the flesh of his own arm:  Manasses Ephraim, and Ephraim Manasses,
@c    and they together shall be against Juda.

@c    9:21. After all these things his indignation is not turned away, but
@c    his hand is stretched out still.



@c    Isaias Chapter 10


@c    Woe to the makers of wicked laws.  The Assyrian shall be a rod for
@c    punishing Israel:  but for their pride they shall be destroyed:  and a
@c    remnant of Israel saved.

@c    10:1. Woe to them that make wicked laws:  and when they write, write
@c    injustice:

@c    10:2. To oppress the poor in judgment, and do violence to the cause of
@c    the humble of my people:  that widows might be their prey, and that they
@c    might rob the fatherless.

@c    10:3. What will you do in the day of visitation, and of the calamity
@c    which cometh from afar?  to whom will ye flee for help?  and where will
@c    ye leave your glory?

@c    10:4. That you be not bowed down under the bond, and fall with the
@c    slain?  In all these things his anger is not turned away, but his hand
@c    is stretched out still.

@c    10:5. Woe to the Assyrian, he is the rod and the staff of my anger, and
@c    my indignation is in their hands.

@c    10:6. I will send him to a deceitful nation, and I will give him a
@c    charge against the people of my wrath, to take away the spoils, and to
@c    lay hold on the prey, and to tread them down like the mire of the
@c    streets.

@c    10:7. But he shall not take it so, and his heart shall not think so:
@c    but his heart shall be set to destroy, and to cut off nations not a
@c    few.

@c    10:8. For he shall say:

@c    10:9. Are not my princes as so many kings?  is not Calano as Charcamis:
@c    and Emath as Arphad?  is not Samaria as Damascus?

@c    10:10. As my hand hath found the kingdoms of the idol, so also their
@c    idols of Jerusalem, and of Samaria.

@c    10:11. Shall I not, as I have done to Samaria and her idols, so do to
@c    Jerusalem and her idols?

@c    10:12. And it shall come to pass, that when the Lord shall have
@c    performed all his works in mount Sion, and in Jerusalem, I will visit
@c    the fruit of the proud heart of the king of Assyria, and the glory of
@c    the haughtiness of his eyes.

@c    10:13. For he hath said:  By the strength of my own hand I have done it,
@c    and by my own wisdom I have understood:  and I have removed the bounds
@c    of the people, and have taken the spoils of the princes, and as a
@c    mighty man hath pulled down them that sat on high.

@c    10:14. And my hand hath found the strength of the people as a nest; and
@c    as eggs are gathered, that are left, so have I gathered all the earth:
@c    and there was none that moved the wing, or opened the mouth, or made
@c    the least noise.

@c    10:15. Shall the axe boast itself against him that cutteth with it?  or
@c    shall the saw exalt itself against him by whom it is drawn?  as if a rod
@c    should lift itself up against him that lifteth it up, and a staff exalt
@c    itself, which is but wood.

@c    10:16. Therefore the sovereign Lord, the Lord of hosts, shall send
@c    leanness among his fat ones:  and under his glory shall be kindled a
@c    burning, as it were the burning of a fire.

@c    10:17. And the light of Israel shall be as a fire, and the Holy One
@c    thereof as a flame:  and his thorns and his briers shall be set on fire,
@c    and shall be devoured in one day.

@c    10:18. And the glory of his forest, and of his beautiful hill, shall be
@c    consumed from the soul even to the flesh, and he shall run away through
@c    fear.

@c    10:19. And they that remain of the trees of his forest shall be so few,
@c    that they shall easily be numbered, and a child shall write them down.

@c    10:20. And it shall come to pass in that day, that the remnant of
@c    Israel, and they that shall escape of the house of Jacob, shall lean no
@c    more upon him that striketh them:  but they shall lean upon the Lord the
@c    Holy One of Israel, in truth.

@c    10:21. The remnant shall be converted, the remnant, I say, of Jacob, to
@c    the mighty God.

@c    10:22. For if thy people, O Israel, shall be as the sand of the sea, a
@c    remnant of them shall be converted, the consumption abridged shall
@c    overflow with justice.

@c    A remnant of them shall be converted. . .This was partly verified in the
@c    children of Israel who remained after the devastations of the
@c    Assyrians, in the time of king Ezechias:  and partly in the conversion
@c    of a remnant of the Jews to the faithful of Christ.--Ibid.  The
@c    consumption abridged, etc. . .That is, the number of them cut short, and
@c    reduced to few, shall flourish in abundance of justice.

@c    10:23. For the Lord God of hosts shall make a consumption, and an
@c    abridgment in the midst of all the land.

@c    10:24. Therefore, thus saith the Lord the God of hosts:  O my people
@c    that dwellest in Sion, be not afraid of the Assyrian:  he shall strike
@c    thee with his rod, and he shall lift up his staff over thee in the way
@c    of Egypt.

@c    10:25. For yet a little and a very little while, and my indignation
@c    shall cease, and my wrath shall be upon their wickedness.

@c    10:26. And the Lord of hosts shall raise up a scourge against him,
@c    according to the slaughter of Madian in the rock of Oreb, and his rod
@c    over the sea, and he shall lift it up in the way of Egypt.

@c    10:27. And it shall come to pass in that day, that his burden shall be
@c    taken away from off thy shoulder, and his yoke from off thy neck, and
@c    the yoke shall putrefy at the presence of the oil.

@c    At the presence of the oil. . .That is, by the sweet unction of divine
@c    mercy.

@c    10:28. He shall come into Aiath, he shall pass into Magron:  at Machmas
@c    he shall lay up his carriages.

@c    Into Aiath, etc. . .Here the prophet describes the march of the
@c    Assyrians under Sennacherib; and the terror they should carry with
@c    them; and how they should suddenly be destroyed.

@c    10:29. They have passed in haste, Gaba is our lodging:  Rama was
@c    astonished, Gabaath of Saul fled away.

@c    10:30. Lift up thy voice, O daughter of Gallim, attend, O Laisa, poor
@c    Anathoth.

@c    10:31. Medemena is removed:  ye inhabitants of Gabim, take courage.

@c    10:32. It is yet day enough, to remain in Nobe:  he shall shake his hand
@c    against the mountain of the daughter of Sion, the hill of Jerusalem.

@c    10:33. Behold the sovereign Lord of hosts shall break the earthen
@c    vessel with terror, and the tall of stature shall be cut down, and the
@c    lofty shall be humbled.

@c    10:34. And the thickets of the forest shall be cut down with iron, and
@c    Libanus with its high ones shall fall.



@c    Isaias Chapter 11


@c    Of the spiritual kingdom of Christ, to which all nations shall repair.

@c    11:1. And there shall come forth a rod out of the root of Jesse, and a
@c    flower shall rise up out of his root.

@c    11:2. And the spirit of the Lord shall rest upon him:  the spirit of
@c    wisdom, and of understanding, the spirit of counsel, and of fortitude,
@c    the spirit of knowledge, and of godliness.

@c    11:3. And he shall be filled with the spirit of the fear of the Lord,
@c    He shall not judge according to the sight of the eyes, nor reprove
@c    according to the hearing of the ears.

@c    11:4. But he shall judge the poor with justice, and shall reprove with
@c    equity the meek of the earth:  and he shall strike the earth with the
@c    rod of his mouth, and with the breath of his lips he shall slay the
@c    wicked.

@c    11:5. And justice shall be the girdle of his loins:  and faith the
@c    girdle of his reins.

@c    11:6. The wolf shall dwell with the lamb:  and the leopard shall lie
@c    down with the kid:  the calf and the lion, and the sheep shall abide
@c    together, and a little child shall lead them.

@c    11:7. The calf and the bear shall feed:  their young ones shall rest
@c    together:  and the lion shall eat straw like the ox.

@c    11:8. And the sucking child shall play on other hole of the asp:  and
@c    the weaned child shall thrust his hand into the den of the basilisk.

@c    11:9. They shall not hurt, nor shall they kill in all my holy mountain,
@c    for the earth is filled with the knowledge of the Lord, as the covering
@c    waters of the sea.

@c    11:10. In that day the root of Jesse, who standeth for an ensign of the
@c    people, him the Gentiles shall beseech, and his sepulchre shall be
@c    glorious.

@c    11:11. And it shall come to pass in that day, that the Lord shall set
@c    his hand the second time to possess the remnant of his people, which
@c    shall be left from the Assyrians, and from Egypt, and from Phetros, and
@c    from Ethiopia, and from Elam, and from Sennaar, and from Emath, and
@c    from the islands of the sea.

@c    11:12. And he shall set up a standard unto the nations, and shall
@c    assemble the fugitives of Israel, and shall gather together the
@c    dispersed of Juda from the four quarters of the earth.

@c    11:13. And the envy of Ephraim shall be taken away, and the enemies of
@c    Juda shall perish:  Ephraim shall not envy Juda, and Juda shall not
@c    fight against Ephraim.

@c    11:14. But they shall fly upon the shoulders of the Philistines by the
@c    sea, they together shall spoil the children of the east:  Edom, till
@c    Moab shall be under the rule of their hand, and the children of Ammon
@c    shall be obedient.

@c    11:15. And the Lord shall lay waste the tongue of the sea of Egypt, and
@c    shall lift up his hand over the river in the strength of his spirit:
@c    and he shall strike it in the seven streams, so that men may pass
@c    through it in their shoes.

@c    11:16. And there shall be a highway for the remnant of my people, which
@c    shall be left from the Assyrians:  as there was for Israel in the day
@c    that he came up out of the land of Egypt.



@c    Isaias Chapter 12


@c    A canticle of thanksgiving for the benefits of Christ.

@c    12:1. And thou shalt say in that day:  I will give thanks to thee, O
@c    Lord, for thou wast angry with me:  thy wrath is turned away, and thou
@c    hast comforted me.

@c    12:2. Behold, God is my saviour, I will deal confidently, and will not
@c    fear:  because the Lord is my strength, and my praise, and he is become
@c    my salvation.

@c    12:3. Thou shall draw waters with joy out of the saviour's fountains:

@c    12:4. And you shall say in that day:  Praise ye the Lord, and call upon
@c    his name:  make his works known among the people:  remember that his name
@c    is high.

@c    12:5. Sing ye to the Lord, for he hath done great things:  shew this
@c    forth in all the earth.

@c    12:6. Rejoice, and praise, O thou habitation of Sion:  for great is he
@c    that is in the midst of thee, the Holy One of Israel.



@c    Isaias Chapter 13


@c    The desolation of Babylon.

@c    13:1. The burden of Babylon which Isaias the son of Amos saw.

@c    The burden of Babylon. . .That is, a prophecy against Babylon.

@c    13:2. Upon the dark mountain lift ye up a banner, exalt the voice, lift
@c    up the hand, and let the rulers go into the gates.

@c    13:3. I have commanded my sanctified ones, and have called my strong
@c    ones in my wrath, them that rejoice in my glory.

@c    13:4. The noise of a multitude in the mountains, as it were of many
@c    people, the noise of the sound of kings, of nations gathered together:
@c    the Lord of hosts hath given charge to the troops of war.

@c    13:5. To them that come from a country afar off, from the end of
@c    heaven:  the Lord and the instruments of his wrath, to destroy the whole
@c    land.

@c    13:6. Howl ye, for the day of the Lord is near:  it shall come as a
@c    destruction from the Lord.

@c    13:7. Therefore shall all hands be faint, and every heart of man shall
@c    melt,

@c    13:8. And shall be broken.  Gripings and pains, shall take hold of them,
@c    they shall be in pain as a woman in labour.  Every one shall be amazed
@c    at his neighbour, their countenances shall be as faces burnt.

@c    13:9. Behold, the day of the Lord shall come, a cruel day, and full of
@c    indignation, and of wrath, and fury, to lay the land desolate, and to
@c    destroy the sinners thereof out of it.

@c    13:10. For the stars of heaven, and their brightness shall not display
@c    their light:  the sun shall be darkened in his rising, and the moon
@c    shall not shine with her light.

@c    13:11. And I will visit the evils of the world, and against the wicked
@c    for their iniquity:  and I will make the pride of infidels to cease, and
@c    will bring down the arrogancy of the mighty.

@c    13:12. A man shall be more precious than gold, yea a man than the
@c    finest of gold.

@c    13:13. For this I will trouble the heaven:  and the earth shall be moved
@c    out of her place, for the indignation of the Lord of hosts, and for the
@c    day of his fierce wrath.

@c    13:14. And they shall be as a doe fleeing away, and as a sheep:  and
@c    there shall be none to gather them together:  every man shall turn to
@c    his own people, and every one shall flee to his own land.

@c    13:15. Every one that shall be found, shall be slain:  and every one
@c    that shall come to their aid, shall fall by the sword.

@c    13:16. Their inhabitants shall be dashed in pieces before their eyes:
@c    their houses shall be pillaged, and their wives shall be ravished.

@c    13:17. Behold I will stir up the Medes against them, who shall not seek
@c    silver, nor desire gold:

@c    13:18. But with their arrows they shall kill the children, and shall
@c    have no pity upon the sucklings of the womb, and their eye shall not
@c    spare their sons.

@c    13:19. And that Babylon, glorious among kingdoms, the famous pride of
@c    the Chaldeans, shall be even as the Lord destroyed Sodom and Gomorrha.

@c    13:20. It shall no more be inhabited for ever, and it shall not be
@c    founded unto generation and generation:  neither shall the Arabian pitch
@c    his tents there, nor shall shepherds rest there.

@c    13:21. But wild beasts shall rest there, and their houses shall be
@c    filled with serpents, and ostriches shall dwell there, and the hairy
@c    ones shall dance there:

@c    13:22. And owls shall answer one another there, in the houses thereof,
@c    and sirens in the temples of pleasure.



@c    Isaias Chapter 14


@c    The restoration of Israel after their captivity.  The parable or song
@c    insulting over the king of Babylon.  A prophecy against the Philistines.

@c    14:1. Her time is near at hand, and her days shall not be prolonged.
@c    For the Lord will have mercy on Jacob, and will yet choose out of
@c    Israel, and will make them rest upon their own ground:  and the stranger
@c    shall be joined with them, and shall adhere to the house of Jacob.

@c    14:2. And the people shall take them, and bring them into their place:
@c    and the house of Israel shall possess them in the land of the Lord for
@c    servants and handmaids:  and they shall make them captives that had
@c    taken them, and shall subdue their oppressors.

@c    14:3. And it shall come to pass in that day, that when God shall give
@c    thee rest from thy labour, and from thy vexation, and from the hard
@c    bondage, wherewith thou didst serve before,

@c    14:4. Thou shalt take up this parable against the king of Babylon, and
@c    shalt say:  How is the oppressor come to nothing, the tribute hath
@c    ceased?

@c    14:5. The Lord hath broken the staff of the wicked, the rod of the
@c    rulers,

@c    14:6. That struck the people in wrath with an incurable wound, that
@c    brought nations under in fury, that persecuted in a cruel manner.

@c    14:7. The whole earth is quiet and still, it is glad and hath rejoiced.

@c    14:8. The fir trees also have rejoiced over thee, and the cedars of
@c    Libanus, saying:  Since thou hast slept, there hath none come up to cut
@c    us down.

@c    14:9. Hell below was in an uproar to meet thee at thy coming, it
@c    stirred up the giants for thee.  All the princes of the earth are risen
@c    up from their thrones, all the princes of nations.

@c    14:10. All shall answer, and say to thee:  Thou also art wounded as well
@c    as we, thou art become like unto us.

@c    14:11. Thy pride is brought down to hell, thy carcass is fallen down:
@c    under thee shall the moth be strewed, and worms shall be thy covering.

@c    14:12. How art thou fallen from heaven, O Lucifer, who didst rise in
@c    the morning?  how art thou fallen to the earth, that didst wound the
@c    nations?

@c    O Lucifer. . .O day star.  All this, according to the letter, is spoken
@c    of the king of Babylon.  It may also be applied, in a spiritual sense,
@c    to Lucifer the prince of devils, who was created a bright angel, but
@c    fell by pride and rebellion against God.

@c    14:13. And thou saidst in thy heart:  I will ascend into heaven, I will
@c    exalt my throne above the stars of God, I will sit in the mountain of
@c    the covenant, in the sides of the north.

@c    14:14. I will ascend above the height of the clouds, I will be like the
@c    most High.

@c    14:15. But yet thou shalt be brought down to hell, into the depth of
@c    the pit.

@c    14:16. They that shall see thee, shall turn toward thee, and behold
@c    thee.  Is this the man that troubled the earth, that shook kingdoms,

@c    14:17. That made the world a wilderness, and destroyed the cities
@c    thereof, that opened not the prison to his prisoners?

@c    14:18. All the kings of the nations have all of them slept in glory,
@c    every one in his own house.

@c    14:19. But thou art cast out of thy grave, as an unprofitable branch
@c    defiled, and wrapped up among them that were slain by the sword, and
@c    art gone down to the bottom of the pit, as a rotten carcass.

@c    14:20. Thou shalt not keep company with them, even in burial:  for thou
@c    hast destroyed thy land, thou hast slain thy people:  the seed of the
@c    wicked shall not be named for ever.

@c    14:21. Prepare his children for slaughter for the iniquity of their
@c    fathers:  they shall not rise up, nor inherit the land, nor fill the
@c    face of the world with cities.

@c    14:22. And I will rise up against them, saith the Lord of hosts:  and I
@c    will destroy the name of Babylon, and the remains, and the bud, and the
@c    offspring, saith the Lord.

@c    14:23. And I will make it a possession for the ericius and pools of
@c    waters, and I will sweep it and wear it out with a besom, saith the
@c    Lord of hosts.

@c    14:24. The Lord of hosts hath sworn, saying:  Surely as I have thought,
@c    so shall it be:  and as I have purposed,

@c    14:25. So shall it fall out:  That I will destroy the Assyrian in my
@c    land, and upon my mountains tread him under foot:  and his yoke shall be
@c    taken away from them, and his burden shall be taken off their shoulder.

@c    14:26. This is the counsel, that I have purposed upon all the earth,
@c    and this is the hand that is stretched out upon all nations.

@c    14:27. For the Lord of hosts hath decreed, and who can disannul it?  and
@c    his hand is stretched out:  and who shall turn it away?

@c    14:28. In the year that king Achaz died, was this burden:

@c    14:29. Rejoice not thou, whole Philistia, that the rod of him that
@c    struck thee is broken in pieces:  for out of the root of the serpent
@c    shall come forth a basilisk, and his seed shall swallow the bird.

@c    14:30. And the firstborn of the poor shall be fed, and the poor shall
@c    rest with confidence:  and I will make thy root perish with famine, and
@c    I will kill thy remnant.

@c    14:31. Howl, O gate; cry, O city:  all Philistia is thrown down:  for a
@c    smoke shall come from the north, and there is none that shall escape
@c    his troop.

@c    14:32. And what shall be answered to the messengers of the nations?
@c    That the Lord hath founded Sion, and the poor of his people shall hope
@c    in him.



@c    Isaias Chapter 15


@c    A prophecy of the desolation of the Moabites.

@c    15:1. The burden of Moab.  Because in the night Ar of Moab is laid
@c    waste, it is silent:  because the wall of Moab is destroyed in the
@c    night, it is silent.

@c    15:2. The house is gone up, and Dibon to the high places to mourn over
@c    Nabo, and over Medaba, Moab hath howled:  on all their heads shall be
@c    baldness, and every beard shall be shaven.

@c    15:3. In their streets they are girded with sackcloth:  on the tops of
@c    their houses, and in their streets all shall howl and come down
@c    weeping.

@c    15:4. Hesebon shall cry, and Eleale, their voice is heard even to Jasa.
@c    For this shall the well appointed men of Moab howl, his soul shall howl
@c    to itself.

@c    15:5. My heart shall cry to Moab, the bars thereof shall flee unto
@c    Segor a heifer of three years old:  for by the ascent of Luith they
@c    shall go up weeping:  and in the way of Oronaim they shall lift up a cry
@c    of destruction.

@c    15:6. For the waters of Nemrim shall be desolate, for the grass is
@c    withered away, the spring is faded, all the greenness is perished.

@c    15:7. According to the greatness of their work, is their visitation
@c    also:  they shall lead them to the torrent of the willows.

@c    Torrent of the willows. . .That is, as some say, the waters of Babylon:
@c    others render it, a valley of the Arabians.

@c    15:8. For the cry is gone round about the border of Moab:  the howling
@c    thereof unto Gallim, and unto the well of Elim the cry thereof.

@c    15:9. For the waters of Dibon are filled with blood:  for I will bring
@c    more upon Dibon:  the lion upon them that shall flee of Moab, and upon
@c    the remnant of the land.



@c    Isaias Chapter 16


@c    The prophet prayeth for Christ's coming.  The affliction of the Moabites
@c    for their pride.

@c    16:1. Send forth, O Lord, the lamb, the ruler of the earth, from Petra
@c    of the desert, to the mount of the daughter of Sion.

@c    16:2. And it shall come to pass, that as a bird fleeing away, and as
@c    young ones flying out of the nest, so shall the daughters of Moab be in
@c    the passage of Arnon.

@c    16:3. Take counsel, gather a council:  make thy shadow as the night in
@c    the midday:  hide them that flee, and betray not them that wander about.

@c    16:4. My fugitives shall dwell with thee:  O Moab, be thou a covert to
@c    them from the face of the destroyer:  for the dust is at an end, the
@c    wretch is consumed:  he hath failed, that trod the earth under foot.

@c    16:5. And a throne shall be prepared in mercy, and one shall sit upon
@c    it in truth in the tabernacle of David, judging and seeking judgment
@c    and quickly rendering that which is just.

@c    16:6. We have heard of the pride of Moab, he is exceeding proud:  his
@c    pride and his arrogancy, and his indignation is more than his strength.

@c    16:7. Therefore shall Moab howl to Moab, every one shall howl:  to them
@c    that rejoice upon the brick walls, tell ye their stripes.

@c    16:8. For the suburbs of Hesebon are desolate, and the lords of the
@c    nations have destroyed the vineyard of Sabama:  the branches thereof
@c    have reached even to Jazer:  they have wandered in the wilderness, the
@c    branches thereof are left, they are gone over the sea.

@c    16:9. Therefore I will lament with the weeping of Jazer the vineyard of
@c    Sabama:  I will water thee with my tears, O Hesebon, and Eleale:  for the
@c    voice of the treaders hath rushed in upon thy vintage, and upon thy
@c    harvest.

@c    16:10. And gladness and joy shall be taken away from Carmel, and there
@c    shall be no rejoicing nor shouting in the vineyards.  He shall not tread
@c    out wine in the press that was wont to tread it out:  the voice of the
@c    treaders I have taken away.

@c    Carmel. . .This name is often taken to signify a fair and fruitful hill
@c    or field, such as mount Carmel is.

@c    16:11. Wherefore my bowels shall sound like a harp for Moab, and my
@c    inward parts for the brick wall.

@c    16:12. And it shall come to pass, when it is seen that Moab is wearied
@c    on his high places, that he shall go in to his sanctuaries to pray, and
@c    shall not prevail.

@c    16:13. This is the word, that the Lord spoke to Moab from that time:

@c    16:14. And now the Lord hath spoken, saying:  In three years, as the
@c    years of a hireling, the glory of Moab shall be taken away for all the
@c    multitude of the people, and it shall be left small and feeble, not
@c    many.



@c    Isaias Chapter 17


@c    Judgments upon Damascus and Samaria.  The overthrow of the Assyrians.

@c    17:1. The burden of Damascus.  Behold Damascus shall cease to be a city,
@c    and shall be as a ruinous heap of stones.

@c    17:2. The cities of Aroer shall be left for flocks, and they shall rest
@c    there, and there shall be none to make them afraid.

@c    17:3. And aid shall cease from Ephraim, and the kingdom from Damascus:
@c    and the remnant of Syria shall be as the glory of the children of
@c    Israel:  saith the Lord of hosts.

@c    17:4. And it shall come to pass in that day, that the glory of Jacob
@c    shall be made thin, and the fatness of his flesh shall grow lean.

@c    17:5. And it shall be as when one gathereth in the harvest that which
@c    remaineth, and his arm shall gather the ears of corn:  and it shall be
@c    as he that seeketh ears in the vale of Raphaim.

@c    17:6. And the fruit thereof that shall be left upon it, shall be as one
@c    cluster of grapes, and as the shaking of the olive tree, two or three
@c    berries in the top of a bough, or four or five upon the top of the
@c    tree, saith the Lord the God of Israel.

@c    17:7. In that day man shall bow down himself to his Maker, and his eyes
@c    shall look to the Holy One of Israel.

@c    17:8. And he shall not look to the altars which his hands made; and he
@c    shall not have respect to the things that his fingers wrought, such as
@c    groves and temples.

@c    17:9. In that day his strong cities shall be forsaken, as the ploughs,
@c    and the corn that were left before the face of the children of Israel,
@c    and thou shalt be desolate.

@c    That were left. . .Viz., by the Chanaanites, when the children of Israel
@c    came into their land.

@c    17:10. Because thou hast forgotten God thy saviour, and hast not
@c    remembered thy strong helper:  therefore shalt thou plant good plants,
@c    and shalt sow strange seed.

@c    17:11. In the day of thy planting shall be the wild grape, and in the
@c    morning thy seed shall flourish:  the harvest is taken away in the day
@c    of inheritance, and shall grieve thee much.

@c    17:12. Woe to the multitude of many people, like the multitude of the
@c    roaring sea:  and the tumult of crowds, like the noise of many waters.

@c    The multitude, etc. . .This and all that follows to the end of the
@c    chapter, relates to the Assyrian army under Sennacherib.

@c    17:13. Nations shall make a noise like the noise of waters overflowing,
@c    but he shall rebuke him, and he shall flee far off:  and he shall be
@c    carried away as the dust of the mountains before the wind, and as a
@c    whirlwind before a tempest.

@c    17:14. In the time of the evening, behold there shall be trouble:  the
@c    morning shall come, and he shall not be:  this is the portion of them
@c    that have wasted us, and the lot of them that spoiled us.



@c    Isaias Chapter 18


@c    A woe to the Ethiopians, who fed Israel with vain hopes, their future
@c    conversion.

@c    18:1. Woe to the land, the winged cymbal, which is beyond the rivers of
@c    Ethiopia,

@c    18:2. That sendeth ambassadors by the sea, and in vessels of bulrushes
@c    upon the waters.  Go, ye swift angels, to a nation rent and torn in
@c    pieces:  to a terrible people, after which there is no other:  to a
@c    nation expecting and trodden underfoot, whose land the rivers have
@c    spoiled.

@c    Angels. . .Or messengers.

@c    18:3. All ye inhabitants of the world, who dwell on the earth, when the
@c    sign shall be lifted up on the mountains, you shall see, and you shall
@c    hear the sound of the trumpet.

@c    18:4. For thus saith the Lord to me:  I will take my rest, and consider
@c    in my place, as the noon light is clear, and as a cloud of dew in the
@c    day of harvest.

@c    18:5. For before the harvest it was all flourishing, and it shall bud
@c    without perfect ripeness, and the sprigs thereof shall be cut off with
@c    pruning hooks:  and what is left shall be cut away and shaken out.

@c    18:6. And they shall be left together to the birds of the mountains,
@c    and the beasts of the earth:  and the fowls shall be upon them all the
@c    summer, and all the beasts of the earth shall winter upon them.

@c    18:7. At that time shall a present be brought to the Lord of hosts,
@c    from a people rent and torn in pieces:  from a terrible people, after
@c    which there hath been no other:  from a nation expecting, expecting and
@c    trodden under foot, whose land the rivers have spoiled, to the place of
@c    the name of the Lord of hosts, to mount Sion.



@c    Isaias Chapter 19


@c    The punishment of Egypt:  their call to the church.

@c    19:1. The burden of Egypt.  Behold the Lord will ascend upon a swift
@c    cloud, and will enter into Egypt, and the idols of Egypt shall be moved
@c    at his presence, and the heart of Egypt shall melt in the midst
@c    thereof.

@c    19:2. And I will set the Egyptians to fight against the Egyptians:  and
@c    they shall fight brother against brother, and friend against friend,
@c    city against city, kingdom against kingdom.

@c    19:3. And the spirit of Egypt shall be broken in the bowels thereof,
@c    and I will cast down their counsel:  and they shall consult their idols,
@c    and their diviners, and their wizards, and soothsayers.

@c    19:4. And I will deliver Egypt into the hand of cruel masters, and a
@c    strong king shall rule over them, saith the Lord the God of hosts.

@c    19:5. And the water of the sea shall be dried up, and the river shall
@c    be wasted and dry.

@c    19:6. And the rivers shall fail:  the streams of the banks shall be
@c    diminished, and be dried up.  The reed and the bulrush shall wither
@c    away.

@c    19:7. The channel of the river shall be laid bare from its fountain,
@c    and every thing sown by the water shall be dried up, it shall wither
@c    away, and shall be no more.

@c    19:8. The fishers also shall mourn, and all that cast a hook into the
@c    river shall lament, and they that spread nets upon the waters shall
@c    languish away.

@c    19:9. They shall be confounded that wrought in flax, combing and
@c    weaving fine linen.

@c    19:10. And its watery places shall be dry, all they shall mourn that
@c    made pools to take fishes.

@c    19:11. The princes of Tanis are become fools, the wise counsellors of
@c    Pharao have given foolish counsel:  how will you say to Pharao:  I am the
@c    son of the wise, the son of ancient kings?

@c    19:12. Where are now thy wise men?  let them tell thee, and shew what
@c    the Lord of hosts hath purposed upon Egypt.

@c    19:13. The princes of Tanis are become fools, the princes of Memphis
@c    are gone astray, they have deceived Egypt, the stay of the people
@c    thereof.

@c    19:14. The Lord hath mingled in the midst thereof the spirit of
@c    giddiness:  and they have caused Egypt to err in all its works, as a
@c    drunken man staggereth and vomiteth.

@c    19:15. And there shall be no work for Egypt, to make head or tail, him
@c    that bendeth down, or that holdeth back.

@c    19:16. In that day Egypt shall be like unto women, and they shall be
@c    amazed, and afraid, because of the moving of the hand of the Lord of
@c    hosts, which he shall move over it.

@c    19:17. And the land of Juda shall be a terror to Egypt:  everyone that
@c    shall remember it shall tremble because of the counsel of the Lord of
@c    hosts, which he hath determined concerning it.

@c    19:18. In that day there shall be five cities in the land of Egypt,
@c    speaking the language of Chanaan, and swearing by the Lord of hosts:
@c    one shall be called the city of the sun.

@c    19:19. In that day there shall be an altar of the Lord in the midst of
@c    the land of Egypt, and a monument of the Lord at the borders thereof:

@c    19:20. It shall be for a sign, and for a testimony to the Lord of hosts
@c    in the land of Egypt.  For they shall cry to the Lord because of the
@c    oppressor, and he shall send them a Saviour and a defender to deliver
@c    them.

@c    19:21. And the Lord shall be known by Egypt, and the Egyptians shall
@c    know the Lord in that day, and shall worship him with sacrifices and
@c    offerings:  and they shall make vows to the Lord, and perform them.

@c    19:22. And the Lord shall strike Egypt with a scourge, and shall heal
@c    it, and they shall return to the Lord, and he shall be pacified towards
@c    them, and heal them.

@c    19:23. In that day there shall be a way from Egypt to the Assyrians,
@c    and the Assyrian shall enter into Egypt, and the Egyptian to the
@c    Assyrians, and the Egyptians shall serve the Assyrian.

@c    19:24. In that day shall Israel be the third to the Egyptian and the
@c    Assyrian:  a blessing in the midst of the land,

@c    19:25. Which the Lord of hosts hath blessed, saying:  Blessed be my
@c    people of Egypt, and the work of my hands to the Assyrian:  but Israel
@c    is my inheritance.



@c    Isaias Chapter 20


@c    The ignominious captivity of the Egyptians, and the Ethiopians.

@c    20:1. In the year that Tharthan entered into Azotus, when Sargon the
@c    king of the Assyrians had sent him, and he had fought against Azotus,
@c    and had taken it:

@c    20:2. At that same time the Lord spoke by the hand of Isaias the son of
@c    Amos, saying Go, and loose the sackcloth from off thy loins, and take
@c    off thy shoes from thy feet.  And he did so, and went naked, and
@c    barefoot.

@c    20:3. And the Lord said:  As my servant Isaias hath walked, naked and
@c    barefoot, it shall be a sign and a wonder of three years upon Egypt,
@c    and upon Ethiopia,

@c    20:4. So shall the king of the Assyrians lead away the prisoners of
@c    Egypt, and the captivity of Ethiopia, young and old, naked and
@c    barefoot, with their buttocks uncovered to the shame of Egypt.

@c    20:5. And they shall be afraid, and ashamed of Ethiopia their hope, and
@c    of Egypt their glory.

@c    20:6. And the inhabitants of this isle shall say in that day:  Lo this
@c    was our hope, to whom we fled for help, to deliver us from the face of
@c    the king of the Assyrians:  and how shall we be able to escape?



@c    Isaias Chapter 21


@c    The destruction of Babylon by the Medes and Persians:  a prophecy
@c    against the Edomites and the Arabians.

@c    21:1. The burden of the desert of the sea.  As whirlwinds come from the
@c    south, it cometh from the desert from a terrible land.

@c    The desert of the sea. . .So Babylon is here called, because from a city
@c    as full of people as the sea is with water, it was become a desert.

@c    21:2. A grievous vision is told me:  he that is unfaithful dealeth
@c    unfaithfully:  and he that is a spoiler, spoileth.  Go up, O Elam,
@c    besiege, O Mede:  I have made all the mourning thereof to cease.

@c    O Elam. . .That is, O Persia.

@c    21:3. Therefore are my loins filled with pain, anguish hath taken hold
@c    of me, as the anguish of a woman in labour:  I fell down at the hearing
@c    of it, I was troubled at the seeing of it.

@c    21:4. My heart failed, darkness amazed me:  Babylon my beloved is become
@c    a wonder to me.

@c    21:5. Prepare the table, behold in the watchtower them that eat and
@c    drink:  arise, ye princes, take up the shield.

@c    21:6. For thus hath the Lord said to me:  Go, and set a watchman:  and
@c    whatsoever he shall see, let him tell.

@c    21:7. And he saw a chariot with two horsemen, a rider upon an ass, and
@c    a rider upon a camel:  and he beheld them diligently with much heed.

@c    A rider upon an ass, etc. . .These two riders are the kings of the
@c    Persians and Medes.

@c    21:8. And a lion cried out:  I am upon the watchtower of the Lord,
@c    standing continually by day:  and I am upon my ward, standing whole
@c    nights.

@c    And a lion cried out. . .That is, I Isaias seeing the approaching ruin
@c    of Babylon, have cried out as a lion roaring.

@c    21:9. Behold this man cometh, the rider upon the chariot with two
@c    horsemen, and he answered, and said:  Babylon is fallen, she is fallen,
@c    and all the graven gods thereof are broken unto the ground.

@c    21:10. O my thrashing, and the children of my floor, that which I have
@c    heard of the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel, I have declared unto
@c    you.

@c    21:11. The burden of Duma calleth to me out of Seir:  Watchman, what of
@c    the night?  watchman, what of the night?

@c    Duma. . .That is, Idumea, or Edom.

@c    21:12. The watchman said:  The morning cometh, also the night:  if you
@c    seek, seek:  return, come.

@c    21:13. The burden in Arabia.  In the forest at evening you shall sleep,
@c    in the paths of Dedanim.

@c    21:14. Meeting the thirsty bring him water, you that inhabit the land
@c    of the south, meet with bread him that fleeth.

@c    21:15. For they are fled from before the swords, from the sword that
@c    hung over them, from the bent bow, from the face of a grievous battle.

@c    21:16. For thus saith the Lord to me:  Within a year, according to the
@c    years of a hireling, all the glory of Cedar shall be taken away.

@c    Cedar. . .Arabia.

@c    21:17. And the residue of the number of strong archers of the children
@c    of Cedar shall be diminished:  for the Lord the God of Israel hath
@c    spoken it.



@c    Isaias Chapter 22


@c    The prophet laments the devastation of Juda.  He foretells the
@c    deprivation of Sobna, and the substitution of Eliacim, a figure of
@c    Christ.

@c    22:1. The burden of the valley of vision.  What aileth thee also, that
@c    thou too art wholly gone up to the housetops?

@c    The valley of vision. . .Jerusalem.  The temple of Jerusalem was built
@c    upon mount Moria, or the mountain of vision.  But the city is here
@c    called the valley of vision; either because it was lower than the
@c    temple, or because of the low condition to which it was to be reduced.

@c    22:2. Full of clamour, a populous city, a joyous city:  thy slain are
@c    not slain by the sword, nor dead in battle.

@c    22:3. All the princes are fled together, and are bound hard:  all that
@c    were found, are bound together, they are fled far off.

@c    22:4. Therefore have I said:  Depart from me, I will weep bitterly:
@c    labour not to comfort me, for the devastation of the daughter of my
@c    people.

@c    22:5. For it is a day of slaughter and of treading down, and of weeping
@c    to the Lord the God of hosts in the valley of vision, searching the
@c    wall, and magnificent upon the mountain.

@c    22:6. And Elam took the quiver, the chariot of the horseman, and the
@c    shield was taken down from the wall.

@c    22:7. And thy choice valleys shall be full of chariots, and the
@c    horsemen shall place themselves in the gate.

@c    22:8. And the covering of Juda shall be discovered, and thou shalt see
@c    in that day the armoury of the house of the forest.

@c    22:9. And you shall see the breaches of the city of David, that they
@c    are many:  and you have gathered together the waters of the lower pool,

@c    22:10. And have numbered the houses of Jerusalem, and broken down
@c    houses to fortify the wall.

@c    22:11. And you made a ditch between the two walls for the water of the
@c    old pool:  and you have not looked up to the maker thereof, nor regarded
@c    him even at a distance, that wrought it long ago.

@c    22:12. And the Lord, the God of hosts, in that day shall call to
@c    weeping, and to mourning, to baldness, and to girding with sackcloth:

@c    22:13. And behold joy and gladness, killing calves, and slaying rams,
@c    eating flesh, and drinking wine:  Let us eat and drink; for to morrow we
@c    shall die.

@c    22:14. And the voice of the Lord of hosts was revealed in my ears:
@c    Surely this iniquity shall not be forgiven you till you die, saith the
@c    Lord God of hosts.

@c    22:15. Thus saith the Lord God of hosts:  Go, get thee in to him that
@c    dwelleth in the tabernacle, to Sobna who is over the temple:  and thou
@c    shalt say to him:

@c    22:16. What dost thou here, or as if thou wert somebody here?  for thou
@c    hast hewed thee out a sepulchre here, thou hast hewed out a monument
@c    carefully in a high place, a dwelling for thyself in a rock.

@c    22:17. Behold the Lord will cause thee to be carried away, as a cock is
@c    carried away, and he will lift thee up as a garment.

@c    22:18. He will crown thee with a crown of tribulation, he will toss
@c    thee like a ball into a large and spacious country:  there shalt thou
@c    die, and there shall the chariot of thy glory be, the shame of the
@c    house of thy Lord.

@c    22:19. And I will drive thee out from thy station, and depose thee from
@c    thy ministry.

@c    22:20. And it shall come to pass in that day, that I will call my
@c    servant Eliacim the son of Helcias,

@c    22:21. And I will clothe him with thy robe, and will strengthen him
@c    with thy girdle, and will give thy power into his hand:  and he shall be
@c    as a father to the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and to the house of Juda.

@c    22:22. And I will lay the key of the house of David upon his shoulder:
@c    and he shall open, and none shall shut:  and he shall shut, and none
@c    shall open.

@c    22:23. And I will fasten him as a peg in a sure place, and he shall be
@c    for a throne of glory to the house of his father.

@c    22:24. And they shall hang upon him all the glory of his father's
@c    house, divers kinds of vessels, every little vessel, from the vessels
@c    of cups even to every instrument of music.

@c    22:25. In that day, saith the Lord of hosts, shall the peg be removed,
@c    that was fastened in the sure place:  and it shall be broken and shall
@c    fall:  and that which hung thereon, shall perish, because the Lord hath
@c    spoken it.



@c    Isaias Chapter 23


@c    The destruction of Tyre.  It shall be repaired again after seventy
@c    years.

@c    23:1. The burden of Tyre.  Howl, ye ships of the sea, for the house is
@c    destroyed, from whence they were wont to come:  from the land of Cethim
@c    it is revealed to them.

@c    23:2. Be silent, you that dwell in the island:  the merchants of Sidon
@c    passing over the sea, have filled thee.

@c    23:3. The seed of the Nile in many waters, the harvest of the river is
@c    her revenue:  and she is become the mart of the nations.

@c    23:4. Be thou ashamed, O Sidon:  for the sea speaketh, even the strength
@c    of the sea, saying:  I have not been in labour, nor have I brought
@c    forth, nor have I nourished up young men, nor brought up virgins.

@c    23:5. When it shall be heard in Egypt, they will be sorry when they
@c    shall hear of Tyre:

@c    23:6. Pass over the seas, howl, ye inhabitants of the island.

@c    23:7. Is not this your city, which gloried from of old in her
@c    antiquity?  her feet shall carry her afar off to sojourn.

@c    23:8. Who hath taken this counsel against Tyre, that was formerly
@c    crowned, whose merchants were princes, and her traders the nobles of
@c    the earth?

@c    23:9. The Lord of hosts hath designed it, to pull down the pride of all
@c    glory, and bring to disgrace all the glorious ones of the earth.

@c    23:10. Pass thy land as a river, O daughter of the sea, thou hast a
@c    girdle no more.

@c    23:11. He stretched out his hand over the sea, he troubled kingdoms:
@c    the Lord hath given a charge against Chanaan, to destroy the strong
@c    ones thereof.

@c    23:12. And he said:  Thou shalt glory no more, O virgin daughter of
@c    Sidon, who art oppressed:  arise and sail over to Cethim, there also
@c    thou shalt have no rest.

@c    23:13. Behold the land of the Chaldeans, there was not such a people,
@c    the Assyrians founded it:  they have led away the strong ones thereof
@c    into captivity, they have destroyed the houses thereof, they have,
@c    brought it to ruin.

@c    23:14. Howl, O ye ships of the sea, for your strength is laid waste.

@c    23:15. And it shall come to pass in that day that thou, O Tyre, shalt
@c    be forgotten, seventy years, according to the days of one king:  but
@c    after seventy years, there shall be unto Tyre as the song of a harlot.

@c    23:16. Take a harp, go about the city, harlot that hast been forgotten:
@c    sing well, sing many a song, that thou mayst be remembered.

@c    23:17. And it shall come to pass after seventy years, that the Lord
@c    will visit Tyre, and will bring her back again to her traffic:  and she
@c    shall commit fornication again with all the kingdoms of the world upon
@c    the face of the earth.

@c    23:18. And her merchandise and her hire shall be sanctified to the
@c    Lord:  they shall not be kept in store, nor laid up:  for her merchandise
@c    shall be for them that shall dwell before the Lord, that they may eat
@c    unto fulness, and be clothed for a continuance.

@c    Sanctified to the Lord. . .This alludes to the conversion of the
@c    Gentiles.



@c    Isaias Chapter 24


@c    The judgments of God upon all the sinners of the world.  A remnant shall
@c    joyfully praise him.

@c    24:1. Behold the Lord shall lay waste the earth, and shall strip it,
@c    and shall afflict the face thereof, and scatter abroad the inhabitants
@c    thereof.

@c    24:2. And it shall be as with the people, so with the priest:  and as
@c    with the servant so with his master:  as with the handmaid, so with her
@c    mistress:  as with the buyer, so with the seller:  as with the lender, so
@c    with the borrower:  as with him that calleth for his money, so with him
@c    that oweth.

@c    24:3. With desolation shall the earth be laid waste, and it shall be
@c    utterly spoiled:  for the Lord hath spoken this word.

@c    24:4. The earth mourned, and faded away, and is weakened:  the world
@c    faded away, the height of the people of the earth is weakened.

@c    24:5. And the earth is infected by the inhabitants thereof:  because
@c    they have transgressed the laws, they have changed the ordinance, they
@c    have broken the everlasting covenant.

@c    24:6. Therefore shall a curse devour the earth, and the inhabitants
@c    thereof shall sin:  and therefore they that dwell therein shall be mad,
@c    and few men shall be left.

@c    24:7. The vintage hath mourned, the vine hath languished away, all the
@c    merry have sighed.

@c    24:8. The mirth of timbrels hath ceased, the noise of them that rejoice
@c    is ended, the melody of the harp is silent.

@c    24:9. They shall not drink wine with a song:  the drink shall be bitter
@c    to them that drink it.

@c    24:10. The city of vanity is broken down, every house is shut up, no
@c    man cometh in.

@c    24:11. There shall be a crying for wine in the streets:  all mirth is
@c    forsaken:  the joy of the earth is gone away.

@c    24:12. Desolation is left in the city, and calamity shall oppress the
@c    gates.

@c    24:13. For it shall be thus in the midst of the earth, in the midst of
@c    the people, as if a few olives, that remain, should be shaken out of
@c    the olive tree:  or grapes, when the vintage is ended.

@c    24:14. These shall lift up their voice, and shall give praise:  when the
@c    Lord shall be glorified, they shall make a joyful noise from the sea.

@c    24:15. Therefore glorify ye the Lord in instruction:  the name of the
@c    Lord God of Israel in the islands of the sea.

@c    24:16. From the ends of the earth we have heard praises, the glory of
@c    the just one.  And I said:  My secret to myself, my secret to myself, woe
@c    is me:  the prevaricators have prevaricated, and with the prevarication
@c    of transgressors they have prevaricated.

@c    24:17. Fear, and the pit, and the snare are upon thee, O thou
@c    inhabitant of the earth.

@c    24:18. And it shall come to pass, that he that shall flee from the
@c    noise of the fear, shall fall into the pit:  and he that shall rid
@c    himself out of the pit, shall be taken in the snare:  for the
@c    flood-gates from on high are opened, and the foundations of the earth
@c    shall be shaken.

@c    24:19. With breaking shall the earth be broken, with crushing shall the
@c    earth be crushed, with trembling shall the earth be moved.

@c    24:20. With shaking shall the earth be shaken as a drunken man, and
@c    shall be removed as the tent of one night:  and the iniquity thereof
@c    shall be heavy upon it, and it shall fall, and not rise again.

@c    24:21. And it shall come to pass, that in that day the Lord shall visit
@c    upon the host of heaven on high, and upon the kings of the earth, on
@c    the earth.

@c    The host of heaven on high. . .The stars, which in many places of the
@c    Scripture are so called.  Some commentators explain that these words
@c    here signify the demons of the air.

@c    24:22. And they shall be gathered together as in the gathering of one
@c    bundle into the pit, and they shall be shut up there in prison:  and
@c    after many days they shall be visited.

@c    24:23. And the moon shall blush, and the sun shall be ashamed, when the
@c    Lord of hosts shall reign in mount Sion, and in Jerusalem, and shall be
@c    glorified in the sight of his ancients.



@c    Isaias Chapter 25


@c    A canticle of thanksgiving for God's judgments and benefits.

@c    25:1. O Lord, thou art my God, I will exalt O thee, and give glory to
@c    thy name:  for thou hast done wonderful things, thy designs of old
@c    faithful, amen.

@c    25:2. For thou hast reduced the city to a heap, the strong city to
@c    ruin, the house of strangers, to be no city, and to be no more built up
@c    for ever.

@c    25:3. Therefore shall a strong people praise thee, the city of mighty
@c    nations shall fear thee.

@c    25:4. Because thou hast been a strength to the poor, a strength to the
@c    needy in his distress:  a refuge from the whirlwind, a shadow from the
@c    heat.  For the blast of the mighty is like a whirlwind beating against a
@c    wall.

@c    25:5. Thou shalt bring down the tumult of strangers, as heat in thirst:
@c    and as with heat under a burning cloud, thou shalt make the branch of
@c    the mighty to wither away.

@c    25:6. And the Lord of hosts shall make unto all people in this
@c    mountain, a feast of fat things, a feast of wine, of fat things full of
@c    marrow, of wine purified from the lees.

@c    25:7. And he shall destroy in this mountain the face of the bond with
@c    which all people were tied, and the web that he began over all nations.

@c    25:8. He shall cast death down headlong for ever:  and the Lord God
@c    shall wipe away tears from every face, and the reproach of his people
@c    he shall take away from off the whole earth:  for the Lord hath spoken
@c    it.

@c    25:9. And they shall say in that day:  Lo, this is our God, we have
@c    waited for him, and he will save us:  this is the Lord, we have
@c    patiently waited for him, we shall rejoice and be joyful in his
@c    salvation.

@c    25:10. For the hand of the Lord shall rest in this mountain:  and Moab
@c    shall be trodden down under him, as straw is broken in pieces with the
@c    wain.

@c    Moab. . .That is, the reprobate, whose eternal punishment, from which
@c    they can no way escape, is described under these figures.

@c    25:11. And he shall stretch forth his hands under him, as he that
@c    swimmeth stretcheth forth his hands to swim:  and he shall bring down
@c    his glory with the dashing of his hands.

@c    25:12. And the bulwarks of thy high walls shall fall, and be brought
@c    low, and shall be pulled down to the ground, even to the dust.



@c    Isaias Chapter 26


@c    A canticle of thanks for the deliverance of God's people.

@c    26:1. In that day shall this canticle be sung in the land of Juda.  Sion
@c    the city of our strength a saviour, a wall and a bulwark shall be set
@c    therein.

@c    26:2. Open ye the gates, and let the just nation, that keepeth the
@c    truth, enter in.

@c    26:3. The old error is passed away:  thou wilt keep peace:  peace,
@c    because we have hoped in thee.

@c    26:4. You have hoped in the Lord for evermore, in the Lord God mighty
@c    for ever.

@c    26:5. For he shall bring down them that dwell on high, the high city he
@c    shall lay low.  He shall bring it down even to the ground, he shall pull
@c    it down even to the dust.

@c    26:6. The foot shall tread it down, the feet of the poor, the steps of
@c    the needy.

@c    26:7. The way of the just is right, the path of the just is right to
@c    walk in.

@c    26:8. And in the way of thy judgments, O Lord, we have patiently waited
@c    for thee:  thy name, and thy remembrance are the desire of the soul.

@c    26:9. My soul hath desired thee in the night:  yea, and with my spirit
@c    within me in the morning early I will watch to thee.  When thou shalt do
@c    thy judgments on the earth, the inhabitants of the world shall learn
@c    justice.

@c    26:10. Let us have pity on the wicked, but he will not learn justice:
@c    in the land of the saints he hath done wicked things, and he shall not
@c    see the glory of the Lord.

@c    26:11. Lord, let thy hand be exalted, and let them not see:  let the
@c    envious people see, and be confounded:  and let fire devour thy enemies.

@c    26:12. Lord, thou wilt give us peace:  for thou hast wrought all our
@c    works for us.

@c    26:13. O Lord our God, other lords besides thee have had dominion over
@c    us, only in thee let us remember thy name.

@c    26:14. Let not the dead live, let not the giants rise again:  therefore
@c    hast visited and destroyed them, and hast destroyed all their memory.

@c    26:15. Thou hast been favourable to the nation, O Lord, thou hast been
@c    favourable to the nation:  art thou glorified?  thou hast removed all the
@c    ends of the earth far off.

@c    26:16. Lord, they have sought after thee in distress, in the
@c    tribulation of murmuring thy instruction was with them.

@c    26:17. As a woman with child, when she draweth near the time of her
@c    delivery, is in pain, and crieth out in her pangs:  so are we become in
@c    thy presence, O Lord.

@c    26:18. We have conceived, and been as it were in labour, and have
@c    brought forth wind:  we have not wrought salvation on the earth,
@c    therefore the inhabitants of the earth have not fallen.

@c    26:19. Thy dead men shall live, my slain shall rise again:  awake, and
@c    give praise, ye that dwell in the dust:  for thy dew is the dew of the
@c    light:  and the land of the giants thou shalt pull down into ruin.

@c    26:20. Go, my people, enter into thy chambers, shut thy doors upon
@c    thee, hide thyself a little for a moment, until the indignation pass
@c    away.

@c    26:21. For behold the Lord will come out of his place, to visit the
@c    iniquity of the inhabitant of the earth against him:  and the earth
@c    shall disclose her blood, and shall cover her slain no more.

@c    Shall cover her slain no more. . .This is said with relation to the
@c    martyrs, and their happy resurrection.



@c    Isaias Chapter 27


@c    The punishment of the oppressors of God's people.  The Lord's favour to
@c    his church.

@c    27:1. In that day the Lord with his hard, and great, and strong sword
@c    shall visit leviathan the bar serpent, and leviathan the crooked
@c    serpent, and shall slay the whale that is in the sea.

@c    Leviathan. . .That is, the devil, the great enemy of the people of God.
@c    He is called the bar serpent from his strength, and the crooked serpent
@c    from his wiles; and the whale of the sea, from the tyranny he exercises
@c    in the sea of this world.  He was spiritually slain by the death of
@c    Christ, when his power was destroyed.

@c    27:2. In that day there shall be singing to the vineyard of pure wine.

@c    The vineyard, etc. . .The church of Christ.

@c    27:3. I am the Lord that keep it, I will suddenly give it drink:  lest
@c    any hurt come to it, I keep it night and day.

@c    I will suddenly give it drink. . .Or, as the Hebrew may also be
@c    rendered, I will continually water it.

@c    27:4. There is no indignation in me:  who shall make me a thorn and a
@c    brier in battle:  shall I march against it, shall, I set it on fire
@c    together?

@c    No indignation in me, etc. . .Viz., against the church:  nor shall I
@c    become as a thorn or brier in its regard; or march against it, or set
@c    it on fire:  but it shall always take fast hold of me, and keep an
@c    everlasting peace with me.

@c    27:5. Or rather shall it take hold of my strength, shall it make peace
@c    with me, shall it make peace with me?

@c    27:6. When they shall rush in unto Jacob, Israel shall blossom and bud,
@c    and they shall fill the face of the world with seed.

@c    When they shall rush in, etc. . .Some understand this of the enemies of
@c    the true Israel, that shall invade it in vain.  Others of the spiritual
@c    invasion made by the apostles of Christ.

@c    27:7. Hath he struck him according to the stroke of him that struck
@c    him?  or is he slain, as he killed them that were slain by him?

@c    Hath he struck him, etc. . .Hath God punished the carnal persecuting
@c    Jews, in proportion to their doings against Christ and his saints?

@c    27:8. In measure against measure, when it shall be cast off, thou shalt
@c    judge it.  He hath meditated with his severe spirit in the day of heat.

@c    When it shall be cast off, etc. . .When the synagogue shall be cast off,
@c    thou shalt judge it in measure, and in proportion to its crimes.--Ibid.
@c    He hath meditated, etc. . .God hath designed severe punishments in the
@c    day of his wrath.

@c    27:9. Therefore upon this shall the iniquity of the house of Jacob be
@c    forgiven:  and this is all the fruit, that the sin thereof should be
@c    taken away, when he shall have made all the stones of the altar, as
@c    burnt stones broken in pieces, the groves and temples shall not stand.

@c    Of the house of Jacob. . .Viz., of such of them as shall be converted.

@c    27:10. For the strong city shall be desolate, the beautiful city shall
@c    be forsaken, and shall be left as a wilderness:  there the calf shall
@c    feed, and there shall he lie down, and shall consume its branches.

@c    The strong city. . .Jerusalem.

@c    27:11. Its harvest shall be destroyed with drought, women shall come
@c    and teach it:  for it is not a wise people, therefore he that made it,
@c    shall not have mercy on it:  and he that formed it, shall not spare it.

@c    27:12. And it shall come to pass, that in that day the Lord will strike
@c    from the channel of the river even to the torrent of Egypt, and you
@c    shall be gathered together one by one, O ye children of Israel.

@c    27:13. And it shall come to pass, that in that day a noise shall be
@c    made with a great trumpet, and they that were lost, shall come from the
@c    land of the Assyrians, and they that were outcasts in the land of
@c    Egypt, and they shall adore the Lord in the holy mount in Jerusalem.

@c    A great trumpet. . .The preaching of the gospel for the conversion of
@c    the Jews.



@c    Isaias Chapter 28


@c    The punishment of the Israelites, for their pride, intemperance, and
@c    contempt of religion.  Christ the cornerstone.

@c    28:1. Woe to the crown of pride, to the drunkards of Ephraim, and to
@c    the fading flower the glory his joy, who were on the head of the fat
@c    valley, staggering with wine.

@c    Ephraim. . .That is, the kingdom of the ten tribes.--Ibid.  The head of
@c    the fat valley. . .Samaria, situate on a hill, having under it a most
@c    fertile valley.

@c    28:2. Behold the Lord is mighty and strong, as a storm of hail:  a
@c    destroying whirlwind, as the violence of many waters overflowing, and
@c    sent forth upon a spacious land.

@c    28:3. The crown of pride of the drunkards of Ephraim shall be trodden
@c    under feet.

@c    28:4. And the fading tower the glory of his joy, who is on the head of
@c    the fat valley, shall be as a hasty fruit before the ripeness of
@c    autumn:  which when he that seeth it shall behold, as soon he taketh it
@c    in his hand, he will eat it up.

@c    28:5. In that day the Lord of hosts shall be a crown of glory, and a
@c    garland of joy to the residue of his people:

@c    28:6. And a spirit of judgment to him that sitteth in judgment, and
@c    strength to them that return out of the battle to the gate.

@c    28:7. But these also have been ignorant through wine, and through
@c    drunkenness have erred:  the priest and the prophet have been ignorant
@c    through drunkenness, they are swallowed up with wine, they have gone
@c    astray in drunkenness, they have not known him that seeth, they have
@c    been ignorant of judgment.

@c    These also. . .The kingdom of Juda.

@c    28:8. For all the tables were full of vomit and filth, so that there
@c    was no more place.

@c    28:9. Whom shall he teach knowledge?  and whom shall he make to
@c    understand the hearing?  them that are weaned from the milk, that are
@c    drawn away from the breasts.

@c    28:10. For command, command again; command, command again; expect,
@c    expect again; a little there, a little there.

@c    Command, command again, etc. . .This is said in the person of the Jews,
@c    resisting the repeated commands of God, and still putting him off.

@c    28:11. For with the speech of lips, and with another tongue he will
@c    speak to this people.

@c    28:12. To whom he said:  This is my rest, refresh the weary, and this is
@c    my refreshing:  and they would not hear.

@c    28:13. And the word of the Lord shall be to them:  Command, command
@c    again; command, command again; expect, expect again; a little there, a
@c    little there:  that they may go, and fall backward, and be broken, and
@c    snared, and taken.

@c    28:14. Wherefore hear the word of the Lord, ye scornful men, who rule
@c    over my people that is in Jerusalem.

@c    28:15. For you have said:  We have entered into a league with death, and
@c    we have made a covenant with hell.  When the overflowing scourge shall
@c    pass through, it shall not come upon us:  for we have placed our hope in
@c    lies, and by falsehood we are protected.

@c    28:16. Therefore thus saith the Lord God:  Behold I will lay a stone in
@c    the foundations of Sion, a tried stone, a corner stone, a precious
@c    stone, founded in the foundation.  He that believeth, let him not
@c    hasten.

@c    A stone in the foundations. . .Viz., Christ.--Ibid.  Let him not hasten,
@c    etc. . .Let him expect his coming with patience.

@c    28:17. And I will set judgment in weight, and justice in measure:  and
@c    hail shall overturn the hope of falsehood:  and waters shall overflow
@c    its protection.

@c    28:18. And your league with death shall be abolished, and your covenant
@c    with hell shall not stand:  when the overflowing scourge shall pass, you
@c    shall be trodden down by it.

@c    28:19. Whensoever it shall pass through, it shall take you away:
@c    because in the morning early it shall pass through, in the day and in
@c    the night, and vexation alone shall make you understand what you hear.

@c    28:20. For the bed is straitened, so that one must fall out, and a
@c    short covering cannot cover both.

@c    The bed is straitened, etc. . .It is too narrow to hold two:  God will
@c    have the bed of our heart all to himself.

@c    28:21. For the Lord shall stand up as in the mountain of divisions:  he
@c    shall be angry as in the valley which is in Gabaon:  that he may do his
@c    work, his strange work:  that he may perform his work, his work is
@c    strange to him.

@c    As in the mountain, etc. . .As the Lord fought against the Philistines
@c    in Baal Pharasim, 2 Kings 5., and against the Chanaanites, in the
@c    valley of Gabaon, Jos. 10.

@c    28:22. And now do not mock, lest your bonds be tied strait.  For I have
@c    heard of the Lord the God of hosts a consumption and a cutting short
@c    upon all the earth.

@c    28:23. Give ear, and hear my voice, hearken, and hear my speech.

@c    28:24. Shall the ploughman plough all the day to sow, shall he open and
@c    harrow his ground?

@c    28:25. Will he not, when he hath made plain the surface thereof, sow
@c    gith, and scatter cummin, and put wheat in order, and barley, and
@c    millet, and vetches in their bounds?

@c    28:26. For he will instruct him in judgment:  his God will teach him.

@c    28:27. For gith shall not be thrashed with saws, neither shall the cart
@c    wheel turn about upon cummin:  but gith shall be beaten out with a rod,
@c    and cumin with a staff.

@c    28:28. But breadcorn shall be broken small:  but the thrasher shall not
@c    thrash it for ever, neither shall the cart wheel hurt it, nor break it
@c    with its teeth.

@c    28:29. This also is come forth from the Lord God of hosts, to make his
@c    counsel wonderful, and magnify justice.

@c    This also, etc. . .Such also is the proceeding of the Lord with his
@c    land, and the divers seeds he throws therein.



@c    Isaias Chapter 29


@c    God's heavy judgments upon Jerusalem, for their obstinacy:  with a
@c    prophecy of the conversion of the Gentiles.

@c    29:1. Woe to Ariel, to Ariel the city which David took:  year is added
@c    to year.  the solemnities are at an end.

@c    Ariel. . .This word signifies, the lion of God, and here is taken for
@c    the strong city of Jerusalem.

@c    29:2. And I will make a trench about Ariel, and it shall be in sorrow
@c    and mourning, and it shall be to me as Ariel.

@c    29:3. And I will make a circle round about thee, and I will cast up a
@c    rampart against thee, and raise up bulwarks to besiege thee.

@c    29:4. Thou shalt be brought down, thou shall speak out of the earth,
@c    and thy speech shall be heard out of the ground:  and thy voice shall be
@c    from the earth like that of the python, and out of the earth thy speech
@c    shall mutter.

@c    29:5. And the multitude of them that fan thee, shall be like small
@c    dust:  and as ashes passing away, the multitude of them that have
@c    prevailed against thee.

@c    29:6. And it shall be at an instant suddenly.  A visitation shall come
@c    from the Lord of hosts in thunder, and with earthquake, and with a
@c    great noise of whirlwind and tempest; and with the flame of devouring
@c    fire.

@c    29:7. And the multitude of all nations that have fought against Ariel,
@c    shall be as the dream of a vision by night, and all that have fought,
@c    and besieged and prevailed against it.

@c    29:8. And as he that is hungry dreameth, and eateth, but when he is
@c    awake, his soul is empty:  and as he that is thirsty dreameth, and
@c    drinketh and after he is awake, is yet faint with thirst, and his soul
@c    is empty:  so shall be the multitude of all the Gentiles, that have
@c    fought against mount Sion.

@c    29:9. Be astonished, and wonder, waver, and stagger:  be drunk, and not
@c    with wine:  stagger, and not with drunkenness.

@c    29:10. For the Lord hath mingled for you the spirit of a deep sleep, he
@c    will shut up your eyes, he will cover your prophets and princes, that
@c    see visions.

@c    29:11. And the vision of all shall be unto you as the words of a book
@c    that is sealed which when they shall deliver to one that is learned,
@c    they shall say:  Read this:  and he shall answer:  I cannot, for it is
@c    sealed.

@c    29:12. And the book shall be given to one that knoweth no letters, and
@c    it shall be said to him:  Read:  and he shall answer:  I know no letters.

@c    29:13. And the Lord said:  Forasmuch as this people draw near me with
@c    their mouth, and with their lips glorify me, but their heart is far
@c    from me, and they have feared me with the commandment and doctrines of
@c    men:

@c    29:14. Therefore behold I will proceed to cause an admiration in this
@c    people, by a great and wonderful miracle:  for wisdom shall perish from
@c    their wise men, and the understanding of their prudent men shall be
@c    hid.

@c    29:15. Woe to you that are deep of heart, to hide your counsel from the
@c    Lord:  and their works are in the dark, and they say:  Who seeth us, and
@c    who knoweth us?

@c    29:16. This thought of yours is perverse:  as if the clay should think
@c    against the potter, and the work should say to the maker thereof:  Thou
@c    madest me not:  or the thing framed should say to him that fashioned it:
@c    Thou understandest not.

@c    29:17. Is it not yet a very little while, and Libanus shall be turned
@c    into charmel, and charmel shall be esteemed as a forest?

@c    Charmel. . .This word signifies a fruitful field.

@c    29:18. And in that day the deaf shall hear the words of the book, and
@c    out of darkness and obscurity the eyes of the blind shall see.

@c    29:19. And the meek shall increase their joy in the Lord, and the poor
@c    men shall rejoice in the Holy One of Israel.

@c    29:20. For he that did prevail hath failed, the scorner is consumed,
@c    and they are all cut off that watched for iniquity:

@c    29:21. That made men sin by word, and supplanted him that reproved them
@c    in the gate, and declined in vain from the just.

@c    29:22. Therefore thus saith the Lord to the house of Jacob, he that
@c    redeemed Abraham:  Jacob shall not now be confounded, neither shall his
@c    countenance now be ashamed:

@c    29:23. But when he shall see his children, the work of my hands in the
@c    midst of him sanctifying my name, and they shall sanctify the Holy One
@c    of Jacob, and shall glorify the God of Israel:

@c    29:24. And they that erred in spirit, shall know understanding, and
@c    they that murmured, shall learn the law.



@c    Isaias Chapter 30


@c    The people are blamed for their confidence in Egypt.  God's mercies
@c    towards his church.  The punishment of sinners.

@c    30:1. Woe to you, apostate children, saith the Lord, that you would
@c    take counsel, and not of me:  and would begin a web, and not by my
@c    spirit, that you might add sin upon sin:

@c    30:2. Who walk to go down into Egypt, and have not asked at my mouth,
@c    hoping for help in the strength of Pharao, and trusting in the shadow
@c    of Egypt.

@c    30:3. And the strength of Pharao shall be to your confusion, and the
@c    confidence of the shadow of Egypt to your shame.

@c    30:4. For thy princes were in Tanis, and thy messengers came even to
@c    Hanes.

@c    30:5. They were all confounded at a people that could not profit them:
@c    they were no help, nor to any profit, but to confusion and to reproach.

@c    30:6. The burden of the beasts of the south.  In a land of trouble and
@c    distress, from whence come the lioness, and the lion, the viper and the
@c    flying basilisk, they carry their riches upon the shoulders of beasts,
@c    and their treasures upon the bunches of camels to a people that shall
@c    not be able to profit them.

@c    30:7. For Egypt shall help in vain, and to no purpose:  therefore have I
@c    cried concerning this:  It is pride only, sit still.

@c    30:8. Now therefore go in and write for them upon box, and note it
@c    diligently in a book, and it shall be in the latter days for a
@c    testimony for ever.

@c    30:9. For it is a people that provoketh to wrath, and lying children
@c    that will not hear the law of God.

@c    30:10. Who say to the seers:  See not:  and to them that behold:  Behold
@c    not for us those things that are right:  speak unto us pleasant things,
@c    see errors for us.

@c    30:11. Take away from me the way, turn away the path from me, let the
@c    Holy One of Israel cease from before us.

@c    30:12. Therefore thus saith the Holy One of Israel:  Because you have
@c    rejected this word, and have trusted in oppression and tumult, and have
@c    leaned upon it:

@c    30:13. Therefore shall this iniquity be to you as a breach that
@c    falleth, and is found wanting in a high wall, for the destruction
@c    thereof shall come on a sudden, when it is not looked for.

@c    30:14. And it shall be broken small, as the potter's vessel is broken
@c    all to pieces with mighty breaking, and there shall not a sherd be
@c    found of the pieces thereof, wherein a little fire may be carried from
@c    the hearth, or a little water be drawn out of the pit.

@c    30:15. For thus saith the Lord God the Holy One of Israel:  If you
@c    return and be quiet, you shall be saved:  in silence and in hope shall
@c    your strength be.  And you would not:

@c    30:16. But have said:  No, but we will flee to horses:  therefore shall
@c    you flee.  And we will mount upon swift ones:  therefore shall they be
@c    swifter that shall pursue after you.

@c    30:17. A thousand men shall flee for fear of one:  and for fear of five
@c    shall you flee, till you be left as the mast of ship on the top of a
@c    mountain, and as an ensign upon a hill.

@c    30:18. Therefore the Lord waiteth that he may have mercy on you:  and
@c    therefore shall he be exalted sparing you:  because the Lord is the God
@c    of judgment:  blessed are all they that wait for him.

@c    30:19. For the people of Sion shall dwell in Jerusalem:  weeping thou
@c    shalt not weep, he will surely have pity on thee:  at the voice of thy
@c    cry, as soon as he shall hear, he will answer thee.

@c    30:20. And the Lord will give you spare bread, and short water:  and
@c    will not cause thy teacher to flee away from thee any more, and thy
@c    eyes shall see thy teacher.

@c    30:21. And thy ears shall hear the word of one admonishing thee behind
@c    thy back:  This is the way, walk ye in it:  and go not aside neither to
@c    the right hand, nor to the left.

@c    30:22. And thou shalt defile the plates of thy graven things of silver,
@c    and the garment of thy molten things of gold, and shalt cast them away
@c    as the uncleanness of a menstruous woman.  Thou shalt say to it:  Get
@c    thee hence.

@c    30:23. And rain shall be given to thy seed, wheresoever thou shalt sow
@c    in the land:  and the bread of the corn of the land shall be most
@c    plentiful, and fat.  The lamb in that day shall feed at large in thy
@c    possession:

@c    30:24. And thy oxen, and the ass colts that till the ground, shall eat
@c    mingled provender as it was winnowed in the floor.

@c    30:25. And there shall be upon every high mountain, and upon every
@c    elevated hill rivers of running waters in the day of the slaughter of
@c    many, when the tower shall fall.

@c    30:26. And the light of the moon shall be as the light of the sun, and
@c    the light of the sun shall be sevenfold, as the light of seven days:  in
@c    the day when the Lord shall bind up the wound of his people, and shall
@c    heal the stroke of their wound.

@c    30:27. Behold the name of the Lord cometh from afar, his wrath burneth,
@c    and is heavy to bear:  his lips are filled with indignation, and his
@c    tongue as a devouring fire.

@c    30:28. His breath as a torrent overflowing even to the midst of the
@c    neck, to destroy the nations unto nothing, and the bridle of error that
@c    was in the jaws of the people.

@c    30:29. You shall have a song as in the night of the sanctified
@c    solemnity, and joy of heart, as where one goeth with a pipe, to come
@c    into the mountain of the Lord, to the Mighty One of Israel.

@c    30:30. And the Lord shall make the glory of his voice to be heard, and
@c    shall shew the terror of his arm, in the threatening of wrath, and the
@c    flame of devouring fire:  he shall crush to pieces with whirlwind, and
@c    hailstones.

@c    30:31. For at the voice of the Lord the Assyrian shall fear being
@c    struck with the rod.

@c    30:32. And the passage of the rod shall be strongly grounded, which the
@c    Lord shall make to rest upon him with timbrels and harps, and in great
@c    battles he shall overthrow them.

@c    30:33. For Topheth is prepared from yesterday, prepared by the king,
@c    deep, and wide.  The nourishment thereof is fire and much wood:  the
@c    breath of the Lord as a torrent of brimstone kindling it.

@c    Topheth. . .It is the same as Gehenna, and is taken for hell.



@c    Isaias Chapter 31


@c    The folly of trusting to Egypt, and forgetting God.  He will fight for
@c    his people against the Assyrians.

@c    31:1. Woe to them that go down to Egypt for help, trusting in horses,
@c    and putting their confidence in chariots, because they are many:  and in
@c    horsemen, because they are very strong:  and have not trusted in the
@c    Holy One of Israel, and have not sought after the Lord.

@c    31:2. But he that is the wise one hath brought evil, and hath not
@c    removed his words:  and he will rise up against the house of the wicked,
@c    and against the aid of them that work iniquity.

@c    31:3. Egypt is man, and not God:  and their horses, flesh, and not
@c    spirit:  and the Lord shall put down his hand, and the helper shall
@c    fall, and he that is helped shall fall, and they shall all be
@c    confounded together.

@c    31:4. For thus saith the Lord to me:  Like as the lion roareth, and the
@c    lions whelp upon his prey, and when a multitude of shepherds shall come
@c    against him, he will not fear at their voice, nor be afraid of their
@c    multitude:  so shall the Lord of hosts come down to fight upon mount
@c    Sion, and upon the hill thereof.

@c    31:5. As birds flying, so will the Lord of hosts protect Jerusalem,
@c    protecting and delivering, passing over and saving.

@c    31:6. Return as you had deeply revolted, O children of Israel.

@c    31:7. For in that day a man shall cast away his idols of silver, and
@c    his idols of gold, which your hands have made for you to sin.

@c    31:8. And the Assyrian shall fall by the sword not of a man, and the
@c    sword not of a man shall devour him, and he shall flee not at the face
@c    of the sword, and his young men shall be tributaries.

@c    31:9. And his strength shall pass away with dread, and his princes
@c    fleeing shall be afraid:  the Lord hath said it, whose fire is in Sion,
@c    and his furnace in Jerusalem.



@c    Isaias Chapter 32


@c    The blessings of the reign of Christ.  The desolation of the Jews, and
@c    prosperity of the church of Christ.

@c    32:1. Behold a king shall reign in justice, and princes shall rule in
@c    judgment.

@c    32:2. And a man shall be as when one is hid from the wind, and hideth
@c    himself from a storm, as rivers of waters in drought, and the shadow of
@c    a rock that standeth out in a desert land.

@c    32:3. The eyes of them that see shall not be dim, and the ears of them
@c    that hear shall hearken diligently.

@c    32:4. And the heart of fools shall understand knowledge, and the tongue
@c    of stammerers shall speak readily and plain.

@c    32:5. The fool shall no more be called prince:  neither shall the
@c    deceitful be called great:

@c    32:6. For the fool will speak foolish things, and his heart will work
@c    iniquity, to practise hypocrisy, and speak to the Lord deceitfully, and
@c    to make empty the soul of the hungry, and take away drink from the
@c    thirsty.

@c    32:7. The vessels of the deceitful are most wicked:  for he hath framed
@c    devices to destroy the meek, with lying words, when the poor man
@c    speaketh judgment.

@c    32:8. But the prince will devise such things as are worthy of a prince,
@c    and he shall stand above the rulers.

@c    32:9. Rise up, ye rich women, and hear my voice:  ye confident
@c    daughters, give ear to my speech.

@c    32:10. For after days and a year, you that are confident shall be
@c    troubled:  for the vintage is at an end, the gathering shall come no
@c    more.

@c    32:11. Be astonished, ye rich women, be troubled, ye confident ones:
@c    strip you, and be confounded, gird your loins.

@c    32:12. Mourn for your breasts, for the delightful country, for the
@c    fruitful vineyard.

@c    32:13. Upon the land of my people shall thorns and briers come up:  how
@c    much more upon all the houses of joy, of the city that rejoiced?

@c    32:14. For the house is forsaken, the multitude of the city is left,
@c    darkness and obscurity are come upon its dens for ever.  A joy of wild
@c    asses, the pastures of flocks.

@c    32:15. Until the spirit be poured upon us from on high:  and the desert
@c    shall be as a charmel, and charmel shall be counted for a forest.

@c    32:16. An judgment shall dwell in the wilderness, and justice shall sit
@c    in charmel.

@c    32:17. And the work of justice shall be peace, and the service of
@c    justice quietness, and security for ever.

@c    32:18. And my people shall sit in the beauty of peace, and in the
@c    tabernacles of confidence, and in wealthy rest.

@c    32:19. But hail shall be in the descent of the forest, and the city
@c    shall be made very low.

@c    32:20. Blessed are ye that sow upon all waters, sending thither the
@c    foot of the ox and the ass.



@c    Isaias Chapter 33


@c    God's revenge against the enemies of his church.  The happiness of the
@c    heavenly Jerusalem.

@c    33:1. Woe to thee that spoilest, shalt not thou thyself also be
@c    spoiled?  and thou that despisest, shalt not thyself also be despised?
@c    when thou shalt have made an end of spoiling, thou shalt be spoiled:
@c    when being wearied thou shalt cease to despise, thou shalt be despised.

@c    That spoilest, etc. . .This is particularly directed to Sennacherib.

@c    33:2. O Lord, have mercy on us:  for we have waited for thee:  be thou
@c    our arm in the morning, and our salvation in the time of trouble.

@c    33:3. At the voice of the angel the people fled, and at the lifting up
@c    thyself the nations are scattered.

@c    33:4. And your spoils shall be gathered together as the locusts are
@c    gathered, as when the ditches are full of them.

@c    33:5. The Lord is magnified, for he hath dwelt on high:  he hath filled
@c    Sion with judgment and justice.

@c    33:6. And there shall be faith in thy times:  riches of salvation,
@c    wisdom and knowledge:  the fear of the Lord is his treasure.

@c    33:7. Behold they that see shall cry without, the angels of peace shall
@c    weep bitterly.

@c    The angels of peace. . .The messengers or deputies sent to negotiate a
@c    peace.

@c    33:8. The ways are made desolate, no one passeth by the road, the
@c    covenant is made void, he hath rejected the cities, he hath not
@c    regarded the men.

@c    33:9. The land hath mourned, and languished:  Libanus is confounded, and
@c    become foul, and Saron is become as a desert:  and Basan and Carmel are
@c    shaken.

@c    33:10. Now will I rise up, saith the Lord:  now will I be exalted, now
@c    will I lift up myself.

@c    33:11. You shall conceive heat, you shall bring forth stubble:  your
@c    breath as fire shall devour you.

@c    33:12. And the people shall be as ashes after a fire, as a bundle of
@c    thorns they shall be burnt with fire.

@c    33:13. Hear, you that are far off, what I have done, and you that are
@c    near know my strength.

@c    33:14. The sinners in Sion are afraid, trembling hath seized upon the
@c    hypocrites.  Which of you can dwell with devouring fire?  which of you
@c    shall dwell with everlasting burnings?

@c    33:15. He that walketh in justices, and speaketh truth, that casteth
@c    away avarice by oppression, and shaketh his hands from all bribes, that
@c    stoppeth his ears lest he hear blood, and shutteth his eyes that he may
@c    see no evil.

@c    33:16. He shall dwell on high, the fortifications of rocks shall be his
@c    highness:  bread is given him, his waters are sure.

@c    33:17. His eyes shall see the king in his beauty, they shall see the
@c    land far off.

@c    33:18. Thy heart shall meditate fear:  where is the learned?  where is he
@c    that pondered the words of the law?  where is the teacher of little
@c    ones?

@c    33:19. The shameless people thou shalt not see, the people of profound
@c    speech:  so that thou canst not understand the eloquence of his tongue,
@c    in whom there is no wisdom.

@c    33:20. Look upon Sion the city of our solemnity:  thy eyes shall see
@c    Jerusalem, a rich habitation, a tabernacle that cannot be removed:
@c    neither shall the nails thereof be taken away for ever, neither shall
@c    any of the cords thereof be broken.

@c    33:21. Because only there our Lord is magnificent:  a place of rivers,
@c    very broad and spacious streams:  no ship with oars shall pass by it,
@c    neither shall the great galley pass through it.

@c    Of rivers. . .He speaks of the rivers of endless joys that flow from the
@c    throne of God to water the heavenly Jerusalem, where no enemy's ship
@c    can come, etc.

@c    33:22. For the Lord is our judge, the Lord is our lawgiver, the Lord is
@c    our king:  he will save us.

@c    33:23. Thy tacklings are loosed, and they shall be of no strength:  thy
@c    mast shall be in such condition, that thou shalt not be able to spread
@c    the flag.  Then shall the spoils of much prey be divided:  the lame shall
@c    take the spoil.

@c    Thy tacklings. . .He speaks of the enemies of the church, under the
@c    allegory of a ship that is disabled.

@c    33:24. Neither shall he that is near, say:  I am feeble.  The people that
@c    dwell therein, shall have their iniquity taken away from them.



@c    Isaias Chapter 34


@c    The general judgment of the wicked.

@c    34:1. Come near, ye Gentiles, and hear, and hearken, ye people:  let the
@c    earth hear, and all that is therein, the world, and every thing that
@c    cometh forth of it.

@c    34:2. For the indignation of the Lord is upon all nations, and his fury
@c    upon all their armies:  he hath killed them, and delivered them to
@c    slaughter.

@c    34:3. Their slain shall be cast forth, and out of their carcasses shall
@c    rise a stink:  the mountains shall be melted with their blood.

@c    34:4. And all the host of the heavens shall pine away, and the heavens
@c    shall be folded together as a book:  and all their host shall fall down
@c    as the leaf falleth from the vine, and from the fig tree.

@c    And all the host of the heavens. . .That is, the sun, moon, and stars.

@c    34:5. For my sword is inebriated in heaven:  behold it shall come down
@c    upon Idumea, and upon the people of my slaughter unto judgment.

@c    Idumea. . .Under the name of Idumea, or Edom a people that were enemies
@c    of the Jews, are here understood the wicked in general, the enemies of
@c    God and his church.

@c    34:6. The sword of the Lord is filled with blood, it is made thick with
@c    the blood of lambs and buck goats, with the blood of rams full of
@c    marrow:  for there is a victim of the Lord in Bosra and a great
@c    slaughter in the land of Edom.

@c    34:7. And the unicorns shall go down with them, and the bulls with the
@c    mighty:  their land shall be soaked with blood, and their ground with
@c    the fat of fat ones.

@c    The unicorns. . .That is, the great and mighty.

@c    34:8. For it is the day of the vengeance of the Lord, the year of
@c    recompenses of the judgment of Sion.

@c    The year of recompenses, etc. . .When the persecutors of Sion, that is,
@c    of the church, shall receive their reward.

@c    34:9. And the streams thereof shall be turned into pitch, and the
@c    ground thereof into brimstone:  and the land thereof shall become
@c    burning pitch.

@c    34:10. Night and day it shall not be quenched, the smoke thereof shall
@c    go up for ever:  from generation to generation it shall lie waste, none
@c    shall pass through it for ever and ever.

@c    34:11. The bittern and ericius shall possess it:  and the ibis and the
@c    raven shall dwell in it:  and a line shall be stretched out upon it, to
@c    bring it to nothing, and a plummet, unto desolation.

@c    34:12. The nobles thereof shall not be there:  they shall call rather
@c    upon the king, and all the princes thereof shall be nothing.

@c    34:13. And thorns and nettles shall grow up in its houses, and the
@c    thistle in the fortresses thereof:  and it shall be the habitation of
@c    dragons, and the pasture of ostriches.

@c    34:14. And demons and monsters shall meet, and the hairy ones shall cry
@c    out one to another, there hath the lamia lain down, and found rest for
@c    herself.

@c    34:15. There hath the ericius had its hole, and brought up its young
@c    ones, and hath dug round about, and cherished them in the shadow
@c    thereof:  thither are the kites gathered together one to another.

@c    34:16. Search ye diligently in the book of the Lord, and read:  not one
@c    of them was wanting, one hath not sought for the other:  for that which
@c    proceedeth out of my mouth, he hath commanded, and his spirit it hath
@c    gathered them.

@c    34:17. And he hath cast the lot for them, and his hand hath divided it
@c    to them by line:  they shall possess it for ever, from generation to
@c    generation they shall dwell therein.



@c    Isaias Chapter 35


@c    The joyful flourishing of Christ's kingdom:  in his church shall be a
@c    holy and secure way.

@c    35:1. The land that was desolate and impassable shall be glad, and the
@c    wilderness shall rejoice, and shall flourish like the lily.

@c    35:2. It shall bud forth and blossom, and shall rejoice with joy and
@c    praise:  the glory of Libanus is given to it:  the beauty of Carmel, and
@c    Saron, they shall see the glory of the Lord, and the beauty of our God.

@c    35:3. Strengthen ye the feeble hands, and confirm the weak knees.

@c    35:4. Say to the fainthearted:  Take courage, and fear not:  behold your
@c    God will bring the revenge of recompense:  God himself will come and
@c    will save you.

@c    35:5. Then shall the eyes of the blind be opened, and the ears of the
@c    deaf shall be unstopped.

@c    35:6. Then shall the lame man leap as a hart, and the tongue of the
@c    dumb shall be free:  for waters are broken out in the desert, and
@c    streams in the wilderness.

@c    35:7. And that which was dry land, shall become a pool, and the thirsty
@c    land springs of water.  In the dens where dragons dwelt before, shall
@c    rise up the verdure of the reed and the bulrush.

@c    35:8. And a path and a way shall be there, and it shall be called the
@c    holy way:  the unclean shall not pass over it, and this shall be unto
@c    you a straight way, so that fools shall not err therein.

@c    35:9. No lion shall be there, nor shall any mischievous beast go up by
@c    it, nor be found there:  but they shall walk there that shall be
@c    delivered.

@c    35:10. And the redeemed of the Lord shall return, and shall come into
@c    Sion with praise, and everlasting joy shall be upon their heads:  they
@c    shall obtain joy and gladness, and sorrow and mourning shall flee away.



@c    Isaias Chapter 36


@c    Sennacherib invades Juda:  his blasphemies.

@c    36:1. And it came to pass in the fourteenth year of king Ezechias, that
@c    Sennacherib king of the Assyrians came up against all the fenced cities
@c    of Juda, and took them.

@c    36:2. And the king of the Assyrians sent Rabsaces from Lachis to
@c    Jerusalem, to king Ezechias with a great army, and he stood by the
@c    conduit of the upper pool in the way of the fuller's field.

@c    36:3. And there went out to him Eliacim the son of Helcias, who was
@c    over the house, and Sobna the scribe, and Joahe the son of Asaph the
@c    recorder.

@c    36:4. And Rabsaces said to them:  Tell Ezechias:  Thus saith the great
@c    king, the king of the Assyrians:  What is this confidence wherein thou
@c    trustest?

@c    36:5. Or with what counsel or strength dost thou prepare for war?  on
@c    whom dost thou trust, that thou art revolted from me?

@c    36:6. Lo thou trustest upon this broken staff of a reed, upon Egypt:
@c    upon which if a man lean, it will go into his hand, and pierce it:  so
@c    is Pharao king of Egypt to all that trust in him.

@c    36:7. But if thou wilt answer me:  We trust in the Lord our God:  is it
@c    not he whose high places and altars Ezechias hath taken away, and hath
@c    said to Juda and Jerusalem:  You shall worship before this altar?

@c    36:8. And now deliver thyself up to my lord the king of the Assyrians,
@c    and I will give thee two thousand horses, and thou wilt not be able on
@c    thy part to find riders for them.

@c    36:9. And how wilt thou stand against the face of the judge of one
@c    place, of the least of my master's servants?  But if thou trust in
@c    Egypt, in chariots and in horsemen:

@c    36:10. And am I now come up without the Lord against this land to
@c    destroy it?  The Lord said to me:  Go up against this land, and destroy
@c    it.

@c    36:11. And Eliacim, and Sobna, and Joahe said to Rabsaces:  Speak to thy
@c    servants in the Syrian tongue:  for we understand it:  speak not to us in
@c    the Jews' language in the hearing of the people, that are upon the
@c    wall.

@c    36:12. And Rabsaces said to them:  Hath my master sent me to thy master
@c    and to thee, to speak all these words; and not rather to the men that
@c    sit on the wall; that they may eat their own dung, and drink their
@c    urine with you?

@c    36:13. Then Rabsaces stood, and cried out with a loud voice in the
@c    Jews' language, and said:  Hear the words of the great king, the king of
@c    the Assyrians.

@c    36:14. Thus saith the king:  Let not Ezechias deceive you, for he shall
@c    not be able to deliver you.

@c    36:15. And let not Ezechias make you trust in the Lord, saying:  The
@c    Lord will surely deliver us, and this city shall not be given into the
@c    hands of the king of the Assyrians.

@c    36:16. Do not hearken to Ezechias:  for thus said the king of the
@c    Assyrians:  Do with me that which is for your advantage, and come out to
@c    me, and eat ye every one of his vine, and every one of his fig tree,
@c    and drink ye every one the water of his cistern,

@c    36:17. Till I come and take you away to a land, like to your own, a
@c    land of corn and of wine, a land of bread and vineyards.

@c    36:18. Neither let Ezechias trouble you, saying:  The Lord will deliver
@c    us.  Have any of the gods of the nations delivered their land out of the
@c    hand of the king of the Assyrians?

@c    36:19. Where is the god of Emath and of Arphad?  where is the god of
@c    Sepharvaim?  have they delivered Samaria out of my hand?

@c    36:20. Who is there among all the gods of these lands, that hath
@c    delivered his country out of my hand, that the Lord may deliver
@c    Jerusalem out of my hand?

@c    36:21. And they held their peace, and answered him not a word.  For the
@c    king had commanded, saying:  Answer him not.

@c    36:22. And Eliacim the son of Helcias, that was over the house, and
@c    Sobna the scribe, and Joahe the son of Asaph the recorder, went in to
@c    Ezechias with their garments rent, and told him the words of Rabsaces.



@c    Isaias Chapter 37


@c    Ezechias, his mourning and prayer.  God's promise of protection.  The
@c    Assyrian army is destroyed.  Sennacherib is slain.

@c    37:1. And it came to pass, when king Ezechias had heard it, that he
@c    rent his garments and covered himself with sackcloth, and went into the
@c    house of the Lord.

@c    37:2. And he sent Eliacim who was over the house, and Sobna the scribe,
@c    and the ancients of the priests covered with sackcloth, to Isaias the
@c    son of Amos the prophet.

@c    37:3. And they said to him:  Thus saith Ezechias:  This day is a day of
@c    tribulation, and of rebuke, and of blasphemy:  for the children are come
@c    to the birth, and there is not strength to bring forth.

@c    37:4. It may be the Lord thy God will hear the words of Rabsaces, whom
@c    the king of the Assyrians his master hath sent to blaspheme the living
@c    God, and to reproach with words which the Lord thy God hath heard:
@c    wherefore lift up by prayer for the remnant that is left.

@c    37:5. And the servants of Ezechias came to Isaias.

@c    37:6. And Isaias said to them:  Thus shall you say to your master:  Thus
@c    saith the Lord:  Be not afraid of the words that thou hast heard, with
@c    which the servants of the king of the Assyrians have blasphemed me.

@c    37:7. Behold, I will send a spirit upon him, and he shall hear a
@c    message, and shall return to his own country, and I will cause him to
@c    fall by the sword in his own country.

@c    37:8. And Rabsaces returned, and found the king of the Assyrians
@c    besieging Lobna.  For he had heard that he was departed from Lachis.

@c    37:9. And he heard say about Tharaca the king of Ethiopia:  He is come
@c    forth to fight against thee.  And when he heard it, he sent messengers
@c    to Ezechias, saying:

@c    37:10. Thus shall you speak to Ezechias the king of Juda, saying:  Let
@c    not thy God deceive thee, in whom thou trustest, saying:  Jerusalem
@c    shall not be given into the hands of the king of the Assyrians.

@c    37:11. Behold thou hast heard all that the kings of the Assyrians have
@c    done to all countries which they have destroyed, and canst thou be
@c    delivered?

@c    37:12. Have the gods of the nations delivered them whom my fathers have
@c    destroyed, Gozam, and Haram, and Reseph, and the children of Eden, that
@c    were in Thalassar?

@c    37:13. Where is the king of Emath, and the king of Arphad, and the king
@c    of the city of Sepharvaim, of Ana, and of Ava?

@c    37:14. And Ezechias took the letter from the hand of the messengers,
@c    and read it, and went up to the house of the Lord, and Ezechias spread
@c    it before the Lord.

@c    37:15. And Ezechias prayed to the Lord, saying:

@c    37:16. Lord of hosts, God of Israel who sitteth upon the cherubims,
@c    thou alone art the God of all the kingdoms of the earth, thou hast made
@c    heaven and earth.

@c    37:17. Incline, O Lord, thy ear, and hear:  open, O Lord, thy eyes, and
@c    see, and hear all the words of Sennacherib, which he hath sent to
@c    blaspheme the living God.

@c    37:18. For of a truth, O Lord, the kings of the Assyrians have laid
@c    waste lands, and their countries.

@c    37:19. And they have cast their gods into the fire, for they were not
@c    gods, but the works of men's hands, of wood and stone:  and they broke
@c    them in pieces.

@c    37:20. And now, O Lord our God, save us out of his hand:  and let all
@c    the kingdoms of the earth know, that thou only art the Lord.

@c    37:21. And Isaias the son of Amos sent to Ezechias, saying:  Thus saith
@c    the Lord the God of Israel:  For the prayer thou hast made to me
@c    concerning Sennacherib the king of the Assyrians:

@c    37:22. This is the word which the Lord hath spoken of him:  The virgin
@c    the daughter of Sion hath despised thee, and laughed thee to scorn:  the
@c    daughter of Jerusalem hath wagged the head after thee.

@c    37:23. Whom hast thou reproached, and whom hast thou blasphemed, and
@c    against whom hast thou exalted thy voice, and lifted up thy eyes on
@c    high?  Against the Holy One of Israel.

@c    37:24. By the hand of thy servants thou hast reproached the Lord:  and
@c    hast said:  With the multitude of my chariots I have gone up to the
@c    height of the mountains, to the top of Libanus:  and I will cut down its
@c    tall cedars, and its choice fir trees, and will enter to the top of its
@c    height, to the forest of its Carmel.

@c    Carmel. . .See these figurative expressions explained in the annotations
@c    on the nineteenth chapter of the fourth book of Kings.

@c    37:25. I have digged, and drunk water, and have dried up with the sole
@c    of my foot, all the rivers shut up in banks.

@c    37:26. Hast thou not heard what I have done to him of old?  from the
@c    days of old I have formed it:  and now I have brought it to effect:  and
@c    it hath come to pass that hills fighting together, and fenced cities
@c    should be destroyed.

@c    37:27. The inhabitants of them were weak of hand, they trembled, and
@c    were confounded:  they became like the grass of the field, and the herb
@c    of the pasture, and like the grass of the housetops, which withered
@c    before it was ripe.

@c    37:28. I know thy dwelling, and thy going out, and thy coming in, and
@c    thy rage against me.

@c    37:29. When thou wast mad against me, thy pride came up to my ears:
@c    therefore I will put a ring in thy nose, and a bit between thy lips,
@c    and I will turn thee back by the way by which thou camest.

@c    37:30. But to thee this shall be a sign:  Eat this year the things that
@c    spring of themselves, and in the second year eat fruits:  but in the
@c    third year sow and reap, and plant vineyards, and eat the fruit of
@c    them.

@c    37:31. And that which shall be saved of the house of Juda, and which is
@c    left, shall take root downward, and shall bear fruit upward:

@c    37:32. For out of Jerusalem shall go forth a remnant, and salvation
@c    from mount Sion:  the zeal of the Lord of hosts shall do this.

@c    37:33. Wherefore thus saith the Lord concerning the king of the
@c    Assyrians:  He shall not come into this city, nor shoot an arrow into
@c    it, nor come before it with shield, nor cast a trench about it.

@c    37:34. By the way that he came, he shall return, and into this city he
@c    shall not come, saith the Lord.

@c    37:35. And I will protect this city, and will save it for my own sake,
@c    and for the sake of David my servant.

@c    37:36. And the angel of the Lord went out and slew in the camp of the
@c    Assyrians a hundred and eighty-five thousand.  And they arose in the
@c    morning, and behold they were all dead corpses.

@c    37:37. And Sennacherib the king of the Assyrians went out and departed,
@c    and returned, and dwelt in Ninive.

@c    37:38. And it came to pass, as he was worshipping in the temple of
@c    Nesroch his god, that Adramelech and Sarasar his sons slew him with the
@c    sword:  and they fled into the land of Ararat, and Asarhaddon his son
@c    reigned in his stead.



@c    Isaias Chapter 38


@c    Ezechias being advertised that he shall die, obtains by prayer a
@c    prolongation of his life:  in confirmation of which the sun goes back.
@c    The canticle of Ezechias.

@c    38:1. In those days Ezechias was sick even to death, and Isaias the son
@c    of Amos the prophet cane unto him, and said to him:  Thus saith the
@c    Lord:  Take order with thy house, for thou shalt die, and not live.

@c    38:2. And Ezechias turned his face toward the wall, and prayed to the
@c    Lord,

@c    38:3. And said:  I beseech thee, O Lord, remember how I have walked
@c    before thee in truth, and with a perfect heart, and have done that
@c    which is good in thy sight.  And Ezechias wept with great weeping.

@c    38:4. And the word of the Lord came to Isaias, saying:

@c    38:5. Go and say to Ezechias:  Thus saith the Lord the God of David thy
@c    father:  I have heard thy prayer, and I have seen thy tears:  behold I
@c    will add to thy days fifteen years:

@c    38:6. And I will deliver thee and this city out of the hand of the king
@c    of the Assyrians, and I will protect it.

@c    38:7. And this shall be a sign to thee from the Lord, that the Lord
@c    will do this word which he hath spoken:

@c    38:8. Behold I will bring again the shadow of the lines, by which it is
@c    now gone down in the sun dial of Achaz with the sun, ten lines
@c    backward.  And the sun returned ten lines by the degrees by which it was
@c    gone down.

@c    38:9. The writing of Ezechias king of Juda, when he had been sick, and
@c    was recovered of his sickness.

@c    38:10. I said:  In the midst of my days I shall go to the gates of hell:
@c    I sought for the residue of my years.

@c    Hell. . .Sheol, or Hades, the region of the dead.

@c    38:11. I said:  I shall not see the Lord God in the land of the living.
@c    I shall behold man no more, nor the inhabitant of rest.

@c    38:12. My generation is at an end, and it is rolled away from me, as a
@c    shepherd's tent.  My life is cut off, as by a weaver:  whilst I was yet
@c    but beginning, he cut me off:  from morning even to night thou wilt make
@c    an end of me.

@c    38:13. I hoped till morning, as a lion so hath he broken all my bones:
@c    from morning even to night thou wilt make an end of me.

@c    38:14. I will cry like a young swallow, I will meditate like a dove:  my
@c    eyes are weakened looking upward:  Lord, I suffer violence, answer thou
@c    for me.

@c    38:15. What shall I say, or what shall he answer for me, whereas he
@c    himself hath done it?  I will recount to thee all my years in the
@c    bitterness of my soul.

@c    38:16. O Lord, if man's life be such, and the life of my spirit be in
@c    such things as these, thou shalt correct me, and make me to live.

@c    38:17. Behold in peace is my bitterness most bitter:  but thou hast
@c    delivered my soul that it should not perish, thou hast cast all my sins
@c    behind thy back.

@c    38:18. For hell shall not confess to thee, neither shall death praise
@c    thee:  nor shall they that go down into the pit, look for thy truth.

@c    38:19. The living, the living, he shall give praise to thee, as I do
@c    this day:  the father shall make the truth known to the children.

@c    38:20. O Lord, save me, and we will sing our psalms all the days of our
@c    life in the house of the Lord.

@c    38:21. Now Isaias had ordered that they should take a lump of figs, and
@c    lay it as a plaster upon the wound, and that he should be healed.

@c    38:22. And Ezechias had said:  What shall be the sign that I shall go up
@c    to the house of the Lord?



@c    Isaias Chapter 39


@c    Ezechias shews all his treasures to the ambassadors of Babylon:  upon
@c    which Isaias foretells the Babylonish captivity.

@c    39:1. At that time Merodach Baladan, the son of Baladan king of
@c    Babylon, sent letters and presents to Ezechias:  for he had heard that
@c    he had been sick and was recovered.

@c    39:2. And Ezechias rejoiced at their coming, and he shewed them the
@c    storehouses of his aromatical spices, and of the silver, and of the
@c    gold, and of the sweet odours, and of the precious ointment, and all
@c    the storehouses of his furniture, and all things that were found in his
@c    treasures.  There was nothing in his house, nor in all his dominion that
@c    Ezechias shewed them not.

@c    39:3. Then Isaias the prophet came to king Ezechias, and said to him:
@c    What said these men, and from whence came they to thee?  And Ezechias
@c    said:  From a far country they came to me, from Babylon.

@c    39:4. And he said:  What saw they in thy house?  And Ezechias said:  All
@c    things that are in my house have they seen, there was not any thing
@c    which I have not shewn them in my treasures.

@c    39:5. And Isaias said to Ezechias:  Hear the word of the Lord of hosts.

@c    39:6. Behold the days shall come that all that is in thy house, and
@c    that thy fathers have laid up in store until this day, shall be carried
@c    away into Babylon:  there shall not any thing be left, saith the Lord.

@c    39:7. And of thy children, that shall issue from thee, whom thou shalt
@c    beget, they shall take away, and they shall be eunuchs in the palace of
@c    the king of Babylon.

@c    39:8. And Ezechias said to Isaias:  The word of the Lord, which he hath
@c    spoken, is good.  And he said:  Only let peace and truth be in my days.



@c    Isaias Chapter 40


@c    The prophet comforts the people with the promise of the coming of
@c    Christ to forgive their sins.  God's almighty power and majesty.

@c    40:1. Be comforted, be comforted, my people, saith your God.

@c    40:2. Speak ye to the heart of Jerusalem, and call to her:  for her evil
@c    is come to an end, her iniquity is forgiven:  she hath received of the
@c    hand of the Lord double for all her sins.

@c    40:3. The voice of one crying in the desert:  Prepare ye the way of the
@c    Lord, make straight in the wilderness the paths of our God.

@c    40:4. Every valley shall be exalted, and every mountain and hill shall
@c    be made low, and the crooked shall become straight, and the rough ways
@c    plain.

@c    40:5. And the glory of the Lord shall be revealed, and all flesh
@c    together shall see, that the mouth of the Lord hath spoken.

@c    40:6. The voice of one, saying:  Cry.  And I said:  What shall I cry?
@c    All flesh is grass, and all the glory thereof as the flower of the field.

@c    40:7. The grass is withered, and the flower is fallen, because the
@c    spirit of the Lord hath blown upon it.  Indeed the people is grass:

@c    40:8. The grass is withered, and the flower is fallen:  but the word of
@c    our Lord endureth for ever.

@c    40:9. Get thee up upon a high mountain, thou that bringest good tidings
@c    to Sion:  lift up thy voice with strength, thou that bringest good
@c    tidings to Jerusalem:  lift it up, fear not.  Say to the cities of Juda:
@c    Behold your God:

@c    40:10. Behold the Lord God shall come with strength, and his arm shall
@c    rule:  Behold his reward is with him and his work is before him.

@c    40:11. He shall feed his flock like a shepherd:  he shall gather
@c    together the lambs with his arm, and shall take them up in his bosom,
@c    and he himself shall carry them that are with young.

@c    40:12. Who hath measured the waters in the hollow of his hand, and
@c    weighed the heavens with his palm?  who hath poised with three fingers
@c    the bulk of the earth, and weighed the mountains in scales, and the
@c    hills in a balance?

@c    40:13. Who hath forwarded the spirit of the Lord?  or who hath been his
@c    counsellor, and hath taught him?

@c    40:14. With whom hath he consulted, and who hath instructed him, and
@c    taught him the path of justice, and taught him knowledge, and shewed
@c    him the way of understanding?

@c    40:15. Behold the Gentiles are as a drop of a bucket, and are counted
@c    as the smallest grain of a balance:  behold the islands are as a little
@c    dust.

@c    40:16. And Libanus shall not be enough to burn, nor the beasts thereof
@c    sufficient for a burnt offering.

@c    40:17. All nations are before him as if they had no being at all, and
@c    are counted to him as nothing, and vanity.

@c    40:18. To whom then have you likened God?  or what image will you make
@c    for him?

@c    40:19. Hath the workman cast a graven statue?  or hath the goldsmith
@c    formed it with gold, or the silversmith with plates of silver?

@c    40:20. He hath chosen strong wood, and that will not rot:  the skilful
@c    workman seeketh how he may set up an idol that may not be moved.

@c    40:21. Do you not know?  hath it not been heard?  hath it not been told
@c    you from the beginning?  have you not understood the foundations of the
@c    earth?

@c    40:22. It is he that sitteth upon the globe of the earth, and the
@c    inhabitants thereof are as locusts:  he that stretcheth out the heavens
@c    as nothing, and spreadeth them out as a tent to dwell in.

@c    40:23. He that bringeth the searchers of secrets to nothing, that hath
@c    made the judges of the earth as vanity.

@c    40:24. And surely their stock was neither planted, nor sown, nor rooted
@c    in the earth:  suddenly he hath blown upon them, and they are withered,
@c    and a whirlwind shall take them away as stubble.

@c    40:25. And to whom have ye likened me, or made me equal, saith the Holy
@c    One?

@c    40:26. Lift up your eyes on high, and see who hath created these
@c    things:  who bringeth out their host by number, and calleth them all by
@c    their names:  by the greatness of his might, and strength, and power,
@c    not one of them was missing.

@c    40:27. Why sayest thou, O Jacob, and speakest, O Israel:  My way is hid
@c    from the Lord, and my judgment is passed over from my God?

@c    40:28. Knowest thou not, or hast thou not heard?  the Lord is the
@c    everlasting God, who hath created the ends of the earth:  he shall not
@c    faint, nor labour, neither is there any searching out of his wisdom.

@c    40:29. It is he that giveth strength to the weary, and increaseth force
@c    and might to them that are not.

@c    40:30. You shall faint, and labour, and young men shall fall by
@c    infirmity.

@c    40:31. But they that hope in the Lord shall renew their strength, they
@c    shall take wings as eagles, they shall run and not be weary, they shall
@c    walk and not faint.



@c    Isaias Chapter 41


@c    The reign of the just one:  the vanity of idols.

@c    41:1. Let the islands keep silence before me, and the nations take new
@c    strength:  let them come near, and then speak, let us come near to
@c    judgment together.

@c    41:2. Who hath raised up the just one from the east, hath called him to
@c    follow him?  he shall give the nations in his sight, and he shall rule
@c    over kings:  he shall give them as the dust to his sword, as stubble
@c    driven by the wind, to his bow.

@c    41:3. He shall pursue them, he shall pass in peace, no path shall
@c    appear after his feet.

@c    41:4. Who hath wrought and done these things, calling the generations
@c    from the beginning?  I the Lord, I am the first and the last.

@c    41:5. The islands saw it, and feared, the ends of the earth were
@c    astonished, they drew near, and came.

@c    41:6. Every one shall help his neighbour, and shall say to his brother:
@c    Be of good courage.

@c    41:7. The coppersmith striking with the hammer encouraged him that
@c    forged at that time, saying:  It is ready for soldering:  and he
@c    strengthened it with nails, that it should not be moved.

@c    41:8. But thou Israel, art my servant, Jacob whom I have chosen, the
@c    seed of Abraham my friend:

@c    41:9. In whom I have taken thee from the ends of the earth, and from
@c    the remote parts thereof have called thee, and said to thee:  Thou art
@c    my servant, I have chosen thee, and have not cast thee away.

@c    41:10. Fear not, for I am with thee:  turn not aside, for I am thy God:
@c    I have strengthened thee, and have helped thee, and the right hand of
@c    my just one hath upheld thee.

@c    41:11. Behold all that fight against thee shall be confounded and
@c    ashamed, they shall be as nothing, and the men shall perish that strive
@c    against thee.

@c    41:12. Thou shalt seek them, and shalt not find the men that resist
@c    thee:  they shall be as nothing:  and as a thing consumed the men that
@c    war against thee.

@c    41:13. For I am the Lord thy God, who take thee by the hand, and say to
@c    thee:  Fear not, I have helped thee.

@c    41:14. Fear not, thou worm of Jacob, you that are dead of Israel:  I
@c    have helped thee, saith the Lord:  and thy Redeemer the Holy One of
@c    Israel.

@c    41:15. I have made thee as a new thrashing wain, with teeth like a saw:
@c    thou shalt thrash the mountains, and break them in pieces:  and shalt
@c    make the hills as chaff.

@c    41:16. Thou shalt fan them, and the wind shall carry them away, and the
@c    whirlwind shall scatter them:  and thou shalt rejoice in the Lord, in
@c    the Holy One of Israel thou shalt be joyful.

@c    41:17. The needy and the poor seek for waters, and there are none:
@c    their tongue hath been dry with thirst.  I the Lord will hear them, I
@c    the God of Israel will not forsake them.

@c    41:18. I will open rivers in the high hills, and fountains in the midst
@c    of the plains:  I will turn the desert into pools of waters, and the
@c    impassable land into streams of waters.

@c    41:19. I will plant in the wilderness the cedar, and the thorn, and the
@c    myrtle, and the olive tree:  I will set in the desert the fir tree, the
@c    elm, and the box tree together:

@c    The thorn. . .In Hebrew, the shitta, or setim, a tree resembling the
@c    white thorn.

@c    41:20. That they may see and know, and consider, and understand
@c    together that the hand of the Lord hath done this, and the Holy One of
@c    Israel hath created it.

@c    41:21. Bring your cause near, saith the Lord:  bring hither, if you have
@c    any thing to allege, saith the King of Jacob.

@c    41:22. Let them come, and tell us all things that are to come:  tell us
@c    the former things what they were:  and we will set our heart upon them
@c    and shall know the latter end of them, and tell us the things that are
@c    to come.

@c    41:23. Shew the things that are to come hereafter, and we shall know
@c    that ye are gods.  Do ye also good or evil, if you can:  and let us
@c    speak, and see together.

@c    41:24. Behold, you are of nothing, and your work of that which hath no
@c    being:  he that hath chosen you is an abomination.

@c    41:25. I have raised up one from the north, and he shall come from the
@c    rising of the sun:  he shall call upon my name, and he shall make
@c    princes to be as dirt, and as the potter treading clay.

@c    41:26. Who hath declared from the beginning, that we may know:  and from
@c    time of old, that we may say:  Thou art just.  There is none that
@c    sheweth, nor that foretelleth, nor that heareth your words.

@c    41:27. The first shall say to Sion:  Behold they are here, and to
@c    Jerusalem I will give an evangelist.

@c    41:28. And I saw, and there was no one even among them to consult, or
@c    who, when I asked, could answer a word.

@c    41:29. Behold they are all in the wrong, and their works are vain:
@c    their idols are wind and vanity.



@c    Isaias Chapter 42


@c    The office of Christ.  The preaching of the gospel to the Gentiles.  The
@c    blindness and reprobation of the Jews.

@c    42:1. Behold my servant, I will uphold him:  my elect, my soul
@c    delighteth in him:  I have given my spirit upon him, he shall bring
@c    forth judgment to the Gentiles.

@c    My servant. . .Christ, who according to his humanity, is the servant of
@c    God.

@c    42:2. He shall not cry, nor have respect to person, neither shall his
@c    voice be heard abroad.

@c    42:3. The bruised reed he shall not break, and smoking flax he shall
@c    not quench, he shall bring forth judgment unto truth.

@c    42:4. He shall not be sad, nor troublesome, till he set judgment in the
@c    earth, and the islands shall wait for his law.

@c    42:5. Thus saith the Lord God that created the heavens, and stretched
@c    them out:  that established the earth, and the things that spring out of
@c    it:  that giveth breath to the people upon it, and spirit to them that
@c    tread thereon.

@c    42:6. I the Lord have called thee in justice, and taken thee by the
@c    hand, and preserved thee.  And I have given thee for a covenant of the
@c    people, for a light of the Gentiles:

@c    42:7. That thou mightest open the eyes of the blind, and bring forth
@c    the prisoner out of prison, and them that sit in darkness out of the
@c    prison house.

@c    42:8. I the Lord, this is my name:  I will not give my glory to another,
@c    nor my praise to graven things.

@c    42:9. The things that were first, behold they are come:  and new things
@c    do I declare:  before they spring forth, I will make you hear them.

@c    42:10. Sing ye to the Lord a new song, his praise is from the ends of
@c    the earth:  you that go down to the sea, and all that are therein:  ye
@c    islands, and ye inhabitants of them.

@c    42:11. Let the desert and the cities thereof be exalted:  Cedar shall
@c    dwell in houses:  ye inhabitants of Petra, give praise, they shall cry
@c    from the top of the mountains.

@c    Petra. . .A city that gives name to Arabia Petraea.

@c    42:12. They shall give glory to the Lord, and shall declare his praise
@c    in the islands.

@c    42:13. The Lord shall go forth as a mighty man, as a man of war shall
@c    he stir up zeal:  he shall shout and cry:  he shall prevail against his
@c    enemies.

@c    42:14. I have always held my peace, I have kept silence, I have been
@c    patient, I will speak now as a woman in labour:  I will destroy, and
@c    swallow up at once.

@c    42:15. I will lay waste the mountains and hills, and will make all
@c    their grass to wither:  and I will turn rivers into islands, and will
@c    dry up the standing pools.

@c    42:16. And I will lead the blind into the way which they know not:  and
@c    in the paths which they were ignorant of I will make them walk:  I will
@c    make darkness light before them, and crooked things straight:  these
@c    things have I done to them, and have not forsaken them.

@c    42:17. They are turned back:  let them be greatly confounded, that trust
@c    in a graven thing, that say to a molten thing:  You are our god.

@c    42:18. Hear, ye deaf, and, ye blind, behold that you may see.

@c    42:19. Who is blind, but my servant?  or deaf, but he to whom I have
@c    sent my messengers?  Who is blind, but he that is sold?  or who is blind,
@c    but the servant of the Lord?

@c    42:20. Thou that seest many things, wilt thou not observe them?  thou
@c    that hast ears open, wilt thou not hear?

@c    42:21. And the Lord was willing to sanctify him, and to magnify the
@c    law, and exalt it.

@c    42:22. But this is a people that is robbed and wasted:  they are all the
@c    snare of young men, and they are hid in the houses of prisons:  they are
@c    made a prey, and there is none to deliver them:  a spoil, and there is
@c    none that saith:  Restore.

@c    42:23. Who is there among you that will give ear to this, that will
@c    attend and hearken for times to come?

@c    42:24. Who hath given Jacob for a spoil, and Israel to robbers?  hath
@c    not the Lord himself, against whom we have sinned?  And they would not
@c    walk in his ways, and they have not hearkened to his law.

@c    42:25. And he hath poured out upon him the indignation of his fury, and
@c    a strong battle, and hath burnt him round about, and he knew not:  and
@c    set him on fire, and he understood not.



@c    Isaias Chapter 43


@c    God comforts his church, promising to protect her for ever:  he
@c    expostulates with the Jews for their ingratitude.

@c    43:1. And now thus saith the Lord that created thee, O Jacob, and
@c    formed thee, O Israel:  Fear not, for I have redeemed thee, and called
@c    thee by thy name:  thou art mine.

@c    43:2. When thou shalt pass through the waters, I will be with thee, and
@c    the rivers shall not cover thee:  when thou shalt walk in the fire, thou
@c    shalt not be burnt, and the flames shall not burn in thee:

@c    43:3. For I am the Lord thy God, the Holy One of Israel, thy Saviour:  I
@c    have given Egypt for thy atonement, Ethiopia and Saba for thee.

@c    43:4. Since thou becamest honourable in my eyes, thou art glorious:  I
@c    have loved thee, and I will give men for thee, and people for thy life.

@c    43:5. Fear not, for I am with thee:  I will bring thy seed from the
@c    east, and gather thee from the west.

@c    43:6. I will say to the north:  Give up:  and to the south:  Keep not
@c    back:  bring my sons from afar, and my daughters from the ends of the
@c    earth.

@c    43:7. And every one that calleth upon my name, I have created him for
@c    my glory.  I have formed him, and made him.

@c    43:8. Bring forth the people that are blind, and have eyes:  that are
@c    deaf, and have ears.

@c    43:9. All the nations are assembled together, and the tribes are
@c    gathered:  who among you can declare this, and shall make us hear the
@c    former things?  let them bring forth their witnesses, let them be
@c    justified, and hear, and say:  It is truth.

@c    43:10. You are my witnesses, saith the Lord, and my servant whom I have
@c    chosen:  that you may know, and believe me, and understand that I myself
@c    am.  Before me there was no God formed, and after me there shall be
@c    none.

@c    43:11. I am, I am the Lord:  and there is no saviour besides me.

@c    43:12. I have declared, and have saved.  I have made it heard, and there
@c    was no strange one among you.  You are my witnesses, saith the Lord, and
@c    I am God.

@c    43:13. And from the beginning I am the same, and there is none that can
@c    deliver out of my hind:  I will work, and who shall turn it away?

@c    43:14. Thus saith the Lord your redeemer, the Holy One of Israel:  For
@c    your sake I sent to Babylon, and have brought down all their bars, and
@c    the Chaldeans glorying in their ships.

@c    43:15. I am the Lord your Holy One, the Creator of Israel, your King.

@c    43:16. Thus saith the Lord, who made a way in the sea, and a path in
@c    the mighty waters.

@c    43:17. Who brought forth the chariot and the horse, the army and the
@c    strong:  they lay down to sleep together, and they shall not rise again:
@c    they are broken as flax, and are extinct.

@c    43:18. Remember not former things, and look not on things of old.

@c    43:19. Behold I do new things, and now they shall spring forth, verily
@c    you shall know them:  I will make a way in the wilderness, and rivers in
@c    the desert.

@c    43:20. The beast of the field shall glorify me, the dragons and the
@c    ostriches:  because I have given waters in the wilderness, rivers in the
@c    desert, to give drink to my people, to my chosen.

@c    43:21. This people have I formed for myself, they shall shew forth my
@c    praise.

@c    43:22. But thou hast not called upon me, O Jacob, neither hast thou
@c    laboured about me, O Israel.

@c    43:23. Thou hast not offered me the ram of thy holocaust, nor hast thou
@c    glorified me with thy victims:  I have not caused thee to serve with
@c    oblations, nor wearied thee with incense.

@c    43:24. Thou hast bought me no sweet cane with money, neither hast thou
@c    filled me with the fat of thy victims.  But thou hast made me to serve
@c    with thy sins, thou hast wearied me with thy iniquities.

@c    43:25. I am, I am he that blot out thy iniquities for my own sake, and
@c    I will not remember thy sins.

@c    43:26. Put me in remembrance, and let us plead together:  tell if thou
@c    hast any thing to justify thyself.

@c    43:27. Thy first father sinned, and thy teachers have transgressed
@c    against me.

@c    43:28. And I have profaned the holy princes, I have given Jacob to
@c    slaughter, and Israel to reproach.



@c    Isaias Chapter 44


@c    God's favour to his church.  The folly of idolatry.  The people shall be
@c    delivered from captivity.

@c    44:1. And now hear, O Jacob, my servant, and Israel whom I have chosen.

@c    44:2. Thus saith the Lord that made and formed thee, thy helper from
@c    the womb:  Fear not, O my servant Jacob, and thou most righteous whom I
@c    have chosen.

@c    44:3. For I will pour out waters upon the thirsty ground, and streams
@c    upon the dry land:  I will pour out my spirit upon thy seed, and my
@c    blessing upon thy stock.

@c    44:4. And they shall spring up among the herbs, as willows beside the
@c    running waters.

@c    44:5. One shall say:  I am the Lord's, and another shall call himself by
@c    the name of Jacob, and another shall subscribe with his hand, To the
@c    Lord, and surname himself by the name of Israel.

@c    44:6. Thus saith the Lord the king of Israel, and his redeemer the Lord
@c    of hosts:  I am the first, and I am the last, and besides me there is no
@c    God.

@c    44:7. Who is like to me?  let him call and declare:  and let him set
@c    before me the order, since I appointed the ancient people:  and the
@c    things to come, and that shall be hereafter, let them shew unto them.

@c    44:8. Fear ye not, neither be ye troubled from that time I have made
@c    thee to hear, and have declared:  you are my witnesses.  Is there a God
@c    besides me, a maker, whom I have not known?

@c    44:9. The makers of idols are all of them nothing, and their best
@c    beloved things shall not profit them.  They are their witnesses, that
@c    they do not see, nor understand, that they may be ashamed.

@c    44:10. Who hath formed a god, and made a graven thing that is
@c    profitable for nothing?

@c    44:11. Behold, all the partakers thereof shall be confounded:  for the
@c    makers are men:  they shall all assemble together, they shall stand and
@c    fear, and shall be confounded together.

@c    44:12. The smith hath wrought with his file, with coals, and with
@c    hammers he hath formed it, and hath wrought with the strength of his
@c    arm:  he shall hunger and faint, he shall drink no water, and shall be
@c    weary.

@c    44:13. The carpenter hath stretched out his rule, he hath formed it
@c    with a plane:  he hath made it with corners, and hath fashioned it round
@c    with the compass:  and he hath made the image of a man as it were a
@c    beautiful man dwelling in a house.

@c    44:14. He hath cut down cedars, taken the holm, and the oak that stood
@c    among the trees of the forest:  he hath planted the pine tree, which the
@c    rain hath nourished.

@c    44:15. And it hath served men for fuel:  he took thereof, and warmed
@c    himself:  and he kindled it, and baked bread:  but of the rest he made a
@c    god, and adored it:  he made a graven thing, and bowed down before it.

@c    44:16. Part of it he burnt with fire, and with part of it he dressed
@c    his meat:  he boiled pottage, and was filled, and was warmed, and said:
@c    Aha, I am warm, I have seen the fire.

@c    44:17. But the residue thereof he made a god, and a graven thing for
@c    himself:  he boweth down before it, and adoreth it, and prayeth unto it,
@c    saying:  Deliver me, for thou art my God.

@c    44:18. They have not known, nor understood:  for their eyes are covered
@c    that they may not see, and that they may not understand with their
@c    heart.

@c    44:19. They do not consider in their mind, nor know, nor have the
@c    thought to say:  I have burnt part of it in the fire, and I have baked
@c    bread upon the coals thereof:  I have broiled flesh and have eaten, and
@c    of the residue thereof shall I make an idol?  shall I fall down before
@c    the stock of a tree?

@c    44:20. Part thereof is ashes:  his foolish heart adoreth it, and he will
@c    not save his soul, nor say:  Perhaps there is a lie in my right hand.

@c    44:21. Remember these things, O Jacob, and Israel, for thou art my
@c    servant.  I have formed thee, thou art my servant, O Israel, forget me
@c    not.

@c    44:22. I have blotted out thy iniquities as a cloud, and thy sins as a
@c    mist:  return to me, for I have redeemed thee.

@c    44:23. Give praise, O ye heavens, for the Lord hath shewn mercy:  shout
@c    with joy, ye ends of the earth:  ye mountains, resound with praise,
@c    thou, O forest, and every tree therein:  for the Lord hath redeemed
@c    Jacob, and Israel shall be glorified.

@c    44:24. Thus saith the Lord thy redeemer, and thy maker, from the womb:
@c    I am the Lord, that make all things, that alone stretch out the
@c    heavens, that established the earth, and there is none with me.

@c    44:25. That make void the tokens of diviners, and make the soothsayers
@c    mad.  That turn the wise backward, and that make their knowledge
@c    foolish.

@c    44:26. That raise up the word of my servant and perform the counsel of
@c    my messengers, who say to Jerusalem:  Thou shalt be inhabited:  and to
@c    the cities of Juda:  You shall be built, and I will raise up the wastes
@c    thereof.

@c    44:27. Who say to the deep:  Be thou desolate, and I will dry up thy
@c    rivers.

@c    44:28. Who say to Cyrus:  Thou art my shepherd, and thou shalt perform
@c    all my pleasure.  Who say to Jerusalem:  Thou shalt be built:  and to the
@c    temple:  Thy foundations shall be laid.



@c    Isaias Chapter 45


@c    A prophecy of Cyrus, as a figure of Christ, the great deliverer of
@c    God's people.

@c    45:1. Thus saith the Lord to my anointed Cyrus, whose right hand I have
@c    taken hold of, to subdue nations before his face, and to turn the backs
@c    of kings, and to open the doors before him, and the gates shall not be
@c    shut.

@c    45:2. I will go before thee, and will humble the great ones of the
@c    earth:  I will break in pieces the gates of brass, and will burst the
@c    bars of iron.

@c    45:3. And I will give thee hidden treasures, and the concealed riches
@c    of secret places:  that thou mayest know that I am the Lord who call
@c    thee by thy name, the God of Israel.

@c    45:4. For the sake of my servant Jacob, and Israel my elect, I have
@c    even called thee by thy name:  I have made a likeness of thee, and thou
@c    hast not known me.

@c    45:5. I am the Lord, and there is none else:  there is no God besides
@c    me:  I girded thee, and thou hast not known me:

@c    45:6. That they may know who are from the rising of the sun, and they
@c    who are from the west, that there is none besides me.  I am the Lord,
@c    and there is none else:

@c    45:7. I form the light, and create darkness, I make peace, and create
@c    evil:  I the Lord that do all these things.

@c    Create evil, etc. . .The evils of afflictions and punishments, but not
@c    the evil of sin.

@c    45:8. Drop down dew, ye heavens, from above, and let the clouds rain
@c    the just:  let the earth be opened, and bud forth a saviour:  and let
@c    justice spring up together:  I the Lord have created him.

@c    45:9. Woe to him that gainsayeth his maker, a sherd of the earthen
@c    pots:  shall the clay say to him that fashioneth it:  What art thou
@c    making, and thy work is without hands?

@c    45:10. Woe to him that saith to his father:  Why begettest thou?  and to
@c    the woman:  Why dost thou bring forth?

@c    45:11. Thus saith the Lord the Holy One of Israel, his maker:  Ask me of
@c    things to come, concerning my children, and concerning the work of my
@c    hands give ye charge to me.

@c    45:12. I made the earth:  and I created man upon it:  my hand stretched
@c    forth the heavens, and I have commanded all their host.

@c    45:13. I have raised him up to justice, and I will direct all his ways:
@c    he shall build my city, and let go my captives, not for ransom, nor for
@c    presents, saith the Lord the God of hosts.

@c    45:14. Thus saith the Lord:  The labour of Egypt, and the merchandise of
@c    Ethiopia, and of Sabaim, men of stature shall come over to thee, and
@c    shall be thine:  they shall walk after thee, they shall go bound with
@c    manacles:  and they shall worship thee, and shall make supplication to
@c    thee:  only in thee is God, and there is no God besides thee.

@c    45:15. Verily thou art a hidden God, the God of Israel the saviour.

@c    45:16. They are all confounded and ashamed:  the forgers of errors are
@c    gone together into confusion.

@c    45:17. Israel is saved in the Lord with an eternal salvation:  you shall
@c    not be confounded, and you shall not be ashamed for ever and ever.

@c    45:18. For thus saith the Lord that created the heavens, God himself
@c    that formed the earth, and made it, the very maker thereof:  he did not
@c    create it in vain:  he formed it to be inhabited.  I am the Lord, and
@c    there is no other.

@c    45:19. I have not spoken in secret, in a dark place of the earth:  I
@c    have not said to the seed of Jacob:  Seek me in vain.  I am the Lord that
@c    speak justice, that declare right things.

@c    45:20. Assemble yourselves, and come, and draw near together, ye that
@c    are saved of the Gentiles:  they have no knowledge that set up the wood
@c    of their graven work, and pray to a god that cannot save.

@c    45:21. Tell ye, and come, and consult together:  who hath declared this
@c    from the beginning, who hath foretold this from that time?  Have not I
@c    the Lord, and there is no God else besides me?  A just God and a
@c    saviour, there is none besides me.

@c    45:22. Be converted to me, and you shall be saved, all ye ends of the
@c    earth:  for I am God, and there is no other.

@c    45:23. I have sworn by myself, the word of justice shall go out of my
@c    mouth, and shall not return:

@c    45:24. For every knee shall be bowed to me, and every tongue shall
@c    swear.

@c    45:25. Therefore shall he say:  In the Lord are my justices and empire:
@c    they shall come to him, and all that resist him shall be confounded.

@c    45:26. In the Lord shall all the seed of Israel be justified and
@c    praised.



@c    Isaias Chapter 46


@c    The idols of Babylon shall be destroyed.  Salvation is promised through
@c    Christ.

@c    46:1. Bel is broken, Nebo is destroyed:  their idols are put upon beasts
@c    and cattle, your burdens of heavy weight even unto weariness.

@c    46:2. They are consumed, and are broken together:  they could not save
@c    him that carried them, and they themselves shall go into captivity.

@c    46:3. Hearken unto me, O house of Jacob, all the remnant of the house
@c    of Israel who are carried by my bowels, are borne up by my womb.

@c    46:4. Even to your old age I am the same, and to your grey hairs I will
@c    carry you:  I have made you, and I will bear:  I will carry and will
@c    save.

@c    46:5. To whom have you likened me, and made me equal, and compared me,
@c    and made me like?

@c    46:6. You that contribute gold out of the bag, and weigh out silver in
@c    the scales:  and hire a goldsmith to make a god:  and they fall down and
@c    worship.

@c    46:7. They bear him on their shoulders and carry him, and set him in
@c    his place, and he shall stand, and shall not stir out of his place.
@c    Yea, when they shall cry also unto him, he shall not hear:  he shall not
@c    save them from tribulation.

@c    46:8. Remember this, and be ashamed:  return, ye transgressors, to the
@c    heart.

@c    46:9. Remember the former age, for I am God, and there is no God
@c    beside, neither is there the like to me:

@c    46:10. Who shew from the beginning the things that shall be at last,
@c    and from ancient times the things that as yet are not done, saying:  My
@c    counsel shall stand, and all my will shall be done:

@c    46:11. Who call a bird from the east, and from a far country the man of
@c    my own will, and I have spoken, and will bring it to pass:  I have
@c    created, and I will do it.  Hear me, O ye hardhearted, who are far from
@c    justice.

@c    46:12. I have brought my justice near, it shall not be afar off:  and my
@c    salvation shall not tarry.  I will give salvation in Sion, and my glory
@c    in Israel.



@c    Isaias Chapter 47


@c    God's judgment upon Babylon.

@c    47:1. Come down, sit in the dust, O virgin daughter of Babylon, sit on
@c    the ground:  there is no throne for the daughter of the Chaldeans, for
@c    thou shalt no more be called delicate and tender.

@c    47:2. Take a millstone and grind meal:  uncover thy shame, strip thy
@c    shoulder, make bare thy legs, pass over the rivers.

@c    47:3. Thy nakedness shall be discovered, and thy shame shall be seen:  I
@c    will take vengeance, and no man shall resist me.

@c    47:4. Our redeemer, the Lord of hosts is his name, the Holy One of
@c    Israel.

@c    47:5. Sit thou silent, and get thee into darkness, O daughter of the
@c    Chaldeans:  for thou shalt no more be called the lady of kingdoms.

@c    47:6. I was angry with my people, I have polluted my inheritance, and
@c    have given them into thy hand:  thou hast shewn no mercy to them:  upon
@c    the ancient thou hast laid thy yoke exceeding heavy.

@c    47:7. And thou hast said:  I shall be a lady for ever:  thou hast not
@c    laid these things to thy heart, neither hast thou remembered thy latter
@c    end.

@c    47:8. And now hear these things, thou that art delicate, and dwellest
@c    confidently, that sayest in thy heart:  I am, and there is none else
@c    besides me:  I shall not sit as a widow, and I shall not know
@c    barrenness.

@c    47:9. These two things shall come upon thee suddenly in one day,
@c    barrenness and widowhood.  All things are come upon thee, because of the
@c    multitude of thy sorceries, and for the great hardness of thy
@c    enchanters.

@c    47:10. And thou hast trusted in thy wickedness, and hast said:  There is
@c    none that seeth me.  Thy wisdom, and, thy knowledge, this hath deceived
@c    thee.  And thou hast said in thy heart:  I am, and besides me there is no
@c    other.

@c    47:11. Evil shall come upon thee, and thou shalt not know the rising
@c    thereof:  and calamity shall fall violently upon thee, which thou canst
@c    not keep off:  misery shall come upon thee suddenly, which thou shalt
@c    not know.

@c    47:12. Stand now with thy enchanters, and with the multitude of thy
@c    sorceries, in which thou hast laboured from thy youth, if so be it may
@c    profit thee any thing, or if thou mayst become stronger.

@c    47:13. Thou hast failed in the multitude of thy counsels:  let now the
@c    astrologers stand and save thee, they that gazed at the stars, and
@c    counted the months, that from them they might tell the things that
@c    shall come to thee.

@c    47:14. Behold they are as stubble, fire hath burnt them, they shall not
@c    deliver themselves from the power of the flames:  there are no coals
@c    wherewith they may be warmed, nor fire, that they may sit thereat.

@c    47:15. Such are all the things become to thee, in which thou hast
@c    laboured:  thy merchants from thy youth, every one hath erred in his own
@c    way, there is none that can save thee.



@c    Isaias Chapter 48


@c    He reproaches the Jews for their obstinacy:  he will deliver them out of
@c    their captivity, for his own name's sake.

@c    48:1. Hear ye these things, O house of Jacob, you that are called by
@c    the name of Israel, and are come forth out of the waters of Juda, you
@c    who swear by the name of the Lord, and make mention of the God of
@c    Israel, but not in truth, nor in justice.

@c    48:2. For they are called of the holy city, and are established upon
@c    the God of Israel:  the Lord of hosts is his name.

@c    48:3. The former things of old, I have declared, and they went forth
@c    out of my mouth, and I have made them to be heard:  I did them suddenly
@c    and they came to pass.

@c    48:4. For I knew that thou art stubborn, and thy neck is as an iron
@c    sinew, and thy forehead as brass.

@c    48:5. I foretold thee of old, before they came to pass I told thee,
@c    lest thou shouldst say:  My idols have done these things, and my graven
@c    and molten things have commanded them.

@c    48:6. See now all the things which thou hast heard:  but have you
@c    declared them?  I have shewn thee new things from that time, and things
@c    are kept which thou knowest not:

@c    48:7. They are created now, and not of old:  and before the day, when
@c    thou heardest them not, lest thou shouldst say:  Behold I knew them.

@c    48:8. Thou hast neither heard, nor known, neither was thy ear opened of
@c    old.  For I know that transgressing thou wilt transgress, and I have
@c    called thee a transgressor from the womb.

@c    48:9. For my name's sake I will remove my wrath far off:  and for my
@c    praise I will bridle thee, lest thou shouldst perish.

@c    48:10. Behold I have refined thee, but not as silver, I have chosen
@c    thee in the furnace of poverty.

@c    48:11. For my own sake, for my own sake will I do it, that I may not be
@c    blasphemed:  and I will not give my glory to another.

@c    48:12. Hearken to me, O Jacob, and thou Israel whom I call:  I am he, I
@c    am the first, and I am the last.

@c    48:13. My hand also hath founded the earth, and my right hand hath
@c    measured the heavens:  I shall call them, and they shall stand together.

@c    48:14. Assemble yourselves together, all you, and hear:  who among them
@c    hath declared these things?  the Lord hath loved him, he will do his
@c    pleasure in Babylon, and his arm shall be on the Chaldeans.

@c    48:15. I, even I have spoken and called him:  I have brought him, and
@c    his way is made prosperous.

@c    48:16. Come ye near unto me, and hear this:  I have not spoken in secret
@c    from the beginning:  from the time before it was done, I was there, and
@c    now the Lord God hath sent me, and his spirit.

@c    48:17. Thus saith the Lord thy redeemer, the Holy One of Israel:  I am
@c    the Lord thy God that teach thee profitable things, that govern thee in
@c    the way that thou walkest.

@c    48:18. O that thou hadst hearkened to my commandments:  thy peace had
@c    been as a river, and thy justice as the waves of the sea,

@c    48:19. And thy seed had been as the sand, and the offspring of thy
@c    bowels like the gravel thereof:  his name should not have perished, nor
@c    have been destroyed from before my face.

@c    48:20. Come forth out of Babylon, flee ye from the Chaldeans, declare
@c    it with the voice of joy:  make this to be heard, and speak it out even
@c    to the ends of the earth.  Say:  The Lord hath redeemed his servant
@c    Jacob.

@c    48:21. They thirsted not in the desert, when he led them out:  he
@c    brought forth water out of the rock for them, and he clove the rock,
@c    and the waters gushed out.

@c    48:22. There is no peace to the wicked, saith the Lord.



@c    Isaias Chapter 49


@c    Christ shall bring the Gentiles to salvation.  God's love to his church
@c    is perpetual.

@c    49:1. Give ear, ye islands, and hearken, ye people from afar.  The Lord
@c    hath called me from the womb, from the bowels of my mother he hath been
@c    mindful of my name.

@c    49:2. And he hath made my mouth like a sharp sword:  in the shadow of
@c    his hand he hath protected me, and hath made me as a chosen arrow:  in
@c    his quiver he hath hidden me.

@c    49:3. And he said to me:  Thou art my servant Israel, for in thee will I
@c    glory.

@c    49:4. And I said:  I have laboured in vain, I have spent my strength
@c    without cause and in vain:  therefore my judgment is with the Lord, and
@c    my work with my God.

@c    49:5. And now saith the Lord, that formed me from the womb to be his
@c    servant, that I may bring back Jacob unto him, and Israel will not be
@c    gathered together:  and I am glorified in the eyes of the Lord, and my
@c    God is made my strength.

@c    49:6. And he said:  It is a small thing that thou shouldst be my servant
@c    to raise up the tribes of Jacob, and to convert the dregs of Israel.
@c    Behold, I have given thee to be the light of the Gentiles, that thou
@c    mayst be my salvation even to the farthest part of the earth.

@c    49:7. Thus saith the Lord the redeemer of Israel, his Holy One, to the
@c    soul that is despised, to the nation that is abhorred, to the servant
@c    of rulers:  Kings shall see, and princes shall rise up, and adore for
@c    the Lord's sake, because he is faithful, and for the Holy One of
@c    Israel, who hath chosen thee.

@c    49:8. Thus saith the Lord:  In an acceptable time I have heard thee, and
@c    in the day of salvation I have helped thee:  and I have preserved thee,
@c    and given thee to be a covenant of the people, that thou mightest raise
@c    up the earth, and possess the inheritances that were destroyed:

@c    49:9. That thou mightest say to them that are bound:  Come forth:  and to
@c    them that are in darkness:  Shew yourselves.  They shall feed in the
@c    ways, and their pastures shall be in every plain.

@c    49:10. They shall not hunger, nor thirst, neither shall the heat nor
@c    the sun strike them:  for he that is merciful to them, shall be their
@c    shepherd, and at the fountains of waters he shall give them drink.

@c    49:11. And I will make all my mountains a way, and my paths shall be
@c    exalted.

@c    49:12. Behold these shall come from afar, and behold these from the
@c    north and from the sea, and these from the south country.

@c    49:13. Give praise, O ye heavens, and rejoice, O earth, ye mountains,
@c    give praise with jubilation:  because the Lord hath comforted his
@c    people, and will have mercy on his poor ones.

@c    49:14. And Sion said:  The Lord hath forsaken me, and the Lord hath
@c    forgotten me.

@c    49:15. Can a woman forget her infant, so as not to have pity on the son
@c    of her womb?  and if she should forget, yet will not I forget thee.

@c    49:16. Behold, I have graven thee in my hands:  thy walls are always
@c    before my eyes.

@c    49:17. Thy builders are come:  they that destroy thee and make thee
@c    waste shall go out of thee.

@c    49:18. Lift up thy eyes round about, and see all these are gathered
@c    together, they are come to thee:  I live, saith the Lord, thou shalt be
@c    clothed with all these as with an ornament, and as a bride thou shalt
@c    put them about thee.

@c    49:19. For thy deserts, and thy desolate places, and the land of thy
@c    destruction shall now be too narrow by reason of the inhabitants, and
@c    they that swallowed thee up shall be chased far away.

@c    49:20. The children of thy barrenness shall still say in thy ears:  The
@c    place is too strait for me, make me room to dwell in.

@c    49:21. And thou shalt say in thy heart:  Who hath begotten these?  I was
@c    barren and brought not forth, led away, and captive:  and who hath
@c    brought up these?  I was destitute and alone:  and these, where were
@c    they?

@c    49:22. Thus saith the Lord God:  Behold I will lift up my hand to the
@c    Gentiles, and will set up my standard to the people.  And they shall
@c    bring thy sons in their arms, and carry thy daughters upon their
@c    shoulders.

@c    49:23. And kings shall be thy nursing fathers, and queens thy nurses:
@c    they shall worship thee with their face toward the earth, and they
@c    shall lick up the dust of thy feet.  And thou shalt know that I am the
@c    Lord, for they shall not be confounded that wait for him.

@c    49:24. Shall the prey be taken from the strong?  or can that which was
@c    taken by the mighty, be delivered?

@c    49:25. For thus saith the Lord:  Yea verily, even the captivity shall be
@c    taken away from the strong:  and that which was taken by the mighty,
@c    shall be delivered.  But I will judge those that have judged thee, and
@c    thy children I will save.

@c    49:26. And I will feed thy enemies with their own flesh:  and they shall
@c    be made drunk with their own blood, as with new wine:  and all flesh
@c    shall know, that I am the Lord that save thee, and thy Redeemer the
@c    Mighty One of Jacob.



@c    Isaias Chapter 50


@c    The synagogue shall be divorced for her iniquities.  Christ for her sake
@c    will endure ignominious afflictions.

@c    50:1. Thus saith the Lord:  What is this bill of the divorce of your
@c    mother, with which I have put her away?  or who is my creditor, to whom
@c    I sold you:  behold you are sold for your iniquities, and for your
@c    wicked deeds have I put your mother away.

@c    50:2. Because I came, and there was not a man:  I called, and there was
@c    none that would hear.  Is my hand shortened and become little, that I
@c    cannot redeem?  or is there no strength in me to deliver?  Behold at my
@c    rebuke I will make the sea a desert, I will turn the rivers into dry
@c    land:  the fishes shall rot for want of water, and shall die for thirst.

@c    50:3. I will clothe the heavens with darkness, and will make sackcloth
@c    their covering.

@c    50:4. The Lord hath given me a learned tongue, that I should know how
@c    to uphold by word him that is weary:  he wakeneth in the morning, in the
@c    morning he wakeneth my ear, that I may hear him as a master.

@c    50:5. The Lord God hath opened my ear, and I do not resist:  I have not
@c    gone back.

@c    50:6. I have given my body to the strikers, and my cheeks to them that
@c    plucked them:  I have not turned away my face from them that rebuked me,
@c    and spit upon me.

@c    50:7. The Lord God is my helper, therefore am I not confounded:
@c    therefore have I set my face as a most hard rock, and I know that I
@c    shall not be confounded.

@c    50:8. He is near that justifieth me, who will contend with me?  let us
@c    stand together, who is my adversary?  let him come near to me.

@c    50:9. Behold the Lord God is my helper:  who is he that shall condemn
@c    me?  Lo, they shall all be destroyed as a garment, the moth shall eat
@c    them up.

@c    50:10. Who is there among you that feareth the Lord, that heareth the
@c    voice of his servant, that hath walked in darkness, and hath no light?
@c    let him hope in the name of the Lord, and lean upon his God.

@c    50:11. Behold all you that kindle a fire, encompassed with flames, walk
@c    in the light of your fire, and in the flames which you have kindled:
@c    this is done to you by my hand, you shall sleep in sorrows.



@c    Isaias Chapter 51


@c    An exhortation to trust in Christ.  He shall protect the children of his
@c    church.

@c    51:1. Give ear to me, you that follow that which is just, and you that
@c    seek the Lord:  look unto the rock whence you are hewn, and to the hole
@c    of the pit from which you are dug out.

@c    51:2. Look unto Abraham your father, and to Sara that bore you:  for I
@c    called him alone, and blessed him, and multiplied him.

@c    51:3. The Lord therefore will comfort Sion, and will comfort all the
@c    ruins thereof:  and he will make her desert as a place of pleasure, and
@c    her wilderness as the garden of the Lord.  Joy and gladness shall be
@c    found therein, thanksgiving, and the voice of praise.

@c    51:4. Hearken unto me, O my people, and give ear to me, O my tribes:
@c    for a law shall go forth from me, and my judgment shall rest to be a
@c    light of the nations.

@c    51:5. My just one is near at hand, my saviour is gone forth, and my
@c    arms shall judge the people:  the islands shall look for me, and shall
@c    patiently wait for my arm.

@c    51:6. Lift up your eyes to heaven, and look down to the earth beneath:
@c    for the heavens shall vanish like smoke, and the earth shall be worn
@c    away like a garment, and the inhabitants thereof shall perish in like
@c    manner:  but my salvation shall be for ever, and my justice shall not
@c    fail.

@c    51:7. Hearken to me, you that know what is just, my people who have my
@c    law in your heart:  fear ye not the reproach of men, and be not afraid
@c    of their blasphemies.

@c    51:8. For the worm shall eat them up as a garment:  and the moth shall
@c    consume them as wool:  but my salvation shall be for ever, and my
@c    justice from generation to generation.

@c    51:9. Arise, arise, put on strength, O thou arm of the Lord, arise as
@c    in the days of old, in the ancient generations.  Hast not thou struck
@c    the proud one, and wounded the dragon?

@c    51:10. Hast not thou dried up the sea, the water of the mighty deep,
@c    who madest the depth of the sea a way, that the delivered might pass
@c    over?

@c    51:11. And now they that are redeemed by the Lord, shall return, and
@c    shall come into Sion singing praises, and joy everlasting shall be upon
@c    their heads, they shall obtain joy and gladness, sorrow and mourning
@c    shall flee away.

@c    51:12. I myself will comfort you:  who art thou, that thou shouldst be
@c    afraid of a mortal man, and of the son of man, who shall wither away
@c    like grass?

@c    51:13. And thou hast forgotten the Lord thy maker, who stretched out
@c    the heavens, and founded the earth:  and thou hast been afraid
@c    continually all the day at the presence of his fury who afflicted thee,
@c    and had prepared himself to destroy thee:  where is now the fury of the
@c    oppressor?

@c    51:14. He shall quickly come that is going to open unto you, and he
@c    shall not kill unto utter destruction, neither shall his bread fail.

@c    51:15. But I am the Lord thy God, who trouble the sea, and the waves
@c    thereof swell:  the Lord of hosts is my name.

@c    51:16. I have put my words in thy mouth, and have protected thee in the
@c    shadow of my hand, that thou mightest plant the heavens, and found the
@c    earth:  and mightest say to Sion:  Thou art my people.

@c    51:17. Arise, arise, stand up, O Jerusalem, which hast drunk at the
@c    hand of the Lord the cup of his wrath; thou hast drunk even to the
@c    bottom of the cup of dead sleep, and thou hast drunk even to the dregs.

@c    51:18. There is none that can uphold her among all the children that
@c    she hath brought forth:  and there is none that taketh her by the hand
@c    among all the children that she hath brought up.

@c    51:19. There are two things that have happened to thee:  who shall be
@c    sorry for thee?  desolation, and destruction, and the famine, and the
@c    sword, who shall comfort thee?

@c    51:20. Thy children are cast forth, they have slept at the head of all
@c    the ways, and the wild ox that is snared:  full of the indignation of
@c    the Lord, of the rebuke of thy God.

@c    51:21. Therefore hear this, thou poor little one, and thou that art
@c    drunk but not with wine.

@c    51:22. Thus saith thy Sovereign the Lord, and thy God, who will fight
@c    for his people:  Behold I have taken out of thy hand the cup of dead
@c    sleep, the dregs of the cup of my indignation, thou shalt not drink it
@c    again any more.

@c    51:23. And I will put it in the hand of them that have oppressed thee,
@c    and have said to thy soul:  Bow down, that we may go over:  and thou hast
@c    laid thy body as the ground, and as a way to them that went over.



@c    Isaias Chapter 52


@c    Under the figure of the deliverance from the Babylonish captivity, the
@c    church is invited to rejoice for her redemption from sin.  Christ's
@c    kingdom shall be exalted.

@c    52:1. Arise, arise, put on thy strength, O Sion, put on the garments of
@c    thy glory, O Jerusalem, the city of the Holy One:  for henceforth the
@c    uncircumcised, and unclean shall no more pass through thee.

@c    52:2. Shake thyself from the dust, arise, sit up, O Jerusalem:  loose
@c    the bonds from off thy neck, O captive daughter of Sion.

@c    52:3. For thus saith the Lord:  You were sold gratis, and you shall be
@c    redeemed, without money.

@c    52:4. For thus saith the Lord God:  My people went down into Egypt at
@c    the beginning to sojourn there:  and the Assyrian hath oppressed them
@c    without any cause at all.

@c    52:5. And now what have I here, saith the Lord:  for my people is taken
@c    away gratis.  They that rule over them treat them unjustly, saith the
@c    Lord, and my name is continually blasphemed all the day long.

@c    52:6. Therefore my people shall know my name in that day:  for I myself
@c    that spoke, behold I am here.

@c    52:7. How beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of him that
@c    bringeth good tidings, and that preacheth peace:  of him that sheweth
@c    forth good, that preacheth salvation, that saith to Sion:  Thy God shall
@c    reign!

@c    52:8. The voice of thy watchmen:  they have lifted up their voice, they
@c    shall praise together:  for they shall see eye to eye when the Lord
@c    shall convert Sion.

@c    52:9. Rejoice, and give praise together, O ye deserts of Jerusalem:  for
@c    the Lord hath comforted his people:  he hath redeemed Jerusalem.

@c    52:10. The Lord hath prepared his holy arm in the sight of all the
@c    Gentiles:  and all the ends of the earth shall see the salvation of our
@c    God.

@c    52:11. Depart, depart, go ye out from thence, touch no unclean thing:
@c    go out of the midst of her, be ye clean, you that carry the vessels of
@c    the Lord.

@c    52:12. For you shall not go out in a tumult, neither shall you make
@c    haste by flight:  for the Lord will go before you, and the God of Israel
@c    will gather you together.

@c    52:13. Behold my servant shall understand, he shall be exalted, and
@c    extolled, and shall be exceeding high.

@c    52:14. As many have been astonished at thee, so shall his visage be
@c    inglorious among men, and his form among the sons of men.

@c    52:15. He shall sprinkle many nations, kings shall shut their mouth at
@c    him:  for they to whom it was not told of him, have seen:  and they that
@c    heard not, have beheld.



@c    Isaias Chapter 53


@c    A prophecy of the passion of Christ.

@c    53:1. Who a hath believed our report?  and to whom is the arm of the
@c    Lord revealed?

@c    53:2. And he shall grow up as a tender plant before him, and as a root
@c    out of a thirsty ground:  there is no beauty in him, nor comeliness:  and
@c    we have seen him, and there was no sightliness, that we should be
@c    desirous of him:

@c    53:3. Despised, and the most abject of men, a man of sorrows, and
@c    acquainted with infirmity:  and his look was as it were hidden and
@c    despised, whereupon we esteemed him not.

@c    53:4. Surely he hath borne our infirmities and carried our sorrows:  and
@c    we have thought him as it were a leper, and as one struck by God and
@c    afflicted.

@c    53:5. But he was wounded for our iniquities, he was bruised for our
@c    sins:  the chastisement of our peace was upon him, and by his bruises we
@c    are healed.

@c    53:6. All we like sheep have gone astray, every one hath turned aside
@c    into his own way:  and the Lord hath laid on him the iniquity of us all.

@c    53:7. He was offered because it was his own will, and he opened not his
@c    mouth:  he shall be led as a sheep to the slaughter, and shall be dumb
@c    as a lamb before his shearer, and he shall not open his mouth.

@c    53:8. He was taken away from distress, and from judgment:  who shall
@c    declare his generation?  because he is cut off out of the land of the
@c    living:  for the wickedness of my people have I struck him.

@c    53:9. And he shall give the ungodly for his burial, and the rich for
@c    his death:  because he hath done no iniquity, neither was there deceit
@c    in his mouth.

@c    53:10. And the Lord was pleased to bruise him in infirmity:  if he shall
@c    lay down his life for sin, he shall see a longlived seed, and the will
@c    of the Lord shall be prosperous in his hand.

@c    53:11. Because his soul hath laboured, he shall see and be filled:  by
@c    his knowledge shall this my just servant justify many, and he shall
@c    bear their iniquities.

@c    53:12. Therefore will I distribute to him very many, and he shall
@c    divide the spoils of the strong, because he hath delivered his soul
@c    unto death, and was reputed with the wicked:  and he hath borne the sins
@c    of many, and hath prayed for the transgressors.



@c    Isaias Chapter 54


@c    The Gentiles, who were barren before, shall multiply in the church of
@c    Christ:  from which God's mercy shall never depart.

@c    54:1. Give praise, O thou barren, that bearest not:  sing forth praise,
@c    and make a joyful noise, thou that didst not travail with child:  for
@c    many are the children of the desolate, more than of her that hath a
@c    husband, saith the Lord.

@c    54:2. Enlarge the place of thy tent, and stretch out the skins of thy
@c    tabernacles, spare not:  lengthen thy cords, and strengthen thy stakes.

@c    54:3. For thou shalt pass on to the right hand, and to the left:  and
@c    thy seed shall inherit the Gentiles, and shall inhabit the desolate
@c    cities.

@c    54:4. Fear not, for thou shalt not be confounded, nor blush:  for thou
@c    shalt not be put to shame, because thou shalt forget the shame of thy
@c    youth, and shalt remember no more the reproach of thy widowhood.

@c    54:5. For he that made thee shall rule over thee, the Lord of hosts is
@c    his name:  and thy Redeemer, the Holy One of Israel, shall be called the
@c    God of all the earth.

@c    54:6. For the Lord hath called thee as a woman forsaken and mourning in
@c    spirit, and as a wife cast off from her youth, said thy God.

@c    54:7. For a small moment have I forsaken thee, but with great mercies
@c    will I gather thee.

@c    54:8. In a moment of indignation have I hid my face a little while from
@c    thee, but with everlasting kindness have I had mercy on thee, said the
@c    Lord thy Redeemer.

@c    54:9. This thing is to me as in the days of Noe, to whom I swore, that
@c    I would no more bring in the waters of Noe upon the earth:  so have I
@c    sworn not to be angry with thee, and not to rebuke thee.

@c    54:10. For the mountains shall be moved, and the hills shall tremble;
@c    but my mercy shall not depart from thee, and the covenant of my peace
@c    shall not be moved:  said the Lord that hath mercy on thee.

@c    54:11. O poor little one, tossed with tempest, without all comfort,
@c    behold I will lay thy stones in order, and will lay thy foundations
@c    with sapphires,

@c    54:12. And I will make thy bulwarks of jasper:  and thy gates of graven
@c    stones, and all thy borders of desirable stones.

@c    54:13. All thy children shall be taught of the Lord:  and great shall be
@c    the peace of thy children.

@c    54:14. And thou shalt be founded in justice:  depart far from
@c    oppression, for thou shalt not fear; and from terror, for it shall not
@c    come near thee.

@c    54:15. Behold, an inhabitant shall come, who was not with me, he that
@c    was a stranger to thee before, shall be joined to thee.

@c    54:16. Behold, I have created the smith that bloweth the coals in the
@c    fire, and bringeth forth an instrument for his work, and I have created
@c    the killer to destroy.

@c    54:17. No weapon that is formed against thee shall prosper:  and every
@c    tongue that resisteth thee in judgment, thou shalt condemn.  This is the
@c    inheritance of the servants of the Lord, and their justice with me,
@c    saith the Lord.



@c    Isaias Chapter 55


@c    God promises abundance of spiritual graces to the faithful, that shall
@c    believe in Christ out of all nations, and sincerely serve him.

@c    55:1. All you that thirst, come to the waters:  and you that have no
@c    money make haste, buy, and eat:  come ye, buy wine and milk without
@c    money, and without any price.

@c    55:2. Why do you spend money for that which is not bread, and your
@c    labour for that which doth not satisfy you?  Hearken diligently to me,
@c    and eat that which is good, and your soul shall be delighted in
@c    fatness.

@c    55:3. Incline your ear and come to me:  hear and your soul shall live,
@c    and I will make an everlasting covenant with you, the faithful mercies
@c    of David.

@c    55:4. Behold I have given him for a witness to the people, for a leader
@c    and a master to the Gentiles.

@c    55:5. Behold thou shalt call a nation, which thou knewest not:  and the
@c    nations that knew not thee shall run to thee, because of the Lord thy
@c    God, and for the Holy One of Israel, for he hath glorified thee.

@c    55:6. Seek ye the Lord, while he may be found:  call upon him, while he
@c    is near.

@c    55:7. Let the wicked forsake his way, and the unjust man his thoughts,
@c    and let him return to the Lord, and he will have mercy on him, and to
@c    our God:  for he is bountiful to forgive.

@c    55:8. For my thoughts are not your thoughts:  nor your ways my ways,
@c    saith the Lord.

@c    55:9. For as the heavens are exalted above the earth, so are my ways
@c    exalted above your ways, and my thoughts above your thoughts.

@c    55:10. And as the rain and the snow come down from heaven, and return
@c    no more thither, but soak the earth, and water it, and make it to
@c    spring, and give seed to the sower, and bread to the eater:

@c    55:11. So shall my word be, which shall go forth from my mouth:  it
@c    shall not return to me void, but it shall do whatsoever I please, and
@c    shall prosper in the things for which I sent it.

@c    55:12. For you shall go out with joy, and be led forth with peace:  the
@c    mountains and the hills shall sing praise before you, and all the trees
@c    of the country shall clap their hands.

@c    55:13. Instead of the shrub, shall come up the fir tree, and instead of
@c    the nettle, shall come up the myrtle tree:  and the Lord shall be named
@c    for an everlasting sign, that shall not be taken away.



@c    Isaias Chapter 56


@c    God invites all to keep his commandments:  the Gentiles that keep them
@c    shall be the people of God:  the Jewish pastors are reproved.

@c    56:1. Thus saith the Lord:  Keep ye judgment, and do justice:  for my
@c    salvation is near to come, and my justice to be revealed.

@c    56:2. Blessed is the man that doth this, and the son of man that shall
@c    lay hold on this:  that keepeth the sabbath from profaning it, that
@c    keepeth his hands from doing any evil.

@c    56:3. And let not the son of the stranger, that adhereth to the Lord,
@c    speak, saying:  The Lord will divide and separate me from his people.
@c    And let not the eunuch say:  Behold I am a dry tree.

@c    56:4. For thus saith the Lord to the eunuchs, They that shall keep my
@c    sabbaths, and shall choose the things that please me, and shall hold
@c    fast my covenant:

@c    56:5. I will give to them in my house, and within my walls, a place,
@c    and a name better than sons and daughters:  I will give them an
@c    everlasting name which shall never perish.

@c    56:6. And the children of the stranger that adhere to the Lord, to
@c    worship him, and to love his name, to be his servants:  every one that
@c    keepeth the sabbath from profaning it, and that holdeth fast my
@c    covenant:

@c    56:7. I will bring them into my holy mount, and will make them joyful
@c    in my house of prayer:  their holocausts, and their victims shall please
@c    me upon my altar:  for my house shall be called the house of prayer, for
@c    all nations.

@c    56:8. The Lord God, who gathereth the scattered of Israel, saith:  I
@c    will still gather unto him his congregation.

@c    56:9. All ye beasts of the field come to devour, all ye beasts of the
@c    forest.

@c    56:10. His watchmen are all blind, they are all ignorant:  dumb dogs not
@c    able to bark, seeing vain things, sleeping and loving dreams.

@c    56:11. And most impudent dogs, they never had enough:  the shepherds
@c    themselves knew no understanding:  all have turned aside into their own
@c    way, every one after his own gain, from the first even to the last.

@c    56:12. Come, let us take wine, and be filled with drunkenness:  and it
@c    shall be as to day, so also to morrow, and much more.



@c    Isaias Chapter 57


@c    The infidelity of the Jews:  their idolatry.  Promises to humble
@c    penitents.

@c    57:1. The just perisheth, and no man layeth it to heart, and men of
@c    mercy are taken away, because there is none that understandeth; for the
@c    just man is taken away from before the face of evil.

@c    57:2. Let peace come, let him rest in his bed that hath walked in his
@c    uprightness.

@c    57:3. But draw near hither, you sons of the sorceress, the seed of the
@c    adulterer, and of the harlot.

@c    57:4. Upon whom have you jested?  upon whom have you opened your mouth
@c    wide, and put out your tongue?  are not you wicked children, a false
@c    seed,

@c    57:5. Who seek your comfort in idols under every green tree,
@c    sacrificing children in the torrents, under the high rocks?

@c    57:6. In the parts of the torrent is thy portion, this is thy lot:  and
@c    thou hast poured out libations to them, thou hast offered sacrifice.
@c    Shall I not be angry at these things?

@c    57:7. Upon a high and lofty mountain thou hast laid thy bed, and hast
@c    gone up thither to offer victims.

@c    57:8. And behind the door, and behind the post thou hast set up thy
@c    remembrance:  for thou hast discovered thyself near me, and hast
@c    received an adulterer:  thou hast enlarged thy bed, and made a covenant
@c    with them:  thou hast loved their bed with open hand.

@c    57:9. And thou hast adorned thyself for the king with ointment, and
@c    hast multiplied thy perfumes.  Thou hast sent thy messengers far off,
@c    and wast debased even to hell.

@c    57:10. Thou hast been wearied in the multitude of thy ways:  yet thou
@c    saidst not:  I will rest:  thou has found life of thy hand, therefore
@c    thou hast not asked.

@c    57:11. For whom hast thou been solicitous and afraid, that thou hast
@c    lied, and hast not been mindful of me, nor thought on me in thy heart?
@c    for I am silent, and as one that seeth not, and thou hast forgotten me.

@c    57:12. I will declare thy justice, and thy works shall not profit thee.

@c    57:13. When thou shalt cry, let thy companies deliver thee, but the
@c    wind shall carry them all off, a breeze shall take them away, but he
@c    that putteth his trust in me, shall inherit the land, and shall possess
@c    my holy mount.

@c    57:14. And I will say:  Make a way:  give free passage, turn out of the
@c    path, take away the stumblingblocks out of the way of my people.

@c    57:15. For thus saith the High and the Eminent that inhabiteth
@c    eternity:  and his name is Holy, who dwelleth in the high and holy
@c    place, and with a contrite and humble spirit, to revive the spirit of
@c    the humble, and to revive the heart of the contrite.

@c    57:16. For I will not contend for ever, neither will I be angry unto
@c    the end:  because the spirit shall go forth from my face, and breathings
@c    I will make.

@c    57:17. For the iniquity of his covetousness I was angry, and I struck
@c    him:  I hid my face from thee, and was angry:  and he went away wandering
@c    in his own heart.

@c    57:18. I saw his ways, and I healed him, and brought him back, and
@c    restored comforts to him, and to them that mourn for him.

@c    57:19. I created the fruit of the lips, peace, peace to him that is far
@c    off, and to him that is near, said the Lord, and I healed him.

@c    57:20. But the wicked are like the raging sea, which cannot rest, and
@c    the waves thereof cast up dirt and mire.

@c    57:21. There is no peace to the wicked, saith the Lord God.



@c    Isaias Chapter 58


@c    God rejects the hypocritical fasts of the Jews:  recommends works of
@c    mercy, and sincere godliness.

@c    58:1. Cry, cease not, lift up thy voice like a trumpet, and shew my
@c    people their wicked doings, and the house of Jacob their sins.

@c    58:2. For they seek me from day to day, and desire to know my ways, as
@c    a nation that hath done justice, and hath not forsaken the judgment of
@c    their God:  they ask of me the judgments of justice:  they are willing to
@c    approach to God.

@c    58:3. Why have we fasted, and thou hast not regarded:  have we humbled
@c    our souls, and thou hast not taken notice?  Behold in the day of your
@c    fast your own will is found, and you exact of all your debtors.

@c    58:4. Behold you fast for debates and strife, and strike with the fist
@c    wickedly.  Do not fast as you have done until this day, to make your cry
@c    to be heard on high.

@c    58:5. Is this such a fast as I have chosen:  for a man to afflict his
@c    soul for a day?  is this it, to wind his head about like a circle, and
@c    to spread sackcloth and ashes?  wilt thou call this a fast, and a day
@c    acceptable to the Lord?

@c    58:6. Is not this rather the fast that I have chosen?  loose the bands
@c    of wickedness, undo the bundles that oppress, let them that are broken
@c    go free, and break asunder every burden.

@c    58:7. Deal thy bread to the hungry, and bring the needy and the
@c    harbourless into thy house:  when thou shalt see one naked, cover him,
@c    and despise not thy own flesh.

@c    58:8. Then shall thy light break forth as the morning, and thy health
@c    shall speedily arise, and thy justice shall go before thy face, and the
@c    glory of the Lord shall gather thee up.

@c    58:9. Then shalt thou call, and the Lord shall hear:  thou shalt cry,
@c    and he shall say, Here I am.  If thou wilt take away the chain out of
@c    the midst of thee, and cease to stretch out the finger, and to speak
@c    that which profiteth not.

@c    58:10. When thou shalt pour out thy soul to the hungry, and shalt
@c    satisfy the afflicted soul, then shall thy light rise up in darkness,
@c    and thy darkness shall be as the noonday.

@c    58:11. And the Lord will give thee rest continually, and will fill thy
@c    soul with brightness, and deliver thy bones, and thou shalt be like a
@c    watered garden, and like a fountain of water whose waters shall not
@c    fail.

@c    58:12. And the places that have been desolate for ages shall be built
@c    in thee:  thou shalt raise up the foundation of generation and
@c    generation:  and thou shalt be called the repairer of the fences,
@c    turning the paths into rest.

@c    58:13. If thou turn away thy foot from the sabbath, from doing thy own
@c    will in my holy day, and call the sabbath delightful, and the holy of
@c    the Lord glorious, and glorify him, while thou dost not thy own ways,
@c    and thy own will is not found, to speak a word:

@c    58:14. Then shalt thou be delighted in the Lord, and I will lift thee
@c    up above the high places of the earth, and will feed thee with the
@c    inheritance of Jacob thy father.  For the mouth of the Lord hath spoken
@c    it.



@c    Isaias Chapter 59


@c    The dreadful evil of sin is displayed, as the great obstacle to all
@c    good from God:  yet he will send a Redeemer, and make an everlasting
@c    covenant with his church.

@c    59:1. Behold the hand of the Lord is not shortened that it cannot save,
@c    neither is his ear heavy that it cannot hear.

@c    59:2. But your iniquities have divided between you and your God, and
@c    your sins have hid his face from you that he should not hear.

@c    59:3. For your hands are defiled with blood, and your fingers with
@c    iniquity:  your lips have spoken lies, and your tongue uttereth
@c    iniquity.

@c    59:4. There is none that calleth upon justice, neither is there any one
@c    that judgeth truly:  but they trust in a mere nothing, and speak
@c    vanities:  they have conceived labour, and brought forth iniquity.

@c    59:5. They have broken the eggs of asps, and have woven the webs of
@c    spiders:  he that shall eat of their eggs, shall die:  and that which is
@c    brought out, shall be hatched into a basilisk.

@c    59:6. Their webs shall not be for clothing, neither shall they cover
@c    themselves with their works:  their works are unprofitable works, and
@c    the work of iniquity is in their hands.

@c    59:7. Their feet run to evil, and make haste to shed innocent blood:
@c    their thoughts are unprofitable thoughts:  wasting and destruction are
@c    in their ways.

@c    59:8. They have not known the way of peace, and there is no judgment in
@c    their steps:  their paths are become crooked to them, every one that
@c    treadeth in them knoweth no peace.

@c    59:9. Therefore is judgment far from us, and justice shall not overtake
@c    us.  We looked for light, and behold darkness:  brightness, and we have
@c    walked in the dark.

@c    59:10. We have groped for the wall, and like the blind we have groped
@c    as if we had no eyes:  we have stumbled at noonday as in darkness, we
@c    are in dark places, as dead men.

@c    59:11. We shall roar all of us like bears, and shall lament as mournful
@c    doves.  We have looked for judgment, and there is none:  for salvation,
@c    and it is far from us.

@c    59:12. For our iniquities are multiplied before thee, and our sins have
@c    testified against us:  for our wicked doings are with us, and have known
@c    our iniquities:

@c    59:13. In sinning and lying against the Lord:  and we have turned away
@c    so that we went not after our God, but spoke calumny and transgression:
@c    we have conceived, and uttered from the heart, words of falsehood.

@c    59:14. And judgment is turned away backward, and justice hath stood far
@c    off:  because truth hath fallen down in the street, and equity could not
@c    come in.

@c    59:15. And truth hath been forgotten:  and he that departed from evil,
@c    lay open to be a prey:  and the Lord saw, and it appeared evil in his
@c    eyes, because there is no judgment.

@c    59:16. And he saw that there is not a man:  and he stood astonished,
@c    because there is none to oppose himself:  and his own arm brought
@c    salvation to him, and his own justice supported him.

@c    59:17. He put on justice as a breastplate, and a helmet of salvation
@c    upon his head:  he put on the garments of vengeance, and was clad with
@c    zeal as with a cloak.

@c    59:18. As unto revenge, as it were to repay wrath to his adversaries,
@c    and a reward to his enemies:  he will repay the like to the islands.

@c    59:19. And they from the west, shall fear the name of the Lord:  and
@c    they from the rising of the sun, his glory when he shall come as a
@c    violent stream, which the spirit of the Lord driveth on:

@c    59:20. And there shall come a redeemer to Sion, and to them that return
@c    from iniquity in Jacob, saith the Lord.

@c    59:21. This is my covenant with them, saith the Lord:  My spirit that is
@c    in thee, and my words that I have put in thy mouth, shall not depart
@c    out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seed, nor out of the
@c    mouth of thy seed's seed, saith the Lord, from henceforth and for ever.

@c    This is my covenant, etc. . .Note here a clear promise of perpetual
@c    orthodoxy to the church of Christ.



@c    Isaias Chapter 60


@c    The light of true faith shall shine forth in the church of Christ, and
@c    shall be spread through all nations, and continue for all ages.

@c    60:1. Arise, be enlightened, O Jerusalem:  for thy light is come, and
@c    the glory of the Lord is risen upon thee.

@c    60:2. For behold darkness shall cover the earth, and a mist the people:
@c    but the Lord shall arise upon thee, and his glory shall be seen upon
@c    thee.

@c    60:3. And the Gentiles shall walk in thy light, and kings in the
@c    brightness of thy rising.

@c    60:4. Lift up thy eyes round about, and see:  all these are gathered
@c    together, they are come to thee:  thy sons shall come from afar, and thy
@c    daughters shall rise up at thy side.

@c    60:5. Then shalt thou see, and abound, and thy heart shall wonder and
@c    be enlarged, when the multitude of the sea shall be converted to thee,
@c    the strength of the Gentiles shall come to thee.

@c    60:6. The multitude of camels shall cover thee, the dromedaries of
@c    Madian and Epha:  all they from Saba shall come, bringing gold and
@c    frankincense:  and shewing forth praise to the Lord.

@c    60:7. All the flocks of Cedar shall be gathered together unto thee, the
@c    rams of Nabaioth shall minister to thee:  they shall be offered upon my
@c    acceptable altar, and I will glorify the house of my majesty.

@c    60:8. Who are these, that fly as clouds, and as doves to their windows?

@c    60:9. For, the islands wait for me, and the ships of the sea in the
@c    beginning:  that I may bring thy sons from afar:  their silver, and their
@c    gold with them, to the name of the Lord thy God, and to the Holy One of
@c    Israel, because he hath glorified thee.

@c    60:10. And the children of strangers shall build up thy walls, and
@c    their kings shall minister to thee:  for in my wrath have I struck thee,
@c    and in my reconciliation have I had mercy upon thee.

@c    60:11. And thy gates shall be open continually:  they shall not be shut
@c    day nor night, that the strength of the Gentiles may be brought to
@c    thee, and their kings may be brought.

@c    60:12. For the nation and the kingdom that will not serve thee, shall
@c    perish:  and the Gentiles shall be wasted with desolation.

@c    60:13. The glory of Libanus shall come to thee, the fir tree, and the
@c    box tree, and the pine tree together, to beautify the place of my
@c    sanctuary:  and I will glorify the place of my feet.

@c    60:14. And the children of them that afflict thee, shall come bowing
@c    down to thee, and all that slandered thee shall worship the steps of
@c    thy feet, and shall call thee the city of the Lord, the Sion of the
@c    Holy One of Israel.

@c    60:15. Because thou wast forsaken, and hated, and there was none that
@c    passed through thee, I will make thee to be an everlasting glory, a joy
@c    unto generation and generation:

@c    60:16. And thou shalt suck the milk of the Gentiles, and thou shalt be
@c    nursed with the breasts of kings:  and thou shalt know that I am the
@c    Lord thy Saviour, and thy Redeemer, the Mighty One of Jacob.

@c    60:17. For brass I will bring gold, and for iron I will bring silver:
@c    and for wood brass, and for stones iron:  and I will make thy visitation
@c    peace, and thy overseers justice.

@c    60:18. Iniquity shall no more be heard in thy land, wasting nor
@c    destruction in thy borders, and salvation shall possess thy walls, and
@c    praise thy gates.

@c    60:19. Thou shalt no more have the sun for thy light by day, neither
@c    shall the brightness of the moon enlighten thee:  but the Lord shall be
@c    unto thee for an everlasting light, and thy God for thy glory.

@c    Thou shalt no more, etc. . .In this latter part of the chapter, the
@c    prophet passes from the illustrious promises made to the church
@c    militant on earth, to the glory of the church triumphant in heaven.

@c    60:20. Thy sun shall go down no more, and thy moon shall not decrease:
@c    for the Lord shall be unto thee for an everlasting light, and the days
@c    of thy mourning shall be ended.

@c    60:21. And thy people shall be all just, they shall inherit the land
@c    for ever, the branch of my planting, the work of my hand to glorify me.

@c    60:22. The least shall become a thousand, and a little one a most
@c    strong nation:  I the Lord will suddenly do this thing in its time.



@c    Isaias Chapter 61


@c    The office of Christ:  the mission of the Apostles; the happiness of
@c    their converts.

@c    61:1. The spirit of the Lord is upon me, because the Lord hath anointed
@c    me:  he hath sent me to preach to the meek, to heal the contrite of
@c    heart, and to preach a release to the captives, and deliverance to them
@c    that are shut up.

@c    61:2. To proclaim the acceptable year of the Lord, and the day of
@c    vengeance of our God:  to comfort all that mourn:

@c    61:3. To appoint to the mourners of Sion, and to give them a crown for
@c    ashes, the oil of joy for mourning, a garment of praise for the spirit
@c    of grief:  and they shall be called in it the mighty ones of justice,
@c    the planting of the Lord to glorify him.

@c    61:4. And they shall build the places that have been waste from of old,
@c    and shall raise up ancient ruins, and shall repair the desolate cities,
@c    that were destroyed for generation and generation.

@c    61:5. And strangers shall stand and shall feed your flocks:  and the
@c    sons of strangers shall be your husbandman, and the dressers of your
@c    vines.

@c    61:6. But you shall be called the priests of the Lord:  to you it shall
@c    be said:  Ye ministers of our God:  you shall eat the riches of the
@c    Gentiles, and you shall pride yourselves in their glory.

@c    61:7. For your double confusion and shame, they shall praise their
@c    part:  therefore shall they receive double in their land, everlasting
@c    joy shall be unto them.

@c    61:8. For I am the Lord that love judgment, and hate robbery in a
@c    holocaust:  and I will make their work in truth, and I will make a
@c    perpetual covenant with them.

@c    61:9. And they shall know their seed among the Gentiles, and their
@c    offspring in the midst of peoples:  all that shall see them, shall know
@c    them, that these are the seed which the Lord hath blessed.

@c    61:10. I will greatly rejoice in the Lord, and my soul shall be joyful
@c    in my God:  for he hath clothed me with the garments of salvation:  and
@c    with the robe of justice he hath covered me, as a bridegroom decked
@c    with a crown, and as a bride adorned with her jewels.

@c    61:11. For as the earth bringeth forth her bud, and as the garden
@c    causeth her seed to shoot forth:  so shall the Lord God make justice to
@c    spring forth, and praise before all the nations.



@c    Isaias Chapter 62


@c    The prophet will not cease from preaching Christ:  to whom all nations
@c    shall be converted:  and whose church shall continue for ever.

@c    62:1. For Sion's sake I will not hold my peace, and for the sake of
@c    Jerusalem, I will not rest till her just one come forth as brightness,
@c    and her saviour be lighted as a lamp.

@c    62:2. And the Gentiles shall see thy just one, and all kings thy
@c    glorious one:  and thou shalt be called by a new name, which the mouth
@c    of the Lord shall name.

@c    62:3. And thou shalt be a crown of glory in the hand of the Lord, and a
@c    royal diadem in the hand of thy God.

@c    62:4. Thou shalt no more be called Forsaken:  and thy land shall no more
@c    be called Desolate:  but thou shalt be called My pleasure in her, and
@c    thy land inhabited.  Because the Lord hath been well pleased with thee:
@c    and thy land shall be inhabited.

@c    62:5. For the young man shall dwell with the virgin, and thy children
@c    shall dwell in thee.  And the bridegroom shall rejoice over the bride,
@c    and thy God shall rejoice over thee.

@c    62:6. Upon thy walls, O Jerusalem, I have appointed watchmen all the
@c    day, and all the night, they shall never hold their peace.  You that are
@c    mindful of the Lord, hold not your peace,

@c    62:7. And give him no silence till he establish, and till he make
@c    Jerusalem a praise in the earth.

@c    62:8. The Lord hath sworn by his right hand, and by the arm of his
@c    strength:  Surely I will no more give thy corn to be meat for thy
@c    enemies:  and the sons of the strangers shall not drink thy wine, for
@c    which thou hast laboured.

@c    62:9. For they that gather it, shall eat it, and shall praise the Lord:
@c    and they that bring it together, shall drink it in my holy courts.

@c    62:10. Go through, go through the gates, prepare the way for the
@c    people, make the road plain, pick out the stones, and lift up the
@c    standard to the people.

@c    62:11. Behold the Lord hath made it to be heard in the ends of the
@c    earth, tell the daughter of Sion:  Behold thy Saviour cometh:  behold his
@c    reward is with him, and his work before him.

@c    62:12. And they shall call them, The holy people, the redeemed of the
@c    Lord.  But thou shalt be called:  A city sought after, and not forsaken.



@c    Isaias Chapter 63


@c    Christ's victory over his enemies:  his mercies to his people:  their
@c    complaint.

@c    63:1. Who is this that cometh from Edom, with dyed garments from Bosra,
@c    this beautiful one in his robe, walking in the greatness of his
@c    strength.  I, that speak justice, and am a defender to save.

@c    Edom. . .Edom and Bosra (a strong city of Edom) are here taken in a
@c    mystical sense for the enemies of Christ and his church.

@c    63:2. Why then is thy apparel red, and thy garments like theirs that
@c    tread in the winepress?

@c    63:3. I have trodden the winepress alone, and of the Gentiles there is
@c    not a man with me:  I have trampled on them in my indignation, and have
@c    trodden them down in my wrath, and their blood is sprinkled upon my
@c    garments, and I have stained all my apparel.

@c    63:4. For the day of vengeance is in my heart, the year of my
@c    redemption is come.

@c    63:5. I looked about, and there was none to help:  I sought, and there
@c    was none to give aid:  and my own arm hath saved for me, and my
@c    indignation itself hath helped me.

@c    63:6. And I have trodden down the people in my wrath, and have made
@c    them drunk in my indignation, and have brought down their strength to
@c    the earth.

@c    63:7. I will remember the tender mercies of the Lord, the praise of the
@c    Lord for all the things that the Lord hath bestowed upon us, and for
@c    the multitude of his good things to the house of Israel, which he hath
@c    given them according to his kindness, and according to the multitude of
@c    his mercies.

@c    63:8. And he said:  Surely they are my people, children that will not
@c    deny:  so he became their saviour.

@c    63:9. In all their affliction he was not troubled, and the angel of his
@c    presence saved them:  in his love, and in his mercy he redeemed them,
@c    and he carried them and lifted them up all the days of old.

@c    63:10. But they provoked to wrath, and afflicted the spirit of his Holy
@c    One:  and he was turned to be their enemy, and he fought against them.

@c    63:11. And he remembered the days of old of Moses, and of his people:
@c    Where is he that brought them up out of the sea, with the shepherds of
@c    his flock?  where is he that put in the midst of them the spirit of his
@c    Holy One?

@c    63:12. He that brought out Moses by the right hand, by the arm of his
@c    majesty:  that divided the waters before them, to make himself an
@c    everlasting name.

@c    63:13. He that led them out through the deep, as a horse in the
@c    wilderness that stumbleth not.

@c    63:14. As a beast that goeth down in the field, the spirit of the Lord
@c    was their leader:  so didst thou lead thy people to make thyself a
@c    glorious name.

@c    63:15. Look down from heaven, and behold from thy holy habitation and
@c    the place of thy glory:  where is thy zeal, and thy strength, the
@c    multitude of thy bowels, and of thy mercies?  they have held back
@c    themselves from me.

@c    They have held back, etc. . .This is spoken by the prophet in the person
@c    of the Jews at the time when, for their sins, they were given up to
@c    their enemies.

@c    63:16. For thou art our father, and Abraham hath not known us, and
@c    Israel hath been ignorant of us:  thou, O Lord, art our father, our
@c    redeemer, from everlasting is thy name.

@c    Abraham hath not know us, etc. . .That is, Abraham will not now
@c    acknowledge us for his children, by reason of our degeneracy; but thou,
@c    O Lord, art our true father and our redeemer, and no other can be
@c    called our parent in comparison with thee.

@c    63:17. Why hast thou made us to err, O Lord, from thy ways:  why hast
@c    thou hardened our heart, that we should not fear thee?  return for the
@c    sake of thy servants, the tribes of thy inheritance.

@c    Made us to err, etc.  Hardened our heart, etc. . .The meaning is, that
@c    God in punishment of their great and manifold crimes, and their long
@c    abuse of his mercy and grace, had withdrawn his graces from them, and
@c    so given them up to error and hardness of heart.

@c    63:18. They have possessed thy holy people as nothing:  our enemies have
@c    trodden down thy sanctuary.

@c    63:19. We are become as in the beginning, when thou didst not rule over
@c    us, and when we were not called by thy name.



@c    Isaias Chapter 64


@c    The prophet prays for the release of his people; and for the remission
@c    of their sins.

@c    64:1. O that thou wouldst rend the heavens, and wouldst come down:  the
@c    mountains would melt away at thy presence.

@c    64:2. They would melt as at the burning of fire, the waters would burn
@c    with fire, that thy name might be made known to thy enemies:  that the
@c    nations might tremble at thy presence.

@c    64:3. When thou shalt do wonderful things, we shall not bear them:  thou
@c    didst come down, and at thy presence the mountains melted away.

@c    64:4. From the beginning of the world they have not heard, nor
@c    perceived with the ears:  the eye hath not seen, O God, besides thee,
@c    what things thou hast prepared for them that wait for thee.

@c    64:5. Thou hast met him that rejoiceth, and doth justice:  in thy ways
@c    they shall remember thee:  behold thou art angry, and we have sinned:  in
@c    them we have been always, and we shall be saved.

@c    64:6. And we are all become as one unclean, and all our justices as the
@c    rag of a menstruous woman:  and we have all fallen as a leaf, and our
@c    iniquities, like the wind, have taken us away.

@c    Our justices, etc. . .That is, the works by which we pretended to make
@c    ourselves just.  This is spoken particularly of the sacrifices,
@c    sacraments, and ceremonies of the Jews, after the death of Christ, and
@c    the promulgation of the new law.

@c    64:7. There is none that calleth upon thy name:  that riseth up, and
@c    taketh hold of thee:  thou hast hid thy face from us, and hast crushed
@c    us in the hand of our iniquity.

@c    64:8. And now, O Lord, thou art our father, and we are clay:  and thou
@c    art our maker, and we all are the works of thy hands.

@c    64:9. Be not very angry, O Lord, and remember no longer our iniquity:
@c    behold, see we are all thy people.

@c    64:10. The city of thy sanctuary is become a desert, Sion is made a
@c    desert, Jerusalem is desolate.

@c    64:11. The house of our holiness, and of our glory, where our fathers
@c    praised thee, is burnt with fire, and all our lovely things are turned
@c    into ruins.

@c    64:12. Wilt thou refrain thyself, O Lord, upon these things, wilt thou
@c    hold thy peace, and afflict us vehemently?



@c    Isaias Chapter 65


@c    The Gentiles shall seek and find Christ, but the Jews will persecute
@c    him, and be rejected, only a remnant shall be reserved.  The church
@c    shall multiply, and abound with graces.

@c    65:1. They have sought me that before asked not for me, they have found
@c    me that sought me not.  I said:  Behold me, behold me, to a nation that
@c    did not call upon my name.

@c    65:2. I have spread forth my hands all the day to an unbelieving
@c    people, who walk in a way that is not good after their own thoughts.

@c    65:3. A people that continually provoke me to anger before my face,
@c    that immolate in gardens, and sacrifice upon bricks.

@c    65:4. That dwell in sepulchres, and sleep in the temple of idols:  that
@c    eat swine's flesh, and profane broth is in their vessels.

@c    65:5. That say:  Depart from me, come not near me, because thou art
@c    unclean:  these shall be smoke in my anger, a fire burning all the day.

@c    65:6. Behold it is written before me:  I will not be silent, but I will
@c    render and repay into their bosom.

@c    65:7. Your iniquities, and the iniquities of your fathers together,
@c    saith the Lord, who have sacrificed upon the mountains, and have
@c    reproached me upon the hills; and I will measure back their first work
@c    in their bosom.

@c    65:8. Thus saith the Lord:  As if a grain be found in a cluster, and it
@c    be said:  Destroy it not, because it is a blessing:  so will I do for the
@c    sake of my servants, that I may not destroy the whole.

@c    65:9. And I will bring forth a seed out of Jacob, and out of Juda a
@c    possessor of my mountains:  and my elect shall inherit it, and my
@c    servants shall dwell there.

@c    65:10. And the plains shall be turned to folds of flocks, and the
@c    valley of Achor into a place for the herds to lie down in, for my
@c    people that have sought me.

@c    65:11. And you, that have forsaken the Lord, that have forgotten my
@c    holy mount, that set a table for fortune, and offer libations upon it,

@c    65:12. I will number you in the sword, and you shall all fall by
@c    slaughter:  because I called and you did not answer:  I spoke, and you
@c    did not hear:  and you did evil in my eyes, and you have chosen the
@c    things that displease me.

@c    65:13. Therefore thus saith the Lord God:  Behold my servants shall eat,
@c    and you shall be hungry:  behold my servants shall drink, and you shall
@c    be thirsty.

@c    65:14. Behold my servants shall rejoice, and you shall be confounded:
@c    behold my servants shall praise for joyfulness of heart, and you shall
@c    cry for sorrow of heart, and shall howl for grief of spirit.

@c    65:15. And you shall leave your name for an execration to my elect:  and
@c    the Lord God shall slay thee, and call his servants by another name.

@c    65:16. In which he that is blessed upon the earth, shall be blessed in
@c    God, amen:  and he that sweareth in the earth, shall swear by God, amen:
@c    because the former distresses are forgotten, and because they are hid
@c    from my eyes.

@c    65:17. For behold I create new heavens, and a new earth:  and the former
@c    things shall not be in remembrance, and they shall not come upon the
@c    heart.

@c    65:18. But you shall be glad and rejoice for ever in these things,
@c    which I create:  for behold I create Jerusalem a rejoicing, and the
@c    people thereof joy.

@c    65:19. And I will rejoice in Jerusalem, and joy in my people, and the
@c    voice of weeping shall no more be heard in her, nor the voice of
@c    crying.

@c    65:20. There shall no more be an infant of days there, nor an old man
@c    that shall not fill up his days:  for the child shall die a hundred
@c    years old, and the sinner being a hundred years old shall be accursed.

@c    65:21. And they shall build houses, and inhabit them; and they shall
@c    plant vineyards, and eat the fruits of them.

@c    65:22. They shall not build, and another inhabit; they shall not plant,
@c    and another eat:  for as the days of a tree, so shall be the days of my
@c    people, and the works of their hands shall be of long continuance.

@c    65:23. My elect shall not labour in vain, nor bring forth in trouble;
@c    for they are the seed of the blessed of the Lord, and their posterity
@c    with them.

@c    65:24. And it shall come to pass, that before they call, I will hear;
@c    as they are yet speaking, I will hear.

@c    65:25. The wolf and the lamb shall feed together; the lion and the ox
@c    shall eat straw; and dust shall be the serpent's food:  they shall not
@c    hurt nor kill in all my holy mountain, saith the Lord.



@c    Isaias Chapter 66


@c    More of the reprobation of the Jews, and of the call of the Gentiles.

@c    66:1. Thus saith the Lord:  Heaven is my throne, and the earth my
@c    footstool:  what is this house that you will build to me?  and what is
@c    this place of my rest?

@c    What is this house, etc. . .This is a prophecy that the temple should be
@c    cast off.

@c    66:2. My hand made all these things, and all these things were made,
@c    saith the Lord.  But to whom shall I have respect, but to him that is
@c    poor and little, and of a contrite spirit, and that trembleth at my
@c    words?

@c    66:3. He that sacrificeth an ox, is as if he slew a man:  he that
@c    killeth a sheep in sacrifice, as if he should brain a dog:  he that
@c    offereth an oblation, as if he should offer swine's blood; he that
@c    remembereth incense, as if he should bless an idol.  All these things
@c    have they chosen in their ways, and their soul is delighted in their
@c    abominations.

@c    He that sacrificeth an ox, etc. . .This is a prophecy that the
@c    sacrifices which were offered in the old law should be abolished in the
@c    new; and that the offering of them should be a crime.--Ibid.
@c    Remembereth incense. . .Viz., to offer it in the way of a sacrifice.

@c    66:4. Wherefore I also will choose their mockeries, and will bring upon
@c    them the things they feared:  because I called, and there was none that
@c    would answer; I have spoken, and they heard not; and they have done
@c    evil in my eyes, and have chosen the things that displease me.

@c    I will choose their mockeries. . .I will turn their mockeries upon
@c    themselves; and will cause them to be mocked by their enemies.

@c    66:5. Hear the word of the Lord, you that tremble at his word:  Your
@c    brethren that hate you, and cast you out for my name's sake, have said:
@c    Let the Lord be glorified, and we shall see in your joy:  but they shall
@c    be confounded.

@c    66:6. A voice of the people from the city, a voice from the temple, the
@c    voice of the Lord that rendereth recompense to his enemies.

@c    66:7. Before she was in labour, she brought forth; before her time came
@c    to be delivered, she brought forth a man child.

@c    Before she was in labour, etc. . .This relates to the conversion of the
@c    Gentiles, who were born, as it were, all on a sudden to the church of
@c    God.

@c    66:8. Who hath ever heard such a thing?  and who hath seen the like to
@c    this?  shall the earth bring forth in one day?  or shall a nation be
@c    brought forth at once, because Sion hath been in labour, and hath
@c    brought forth her children?

@c    66:9. Shall not I that make others to bring forth children, myself
@c    bring forth, saith the Lord?  shall I, that give generation to others,
@c    be barren, saith the Lord thy God?

@c    66:10. Rejoice with Jerusalem, and be glad with her, all you that love
@c    her:  rejoice for joy with her, all you that mourn for her.

@c    66:11. That you may suck, and be filled with the breasts of her
@c    consolations:  that you may milk out, and flow with delights, from the
@c    abundance of her glory.

@c    66:12. For thus saith the Lord:  Behold I will bring upon her as it were
@c    a river of peace, and as an overflowing torrent the glory of the
@c    Gentiles, which you shall suck; you shall be carried at the breasts,
@c    and upon the knees they shall caress you.

@c    66:13. As one whom the mother caresseth, so will I comfort you, and you
@c    shall be comforted in Jerusalem.

@c    66:14. You shall see and your heart shall rejoice, and your bones shall
@c    flourish like an herb, and the hand of the Lord shall be known to his
@c    servants, and he shall be angry with his enemies.

@c    66:15. For behold the Lord will come with fire, and his chariots are
@c    like a whirlwind, to render his wrath in indignation, and his rebuke
@c    with flames of fire.

@c    66:16. For the Lord shall judge by fire, and by his sword unto all
@c    flesh, and the slain of the Lord shall be many.

@c    66:17. They that were sanctified, thought themselves clean in the
@c    gardens behind the gate within, they that did eat swine's flesh, and
@c    the abomination, and the mouse:  they shall be consumed together, saith
@c    the Lord.

@c    66:18. But I know their works, and their thoughts:  I come that I may
@c    gather them together with all nations and tongues:  and they shall come
@c    and shall see my glory.

@c    66:19. And I will set a sign among them, and I will send of them that
@c    shall be saved, to the Gentiles into the sea, into Africa, and Lydia
@c    them that draw the bow:  into Italy, and Greece, to the islands afar
@c    off, to them that have not heard of me, and have not seen my glory.  And
@c    they shall declare my glory to the Gentiles:

@c    66:20. And they shall bring all your brethren out of all nations for a
@c    gift to the Lord, upon horses, and in chariots, and in litters, and on
@c    mules, and in coaches, to my holy mountain Jerusalem, saith the Lord,
@c    as if the children of Israel should bring an offering in a clean vessel
@c    into the house of the Lord.

@c    66:21. And I will take of them to be priests, and Levites, saith the
@c    Lord.

@c    66:22. For as the new heavens, and the new earth, which I will make to
@c    stand before me, saith the Lord:  so shall your seed stand, and your
@c    name.

@c    66:23. And there shall be month after month, and sabbath after sabbath:
@c    and all flesh shall come to adore before my face, saith the Lord.

@c    66:24. And they shall go out, and see the carcasses of the men that
@c    have transgressed against me:  their worm shall not die, and their fire
@c    shall not be quenched:  and they shall be a loathsome sight to all
@c    flesh.
