@c    THE BOOK OF JOB



@c    This Book takes its name from the holy man of whom it treats:  who,
@c    according to the more probable opinion, was of the race of Esau; and
@c    the same as Jobab, king of Edom, mentioned Gen. 36.33.  It is uncertain
@c    who was the writer of it.  Some attribute it to Job himself; others to
@c    Moses, or some one of the prophets.  In the Hebrew it is written in
@c    verse, from the beginning of the third chapter to the forty-second
@c    chapter.



@c    Job Chapter 1


@c    Job's virtue and riches.  Satan by permission from God strippeth him of
@c    all his substance.  His patience.

@c    1:1. There was a man in the land of Hus, whose name was Job, and that
@c    man was simple and upright, and fearing God, and avoiding evil.

@c    Hus. . .The land of Hus was a part of Edom; as appears from Lam.
@c    4.21.--Ibid.  Simple. . .That is, innocent, sincere, and without guile.

@c    1:2. And there were born to him seven sons and three daughters.

@c    1:3. And his possession was seven thousand sheep, and three thousand
@c    camels, and five hundred yoke of oxen, and five hundred she asses, and
@c    a family exceedingly great:  and this man was great among all the people
@c    of the east.

@c    1:4. And his sons went, and made a feast by houses, every one in his
@c    day.  And sending, they called their three sisters, to eat and drink
@c    with them.

@c    And made a feast by houses. . .That is, each made a feast in his own
@c    house and had his day, inviting the others, and their sisters.

@c    1:5. And when the days of their feasting were gone about, Job sent to
@c    them, and sanctified them:  and rising up early, offered holocausts for
@c    every one of them.  For he said:  Lest perhaps my sons have sinned, and
@c    have blessed God in their hearts.  So did Job all days.

@c    Blessed. . .For greater horror of the very thought of blasphemy, the
@c    scripture both here and ver. 11, and in the following chapter, ver. 5
@c    and 9, uses the word bless to signify its contrary.

@c    1:6. Now on a certain day, when the sons of God came to stand before
@c    the Lord, Satan also was present among them.

@c    The sons of God. . .The angels.--Ibid.  Satan also, etc.  This passage
@c    represents to us in a figure, accommodated to the ways and
@c    understandings of men, 1. The restless endeavours of Satan against the
@c    servants of God; 2. That he can do nothing without God's permission; 3.
@c    That God doth not permit him to tempt them above their strength:  but
@c    assists them by his divine grace in such manner, that the vain efforts
@c    of the enemy only serve to illustrate their virtue and increase their
@c    merit.

@c    1:7. And the Lord said to him:  Whence comest thou?  And he answered and
@c    said:  I have gone round about the earth, and walked through it.

@c    1:8. And the Lord said to him:  Hast thou considered my servant, Job,
@c    that there is none like him in the earth, a simple and upright man, and
@c    fearing God, and avoiding evil?

@c    1:9. And Satan answering, said:  Doth Job fear God in vain?

@c    1:10. Hast thou not made a fence for him, and his house, and all his
@c    substance round about, blessed the works of his hands, and his
@c    possession hath increased on the earth?

@c    1:11. But stretch forth thy hand a little, and touch all that he hath,
@c    and see if he bless thee not to thy face.

@c    1:12. Then the Lord said to Satan:  Behold, all that he hath is in thy
@c    hand:  only put not forth thy hand upon his person.  And Satan went forth
@c    from the presence of the Lord.

@c    1:13. Now upon a certain day, when his sons and daughters were eating
@c    and drinking wine, in the house of their eldest brother,

@c    1:14. There came a messenger to Job, and said:  The oxen were ploughing,
@c    and the asses feeding beside them,

@c    1:15. And the Sabeans rushed in, and took all away, and slew the
@c    servants with the sword; and I alone have escaped to tell thee.

@c    1:16. And while he was yet speaking, another came, and said:  The fire
@c    of God fell from heaven, and striking the sheep and the servants, hath
@c    consumed them; and I alone have escaped to tell thee.

@c    1:17. And while he also was yet speaking, there came another, and said:
@c    The Chaldeans made three troops, and have fallen upon the camels, and
@c    taken them; moreover, they have slain the servants with the sword:  and
@c    I alone have escaped to tell thee.

@c    1:18. He was yet speaking, and behold another came in, and said:  Thy
@c    sons and daughters were eating and drinking wine in the house of their
@c    eldest brother,

@c    1:19. A violent wind came on a sudden from the side of the desert, and
@c    shook the four corners of the house, and it fell upon thy children, and
@c    they are dead:  and I alone have escaped to tell thee.

@c    1:20. Then Job rose up, and rent his garments, and having shaven his
@c    head, fell down upon the ground, and worshipped,

@c    1:21. And said:  Naked came I out of my mother's womb, and naked shall I
@c    return thither:  the Lord gave, and the Lord hath taken away:  as it hath
@c    pleased the Lord, so is it done:  blessed be the name of the Lord.

@c    1:22. In all these things Job sinned not by his lips, nor spoke he any
@c    foolish thing against God.



@c    Job Chapter 2


@c    2:1. And it came to pass, when on a certain day the sons of God came,
@c    and stood before the Lord, and Satan came amongst them, and stood in
@c    his sight,

@c    2:2. That the Lord said to Satan:  Whence comest thou?  And he answered,
@c    and said:  I have gone round about the earth, and walked through it.

@c    2:3. And the Lord said to Satan:  Hast thou considered my servant, Job,
@c    that there is none like him in the earth, a man simple and upright, and
@c    fearing God, and avoiding evil, and still keeping his innocence?  But
@c    thou hast moved me against him, that I should afflict him without
@c    cause.

@c    2:4. And Satan answered, and said:  Skin for skin; and all that a man
@c    hath, he will give for his life:

@c    2:5. But put forth thy hand, and touch his bone and his flesh, and then
@c    thou shalt see that he will bless thee to thy face.

@c    2:6. And the Lord said to Satan:  Behold, he is in thy hand, but yet
@c    save his life.

@c    2:7. So Satan went forth from the presence of the Lord, and struck Job
@c    with a very grievous ulcer, from the sole of the foot even to the top
@c    of his head:

@c    2:8. And he took a potsherd and scraped the corrupt matter, sitting on
@c    a dunghill.

@c    2:9. And his wife said to him:  Dost thou still continue in thy
@c    simplicity?  bless God and die.

@c    2:10. And he said to her:  Thou hast spoken like one of the foolish
@c    women:  If we have received good things at the hand of God, why should
@c    we not receive evil?  In all these things Job did not sin with his lips.

@c    2:11. Now when Job's three friends heard all the evil that had befallen
@c    him, they came every one from his own place, Eliphaz, the Themanite,
@c    and Baldad, the Suhite, and Sophar, the Naamathite.  For they had made
@c    an appointment to come together and visit him, and comfort him.

@c    2:12. And when they had lifted up their eyes afar off, they knew him
@c    not, and crying out, they wept, and rending their garments, they
@c    sprinkled dust upon their heads toward heaven.

@c    2:13. And they sat with him on the ground seven day and seven nights
@c    and no man spoke to him a word:  for they saw that his grief was very
@c    great.



@c    Job Chapter 3


@c    3:1. After this, Job opened his mouth, and cursed his day,

@c    Cursed his day. . .Job cursed the day of his birth, not by way of
@c    wishing evil to any thing of God's creation; but only to express in a
@c    stronger manner his sense of human miseries in general, and of his own
@c    calamities in particular.

@c    3:2. And he said:

@c    3:3. Let the day perish wherein I was born, and the night in which it
@c    was said:  A man child is conceived.

@c    3:4. Let that day be turned into darkness, let not God regard it from
@c    above, and let not the light shine upon it.

@c    3:5. Let darkness, and the shadow of death, cover it, let a mist
@c    overspread it, and let it be wrapped up in bitterness.

@c    3:6. Let a darksome whirlwind seize upon that night, let it not be
@c    counted in the days of the year, nor numbered in the months.

@c    3:7. Let that night be solitary, and not worthy of praise.

@c    3:8. Let them curse it who curse the day, who are ready to raise up a
@c    leviathan:

@c    3:9. Let the stars be darkened with the mist thereof:  let it expect
@c    light, and not see it, nor the rising of the dawning of the day:

@c    3:10. Because it shut not up the doors of the womb that bore me, nor
@c    took away evils from my eyes.

@c    3:11. Why did I not die in the womb?  why did I not perish when I came
@c    out of the belly?

@c    3:12. Why received upon the knees?  why suckled at the breasts?

@c    3:13. For now I should have been asleep and still, and should have rest
@c    in my sleep:

@c    3:14. With kings and consuls of the earth, who build themselves
@c    solitudes:

@c    3:15. Or with princes, that possess gold, and fill their houses with
@c    silver:

@c    3:16. Or as a hidden untimely birth, I should not be; or as they that,
@c    being conceived, have not seen the light.

@c    3:17. There the wicked cease from tumult, and there the wearied in
@c    strength are at rest.

@c    3:18. And they sometime bound together without disquiet, have not heard
@c    the voice of the oppressor.

@c    3:19. The small and great are there, and the servant is free from his
@c    master.

@c    3:20. Why is light given to him that is in misery, and life to them
@c    that are in bitterness of soul?

@c    3:21. That look for death, and it cometh not, as they that dig for a
@c    treasure:

@c    3:22. And they rejoice exceedingly when they have found the grave?

@c    3:23. To a man whose way is hidden, and God hath surrounded him with
@c    darkness?

@c    3:24. Before I eat I sigh:  and as overflowing waters, so is my roaring:

@c    3:25. For the fear which I feared, hath come upon me:  and that which I
@c    was afraid of, hath befallen me.

@c    3:26. Have I not dissembled?  have I not kept silence?  have I not been
@c    quiet?  and indignation is come upon me.



@c    Job Chapter 4


@c    4:1. Then Eliphaz, the Themanite, answered, and said:

@c    4:2. If we begin to speak to thee, perhaps thou wilt take it ill; but
@c    who can withhold the words he hath conceived?

@c    4:3. Behold thou hast taught many, and thou hast strengthened the weary
@c    hands:

@c    4:4. Thy words have confirmed them that were staggering, and thou hast
@c    strengthened the trembling knees:

@c    4:5. But now the scourge is come upon thee, and thou faintest:  It hath
@c    touched thee, and thou art troubled.

@c    4:6. Where is thy fear, thy fortitude, thy patience, and the perfection
@c    of thy ways?

@c    4:7. Remember, I pray thee, who ever perished being innocent?  or when
@c    were the just destroyed?

@c    4:8. On the contrary, I have seen those who work iniquity, and sow
@c    sorrows, and reap them,

@c    4:9. Perishing by the blast of God, and consumed by the spirit of his
@c    wrath.

@c    4:10. The roaring of the lion, and the voice of the lioness, and the
@c    teeth of the whelps of lions, are broken:

@c    4:11. The tiger hath perished for want of prey, and the young lions are
@c    scattered abroad.

@c    4:12. Now there was a word spoken to me in private, and my ears by
@c    stealth, as it were, received the veins of its whisper.

@c    4:13. In the horror of a vision by night, when deep sleep is wont to
@c    hold men,

@c    4:14. Fear seized upon me, and trembling, and all my bones were
@c    affrighted:

@c    4:15. And when a spirit passed before me, the hair of my flesh stood
@c    up.

@c    4:16. There stood one whose countenance I knew not, an image before my
@c    eyes, and I heard the voice, as it were, of a gentle wind.

@c    4:17. Shall man be justified in comparison of God, or shall a man be
@c    more pure than his maker?

@c    Shall man be justified in comparison of God, etc. . .These are the words
@c    which Eliphaz had heard from an angel, which, ver. 15, he calls a
@c    spirit.

@c    4:18. Behold, they that serve him are not steadfast, and in his angels
@c    he found wickedness:

@c    4:19. How much more shall they that dwell in houses of clay, who have
@c    an earthly foundation, be consumed as with the moth?

@c    4:20. From morning till evening they shall be cut down:  and because no
@c    one understandeth, they shall perish for ever.

@c    4:21. And they that shall be left, shall be taken away from them:  they
@c    shall die, and not in wisdom.



@c    Job Chapter 5


@c    5:1. Call now, if there be any that will answer thee, and turn to some
@c    of the saints.

@c    5:2. Anger indeed killeth the foolish, and envy slayeth the little one.

@c    5:3. I have seen a fool with a strong root, and I cursed his beauty
@c    immediately.

@c    5:4. His children shall be far from safety, and shall be destroyed in
@c    the gate, and there shall be none to deliver them.

@c    5:5. Whose harvest the hungry shall eat, and the armed man shall take
@c    him by violence, and the thirsty shall drink up his riches.

@c    5:6. Nothing upon earth is done without a cause, and sorrow doth not
@c    spring out of the ground.

@c    5:7. Man is born to labour, and the bird to fly.

@c    5:8. Wherefore I will pray to the Lord, and address my speech to God:

@c    5:9. Who doth great things, and unsearchable and wonderful things
@c    without number:

@c    5:10. Who giveth rain upon the face of the earth, and watereth all
@c    things with waters:

@c    5:11. Who setteth up the humble on high, and comforteth with health
@c    those that mourn.

@c    5:12. Who bringeth to nought the designs of the malignant, so that
@c    their hands cannot accomplish what they had begun:

@c    5:13. Who catcheth the wise in their craftiness, and disappointeth the
@c    counsel of the wicked:

@c    5:14. They shall meet with darkness in the day, and grope at noonday as
@c    in the night.

@c    5:15. But he shall save the needy from the sword of their mouth, and
@c    the poor from the hand of the violent.

@c    5:16. And to the needy there shall be hope, but iniquity shall draw in
@c    her mouth.

@c    5:17. Blessed is the man whom God correcteth:  refuse not, therefore,
@c    the chastising of the Lord.

@c    5:18. For he woundeth, and cureth:  he striketh, and his hands shall
@c    heal.

@c    5:19. In six troubles he shall deliver thee, and in the seventh, evil
@c    shall not touch thee.

@c    5:20. In famine he shall deliver thee from death; and in battle, from
@c    the hand of the sword.

@c    5:21. Thou shalt be hidden from the scourge of the tongue:  and thou
@c    shalt not fear calamity when it cometh.

@c    5:22. In destruction and famine thou shalt laugh:  and thou shalt not be
@c    afraid of the beasts of the earth.

@c    5:23. But thou shalt have a covenant with the stones of the lands, and
@c    the beasts of the earth shall be at peace with thee.

@c    5:24. And thou shalt know that thy tabernacle is in peace, and visiting
@c    thy beauty, thou shalt not sin.

@c    5:25. Thou shalt know also that thy seed shall be multiplied, and thy
@c    offspring like the grass of the earth.

@c    5:26. Thou shalt enter into the grave in abundance, as a heap of wheat
@c    is brought in its season.

@c    5:27. Behold, this is even so, as we have searched out:  which thou
@c    having heard, consider it thoroughly in thy mind.



@c    Job Chapter 6


@c    6:1. But Job answered, and said:

@c    6:2. O that my sins, whereby I have deserved wrath, and the calamity
@c    that I suffer, were weighed in a balance.

@c    My sins, etc. . .He does not mean to compare his sufferings with his
@c    real sins:  but with the imaginary crimes which his friends imputed to
@c    him:  and especially with his wrath, or grief, expressed in the third
@c    chapter, which they so much accused.  Though, as he tells them here, it
@c    bore no proportion with the greatness of his calamity.

@c    6:3. As the sand of the sea, this would appear heavier:  therefore, my
@c    words are full of sorrow:

@c    6:4. For the arrows of the Lord are in me, the rage whereof drinketh up
@c    my spirit, and the terrors of the Lord war against me.

@c    6:5. Will the wild ass bray when he hath grass?  or will the ox low when
@c    he standeth before a full manger?

@c    6:6. Or can an unsavoury thing be eaten, that is not seasoned with
@c    salt?  or can a man taste that which, when tasted, bringeth death?

@c    6:7. The things which before my soul would not touch, now, through
@c    anguish, are my meats.

@c    6:8. Who will grant that my request may come:  and that God may give me
@c    what I look for?

@c    6:9. And that he that hath begun may destroy me, that he may let loose
@c    his hand, and cut me off?

@c    6:10. And that this may be my comfort, that afflicting me with sorrow,
@c    he spare not, nor I contradict the words of the Holy one.

@c    6:11. For what is my strength, that I can hold out?  or what is my end,
@c    that I should keep patience?

@c    6:12. My strength is not the strength of stones, nor is my flesh of
@c    brass.

@c    6:13. Behold there is no help for me in myself, and my familiar friends
@c    also are departed from me.

@c    6:14. He that taketh away mercy from his friend, forsaketh the fear of
@c    the Lord.

@c    6:15. My brethren have passed by me, as the torrent that passeth
@c    swiftly in the valleys.

@c    6:16. They that fear the hoary frost, the snow shall fall upon them.

@c    6:17. At the time when they shall be scattered they shall perish:  and
@c    after it groweth hot, they shall be melted out of their place.

@c    6:18. The paths of their steps are entangled:  they shall walk in vain,
@c    and shall perish.

@c    6:19. Consider the paths of Thema, the ways of Saba, and wait a little
@c    while.

@c    6:20. They arc confounded, because I have hoped:  they are come also
@c    even unto me, and are covered with shame.

@c    6:21. Now you are come:  and now, seeing my affliction, you are afraid.

@c    6:22. Did I say:  Bring to me, and give me of your substance?

@c    6:23. Or deliver me from the hand of the enemy, and rescue me out of
@c    the hand of the mighty?

@c    6:24. Teach me, and I will hold my peace:  and if I have been ignorant
@c    of any thing, instruct me.

@c    6:25. Why have you detracted the words of truth, whereas there is none
@c    of you that can reprove me?

@c    6:26. You dress up speeches only to rebuke, and you utter words to the
@c    wind.

@c    6:27. You rush in upon the fatherless, and you endeavour to overthrow
@c    your friend.

@c    6:28. However, finish what you have begun:  give ear and see whether I
@c    lie.

@c    6:29. Answer, I beseech you, without contention:  and speaking that
@c    which is just, judge ye.

@c    6:30. And you shall not find iniquity in my tongue, neither shall folly
@c    sound in my mouth.



@c    Job Chapter 7


@c    7:1. The life of man upon earth is a warfare, and his days are like the
@c    days of a hireling.

@c    7:2. As a servant longeth for the shade, as the hireling looketh for
@c    the end of his work;

@c    7:3. So I also have had empty months, and have numbered to myself
@c    wearisome nights.

@c    7:4. If I lie down to sleep, I shall say:  When shall I rise?  and again,
@c    I shall look for the evening, and shall be filled with sorrows even
@c    till darkness.

@c    7:5. My flesh is clothed with rottenness and the filth of dust; my skin
@c    is withered and drawn together.

@c    7:6. My days have passed more swiftly than the web is cut by the
@c    weaver, and are consumed without any hope.

@c    7:7. Remember that my life is but wind, and my eye shall not return to
@c    see good things.

@c    7:8. Nor shall the sight of man behold me:  thy eyes are upon me, and I
@c    shall be no more.

@c    7:9. As a cloud is consumed, and passeth away:  so he that shall go down
@c    to hell shall not come up.

@c    7:10. Nor shall he return any more into his house, neither shall his
@c    place know him any more

@c    7:11. Wherefore, I will not spare my month, I will speak in the
@c    affliction of my spirit:  I will talk with the bitterness of my soul.

@c    7:12. Am I a sea, or a whale, that thou hast inclosed me in a prison?

@c    7:13. If I say:  My bed shall comfort me, and I shall be relieved,
@c    speaking with myself on my couch:

@c    7:14. Thou wilt frighten me with dreams, and terrify me with visions.

@c    7:15. So that my soul rather chooseth hanging, and my bones death.

@c    7:16. I have done with hope, I shall now live no longer:  spare me, for
@c    my days are nothing.

@c    7:17. What is a man, that thou shouldst magnify him or why dost thou
@c    set thy heart upon him?

@c    7:18. Thou visitest him early in the morning, and thou provest him
@c    suddenly.

@c    7:19. How long wilt thou not spare me, nor suffer me to swallow down my
@c    spittle?

@c    7:20. I have sinned:  what shall I do to thee, O keeper of men?  why hast
@c    thou set me opposite to thee.  and am I become burdensome to myself?

@c    7:21. Why dost thou not remove my sin, and why dost thou not take away
@c    my iniquity?  Behold now I shall sleep in the dust:  and if thou seek me
@c    in the morning, I shall not be.



@c    Job Chapter 8


@c    8:1. Then Baldad, the Suhite, answered, and said:

@c    8:2. How long wilt thou speak these things, and how long shall the
@c    words of thy mouth be like a strong wind?

@c    8:3. Doth God pervert judgment, or doth the Almighty overthrow that
@c    which is just?

@c    8:4. Although thy children have sinned against him, and he hath left
@c    them in the hand of their iniquity:

@c    8:5. Yet if thou wilt arise early to God, and wilt beseech the
@c    Almighty:

@c    8:6. If thou wilt walk clean and upright, he will presently awake unto
@c    thee, and will make the dwelling of thy justice peaceable:

@c    8:7. In so much, that if thy former things were small thy latter things
@c    would be multiplied exceedingly.

@c    8:8. For inquire of the former generation, and search diligently into
@c    the memory of the fathers:

@c    8:9. (For we are but of yesterday, and are ignorant that our days upon
@c    earth are but a shadow

@c    8:10. And they shall teach thee:  they shall speak to thee, and utter
@c    words out of their hearts.

@c    8:11. Can the rush be green without moisture?  or sedge bush grow
@c    without water?

@c    8:12. When it is yet in flower, and is not plucked u with the hand, it
@c    withereth before all herbs.

@c    8:13. Even so are the ways of all that forget God, an the hope of the
@c    hypocrite shall perish:

@c    8:14. His folly shall not please him, and his trust shall be like the
@c    spider's web.

@c    8:15. He shall lean upon his house, and it shall no stand:  he shall
@c    prop it up, and it shall not rise:

@c    8:16. He seemeth to have moisture before the sun cometh; and at his
@c    rising, his blossom shall shoot forth.

@c    8:17. His roots shall be thick upon a heap of stones; and among the
@c    stones he shall abide.

@c    8:18. If one swallow him up out of his place, he shall deny him, and
@c    shall say:  I know thee not.

@c    8:19. For this is the joy of his way, that others may spring again out
@c    of the earth.

@c    8:20. God will not cast away the simple, nor reach out his hand to the
@c    evil doer:

@c    8:21. Until thy mouth be filled with laughter, and thy lips with
@c    rejoicing.

@c    8:22. They that hate thee, shall be clothed with confusion:  and the
@c    dwelling of the wicked shall not stand.



@c    Job Chapter 9


@c    9:1. And Job answered, and said:

@c    9:2. Indeed I know it is so, and that man cannot be justified, compared
@c    with God.

@c    9:3. If he will contend with him, he cannot answer him one for a
@c    thousand.

@c    9:4. He is wise in heart, and mighty in strength:  who hath resisted
@c    him, and hath had peace?

@c    9:5. Who hath removed mountains, and they whom he overthrew in his
@c    wrath, knew it not.

@c    9:6. Who shaketh the earth out of her place, and the pillars thereof
@c    tremble.

@c    9:7. Who commandeth the sun, and it riseth not:  and shutteth up the
@c    stars, as it were, under a seal:

@c    9:8. Who alone spreadeth out the heavens, and walketh upon the waves of
@c    the sea

@c    9:9. Who maketh Arcturus, and Orion, and Hyades, and the inner parts of
@c    the south.

@c    Arcturus, etc. . .These are names of stars or constellations.  In Hebrew,
@c    Ash, Cesil, and Cimah.  See note chap. 38, ver. 31.

@c    9:10. Who doth things great and incomprehensible, and wonderful, of
@c    which there is no number.

@c    9:11. If he come to me, I shall not see him:  if he depart, I shall not
@c    understand.

@c    9:12. If he examine on a sudden, who shall answer him?  or who can say:
@c    Why dost thou so?

@c    9:13. God, whose wrath no man can resist, and under whom they stoop
@c    that bear up the world.

@c    9:14. What am I then, that I should answer him, and have words with
@c    him?

@c    9:15. I, who although I should have any just thing, would not answer,
@c    but would make supplication to my judge.

@c    9:16. And if he should hear me when I call, I should not believe that
@c    he had heard my voice.

@c    9:17. For he shall crush me in a whirlwind, and multiply my wounds even
@c    without cause.

@c    Without cause. . .That is, without my knowing the cause:  or without any
@c    crime of mine.

@c    9:18. He alloweth not my spirit to rest, and he filleth me with
@c    bitterness.

@c    9:19. If strength be demanded, he is most strong:  if equity of
@c    judgment, no man dare bear witness for me.

@c    9:20. If I would justify myself, my own mouth shall condemn me:  if I
@c    would shew myself innocent, he shall prove me wicked.

@c    9:21. Although I should be simple, even this my soul shall be ignorant
@c    of, and I shall be weary of my life.

@c    9:22. One thing there is that I have spoken, both the innocent and the
@c    wicked he consumeth.

@c    9:23. If he scourge, let him kill at once, and not laugh at the pains
@c    of the innocent.

@c    9:24. The earth is given into the hand of the wicked, he covereth the
@c    face of the judges thereof:  and if it be not he, who is it then?

@c    9:25. My days have been swifter than a post:  they have fled away and
@c    have not seen good.

@c    9:26. They have passed by as ships carrying fruits, as an eagle flying
@c    to the prey.

@c    9:27. If I say:  I will not speak so:  I change my face, and am tormented
@c    with sorrow.

@c    9:28. I feared all my works, knowing that thou didst not spare the
@c    offender.

@c    9:29. But if so also I am wicked, why have I laboured in vain?

@c    9:30. If I be washed, as it were, with snow waters, and my hands shall
@c    shine ever so clean:

@c    9:31. Yet thou shalt plunge me in filth, and my garments shall abhor
@c    me.

@c    9:32. For I shall not answer a man that is like myself:  nor one that
@c    may be heard with me equally in judgment.

@c    9:33. There is none that may be able to reprove both, and to put his
@c    hand between both.

@c    9:34. Let him take his rod away from me, and let not his fear terrify
@c    me.

@c    9:35. I will speak, and will not fear him:  for I cannot answer while I
@c    am in fear.



@c    Job Chapter 10


@c    10:1. My soul is weary of my life, I will let go my speech against
@c    myself, I will speak in the bitterness of my soul.

@c    10:2. I will say to God:  Do not condemn me:  tell me why thou judgest me
@c    so?

@c    10:3. Doth it seem good to thee that thou shouldst calumniate me, and
@c    oppress me, the work of thy own hands, and help the counsel of the
@c    wicked?

@c    10:4. Hast thou eyes of flesh:  or, shalt thou see as man seeth?

@c    10:5. Are thy days as the days of man, and are thy years as the times
@c    of men:

@c    10:6. That thou shouldst inquire after my iniquity, and search after my
@c    sin?

@c    10:7. And shouldst know that I have done no wicked thing, whereas there
@c    is no man that can deliver out of thy hand?

@c    10:8. Thy hands have made me, and fashioned me wholly round about, and
@c    dost thou thus cast me down headlong on a sudden?

@c    10:9. Remember, I beseech thee, that thou hast made me as the clay, and
@c    thou wilt bring me into dust

@c    10:10. Hast thou not milked me as milk, and curdled me like cheese?

@c    10:11. Thou hast clothed me with skin and flesh:  thou hast put me
@c    together with bones and sinews:

@c    10:12. Thou hast granted me life and mercy, and thy visitation hath
@c    preserved my spirit.

@c    10:13. Although thou conceal these things in thy heart, yet I know that
@c    thou rememberest all things.

@c    10:14. If I have sinned, and thou hast spared me for an hour:  why dost
@c    thou not suffer me to be clean from my iniquity?

@c    10:15. And if I be wicked, woe unto me:  and if just, I shall not lift
@c    up my head, being filled with affliction and misery.

@c    10:16. And for pride thou wilt take me as a lioness, and returning,
@c    thou tormentest me wonderfully.

@c    10:17. Thou renewest thy witnesses against me, and multipliest thy
@c    wrath upon me, and pains war against me.

@c    10:18. Why didst thou bring me forth out of the womb?  O that I had been
@c    consumed, that eye might not see me l

@c    10:19. I should have been as if I had not been, carried from the womb
@c    to the grave.

@c    10:20. Shall not the fewness of my days be ended shortly?  Suffer me,
@c    therefore, that I may lament my sorrow a little:

@c    10:21. Before I go and return no more, to a land that is dark and
@c    covered with the mist of death:

@c    10:22. A land of misery and darkness, where the shadow of death, and no
@c    order, but everlasting horror dwelleth.



@c    Job Chapter 11


@c    Sophar reproves Job, for justifying himself, and invites him to
@c    repentance.

@c    11:1. Then Sophar the Naamathite answered, and said:

@c    11:2. Shall not he that speaketh much, hear also?  or shall a man full
@c    of talk be justified?

@c    11:3. Shall men hold their peace to thee only?  and when thou hast
@c    mocked others, shall no man confute thee?

@c    11:4. For thou hast said:  My word is pure, and I am clean in thy sight.

@c    11:5. And I wish that God would speak with thee, and would open his
@c    lips to thee,

@c    11:6. That he might shew thee the secrets of wisdom, and that his law
@c    is manifold, and thou mightest understand that he exacteth much less of
@c    thee, than thy iniquity deserveth.

@c    11:7. Peradventure thou wilt comprehend the steps of God, and wilt find
@c    out the Almighty perfectly?

@c    11:8. He is higher than heaven, and what wilt thou do?  he is deeper
@c    than hell, and how wilt thou know?

@c    11:9. The measure of him is longer than the earth, and broader than the
@c    sea.

@c    11:10. If he shall overturn all things, or shall press them together,
@c    who shall contradict him?

@c    11:11. For he knoweth the vanity of men, and when he seeth iniquity,
@c    doth he not consider it?

@c    11:12. A vain man is lifted up into pride, and thinketh himself born
@c    free like a wild ass's colt.

@c    11:13. But thou hast hardened thy heart, and hast spread thy hands to
@c    him.

@c    11:14. If thou wilt put away from thee the iniquity that is in thy
@c    hand, and let not injustice remain in thy tabernacle:

@c    11:15. Then mayst thou lift up thy face without spot, and thou shalt be
@c    steadfast, and shalt not fear.

@c    11:16. Thou shalt also forget misery, and remember it only as waters
@c    that are passed away.

@c    11:17. And brightness like that of the noonday, shall arise to thee at
@c    evening:  and when thou shalt think thyself consumed, thou shalt rise as
@c    the day star.

@c    11:18. And thou shalt have confidence, hope being set before thee, and
@c    being buried thou shalt sleep secure.

@c    11:19. Thou shalt rest, and there shall be none to make thee afraid:
@c    and many shall entreat thy face.

@c    11:20. But the eyes of the wicked shall decay, and the way to escape
@c    shall fail them, and their hope the abomination of the soul.



@c    Job Chapter 12


@c    Job's reply to Sophar.  He extols God's power and wisdom.

@c    12:1. Then Job answered, and said:

@c    12:2. Are you then men alone, and shall wisdom die with you?

@c    12:3. I also have a heart as well as you:  for who is ignorant of these
@c    things, which you know?

@c    12:4. He that is mocked by his friends as I, shall call upon God and he
@c    will hear him:  for the simplicity of the just man is laughed to scorn.

@c    12:5. The lamp despised in the thoughts of the rich, is ready for the
@c    time appointed.

@c    12:6. The tabernacles of robbers abound, and they provoke God boldly;
@c    whereas it is he that hath given all into their hands:

@c    12:7. But ask now the beasts, and they shall teach thee:  and the birds
@c    of the air, and they shall tell thee.

@c    12:8. Speak to the earth, and it shall answer thee:  and the fishes of
@c    the sea shall tell.

@c    12:9. Who is ignorant that the hand of the Lord hath made all these
@c    things?

@c    12:10. In whose hand is the soul of every living thing, and the spirit
@c    of all flesh of man.

@c    12:11. Doth not the ear discern words, and the palate of him that
@c    eateth, the taste?

@c    12:12. In the ancient is wisdom, and in length of days prudence.

@c    12:13. With him is wisdom and strength, he hath counsel and
@c    understanding.

@c    12:14. If he pull down, there is no man that can build up:  if he shut
@c    up a man, there is none that can open.

@c    12:15. If he withhold the waters, all things shall be dried up:  and if
@c    he send them out, they shall overturn the earth.

@c    12:16. With him is strength and wisdom:  he knoweth both the deceivers,
@c    and him that is deceived.

@c    12:17. He bringeth counsellors to a foolish end, and judges to
@c    insensibility.

@c    12:18. He looseth the belt of kings, and girdeth their loins with a
@c    cord.

@c    12:19. He leadeth away priests without glory, and overthroweth nobles.

@c    12:20. He changeth the speech of the true speakers, and taketh away the
@c    doctrine of the aged.

@c    12:21. He poureth contempt upon princes, and relieveth them that were
@c    oppressed.

@c    12:22. He discovereth deep things out of darkness, and bringeth up to
@c    light the shadow of death.

@c    12:23. He multiplieth nations, and destroyeth them, and restoreth them
@c    again after they were overthrown.

@c    12:24. He changeth the heart of the princes of the people of the earth,
@c    and deceiveth them that they walk in vain where there is no way.

@c    12:25. They shall grope as in the dark, and not in the light, and he
@c    shall make them stagger like men that are drunk.



@c    Job Chapter 13


@c    Job persists in maintaining his innocence:  and reproves his friends.

@c    13:1. Behold my eye hath seen all these things, and my ear hath heard
@c    them, and I have understood them all.

@c    13:2. According to your knowledge I also know:  neither am I inferior to
@c    you.

@c    13:3. But yet I will speak to the Almighty, and I desire to reason with
@c    God.

@c    13:4. Having first shewn that you are forgers of lies, and maintainers
@c    of perverse opinions.

@c    13:5. And I wish you would hold your peace, that you might be thought
@c    to be wise men.

@c    13:6. Hear ye therefore my reproof, and attend to the judgment of my
@c    lips.

@c    13:7. Hath God any need of your lie, that you should speak deceitfully
@c    for him?

@c    13:8. Do you accept this person, and do you endeavour to judge for God?

@c    13:9. Or shall it please him, from whom nothing can be concealed?  or
@c    shall he be deceived as a man, with your deceitful dealings?

@c    13:10. He shall reprove you, because in secret you accept his person.

@c    13:11. As soon as he shall move himself, he shall trouble you:  and his
@c    dread shall fall upon you.

@c    13:12. Your remembrance shall be compared to ashes, and your necks
@c    shall be brought to clay.

@c    13:13. Hold your peace a little while, that I may speak whatsoever my
@c    mind shall suggest to me.

@c    13:14. Why do I tear my flesh with my teeth, and carry my soul in my
@c    hands?

@c    13:15. Although he should kill me, I will trust in him:  but yet I will
@c    reprove my ways in his sight.

@c    13:16. And he shall be my saviour:  for no hypocrite shall come before
@c    his presence.

@c    13:17. Hear ye my speech, and receive with your ears hidden truths.

@c    13:18. If I shall be judged, I know that I shall be found just.

@c    13:19. Who is he that will plead against me?  let him come:  why am I
@c    consumed holding my peace?

@c    13:20. Two things only do not to me, and then from thy face I shall not
@c    be hid:

@c    13:21. Withdraw thy hand far from me, and let not thy dread terrify me.

@c    13:22. Call me, and I will answer thee:  or else I will speak, and do
@c    thou answer me.

@c    13:23. How many are my iniquities and sins?  make me know my crimes and
@c    offenses.

@c    13:24. Why hidest thou thy face, and thinkest me thy enemy?

@c    13:25. Against a leaf, that is carried away with the wind, thou shewest
@c    thy power, and thou pursuest a dry straw.

@c    13:26. For thou writest bitter things against me, and wilt consume me
@c    for the sins of my youth.

@c    13:27. Thou hast put my feet in the stocks, and hast observed all my
@c    paths, and hast considered the steps of my feet:

@c    13:28. Who am to be consumed as rottenness, and as a garment that is
@c    motheaten.



@c    Job Chapter 14


@c    Job declares the shortness of man's days:  and professes his belief of a
@c    resurrection.

@c    14:1. Man born of a woman, living for a short time, is filled with many
@c    miseries.

@c    14:2. Who cometh forth like a flower, and is destroyed, and fleeth as a
@c    shadow, and never continueth in the same state.

@c    14:3. And dost thou think it meet to open thy eyes upon such an one,
@c    and to bring him into judgment with thee?

@c    14:4. Who can make him clean that is conceived of unclean seed?  is it
@c    not thou who only art?

@c    14:5. The days of man are short, and the number of his months is with
@c    thee:  thou hast appointed his bounds which cannot be passed.

@c    14:6. Depart a little from him, that he may rest until his wished for
@c    day come, as that of the hireling.

@c    14:7. A tree hath hope:  if it be cut, it growth green again, and the
@c    boughs thereof sprout.

@c    14:8. If its roots be old in the earth, and its stock be dead in the
@c    dust:

@c    14:9. At the scent of water, it shall spring, and bring forth leaves,
@c    as when it was first planted.

@c    14:10. But man when he shall be dead, and stripped and consumed, I pray
@c    you where is he?

@c    14:11. As if the waters should depart out of the sea, and an emptied
@c    river should be dried up;

@c    14:12. So man when he is fallen asleep shall not rise again; till the
@c    heavens be broken, he shall not awake, nor rise up out of his sleep.

@c    14:13. Who will grant me this, that thou mayst protect me in hell, and
@c    hide me till thy wrath pass, and appoint me a time when thou wilt
@c    remember me?

@c    That thou mayst protect me in hell. . .That is, in the state of the
@c    dead; and in the place where the souls are kept waiting for their
@c    Redeemer.

@c    14:14. Shall man that is dead, thinkest thou, live again?  all the days
@c    in which I am now in warfare, I expect until my change come.

@c    14:15. Thou shalt call me, and I will answer thee:  to the work of thy
@c    hands thou shalt reach out thy right hand.

@c    14:16. Thou indeed hast numbered my steps, but spare my sins.

@c    14:17. Thou hast sealed up my offences as it were in a bag, but hast
@c    cured my iniquity.

@c    14:18. A mountain falling cometh to nought, and a rock is removed out
@c    of its place.

@c    14:19. Waters wear away the stones, and with inundation the ground by
@c    little and little is washed away:  so in like manner thou shalt destroy
@c    man.

@c    14:20. Thou hast strengthened him for a little while, that he may pass
@c    away for ever:  thou shalt change his face, and shalt send him away.

@c    14:21. Whether his children come to honour or dishonour, he shall not
@c    understand.

@c    14:22. But yet his flesh, while he shall live, shall have pain, and his
@c    soul shall mourn over him.



@c    Job Chapter 15


@c    Eliphaz returns to the charge against Job, and describes the wretched
@c    state of the wicked.

@c    15:1. And Eliphaz the Themanite, answered, and said:

@c    15:2. Will a wise man answer as if he were speaking in the wind, and
@c    fill his stomach with burning heat?

@c    15:3. Thou reprovest him by words, who is not equal to thee, and thou
@c    speakest that which is not good for thee.

@c    15:4. As much as is in thee, thou hast made void fear, and hast taken
@c    away prayers from before God.

@c    Thou hast made void fear. . .That is, cast off the fear of offending
@c    God.

@c    15:5. For thy iniquity hath taught thy mouth, and thou imitatest the
@c    tongue of blasphemers.

@c    15:6. Thy own mouth shall condemn thee, and not I:  and thy own lips
@c    shall answer thee.

@c    15:7. Art thou the first man that was born, or wast thou made before
@c    the hills?

@c    15:8. Hast thou heard God's counsel, and shall his wisdom be inferior
@c    to thee?

@c    15:9. What knowest thou that we are ignorant of?  what dost thou
@c    understand that we know not?

@c    15:10. There are with us also aged and ancient men, much elder than thy
@c    fathers.

@c    15:11. Is it a great matter that God should comfort thee?  but thy
@c    wicked words hinder this.

@c    15:12. Why doth thy heart elevate thee, and why dost thou stare with
@c    thy eyes, as if they were thinking great things?

@c    15:13. Why doth thy spirit swell against God, to utter such words out
@c    of thy mouth?

@c    15:14. What is man that he should be without spot, and he that is born
@c    of a woman that he should appear just?

@c    15:15. Behold among his saints none is unchangeable, and the heavens
@c    are not pure in his sight.

@c    15:16. How much more is man abominable, and unprofitable, who drinketh
@c    iniquity like water?

@c    15:17. I will shew thee, hear me:  and I will tell thee what I have
@c    seen.

@c    15:18. Wise men confess and hide not their fathers.

@c    Wise men confess and hide not their fathers. . .That is, the knowledge
@c    and documents they have received from their fathers they are not
@c    ashamed to own.

@c    15:19. To whom alone the earth was given, and no stranger hath passed
@c    among them.

@c    15:20. The wicked man is proud all his days, and the number of the
@c    years of his tyranny is uncertain.

@c    15:21. The sound of dread is always in his ears:  and when there is
@c    peace, he always suspecteth treason.

@c    15:22. He believeth not that he may return from darkness to light,
@c    looking round about for the sword on every side.

@c    15:23. When he moveth himself to seek bread, he knoweth that the day of
@c    darkness is ready at his hand.

@c    15:24. Tribulation shall terrify him, and distress shall surround him,
@c    as a king that is prepared for the battle.

@c    15:25. For he hath stretched out his hand against God, and hath
@c    strengthened himself against the Almighty.

@c    15:26. He hath run against him with his neck raised up, and is armed
@c    with a fat neck.

@c    15:27. Fatness hath covered his face, and the fat hangeth down on his
@c    sides.

@c    15:28. He hath dwelt in desolate cities, and in desert houses that are
@c    reduced into heaps.

@c    15:29. He shall not be enriched, neither shall his substance continue,
@c    neither shall he push his root in the earth.

@c    15:30. He shall not depart out of darkness:  the flame shall dry up his
@c    branches, and he shall be taken away by the breath of his own mouth.

@c    15:31. He shall not believe, being vainly deceived by error, that he
@c    may be redeemed with any price.

@c    15:32. Before his days be full he shall perish:  and his hands shall
@c    wither away.

@c    15:33. He shall be blasted as a vine when its grapes are in the first
@c    flower, and as an olive tree that casteth its flower.

@c    15:34. For the congregation of the hypocrite is barren, and fire shall
@c    devour their tabernacles, who love to take bribes.

@c    15:35. He hath conceived sorrow, and hath brought forth iniquity, and
@c    his womb prepareth deceits.



@c    Job Chapter 16


@c    Job expostulates with his friends:  and appeals to the judgment of God.

@c    16:1. Then Job answered, and said:

@c    16:2. I have often heard such things as these:  you are all troublesome
@c    comforters.

@c    16:3. Shall windy words have no end?  or is it any trouble to thee to
@c    speak?

@c    16:4. I also could speak like you:  and would God your soul were for my
@c    soul.

@c    16:5. I would comfort you also with words, and would wag my head over
@c    you.

@c    16:6. I would strengthen you with my mouth, and would move my lips, as
@c    sparing you.

@c    16:7. But what shall I do?  If I speak, my pain will not rest:  and if I
@c    hold my peace, it will not depart from me.

@c    16:8. But now my sorrow hath oppressed me, and all my limbs are brought
@c    to nothing.

@c    16:9. My wrinkles bear witness against me, and a false speaker riseth
@c    up against my face, contradicting me.

@c    16:10. He hath gathered together his fury against me, and threatening
@c    me he hath gnashed with his teeth upon me:  my enemy hath beheld me with
@c    terrible eyes.

@c    16:11. They have opened their mouths upon me, and reproaching me they
@c    have struck me on the cheek, they are filled with my pains.

@c    16:12. God hath shut me up with the unjust man, and hath delivered me
@c    into the hands of the wicked.

@c    16:13. I that was formerly so wealthy, am all on a sudden broken to
@c    pieces:  he hath taken me by my neck, he hath broken me, and hath set me
@c    up to be his mark.

@c    16:14. He hath compassed me round about with his lances, he hath
@c    wounded my loins, he hath not spared, and hath poured out my bowels on
@c    the earth,

@c    16:15. He hath torn me with wound upon wound, he hath rushed in upon me
@c    like a giant.

@c    16:16. I have sowed sackcloth upon my skin, and have covered my flesh
@c    with ashes.

@c    16:17. My face is swollen with weeping, and my eyelids are dim.

@c    16:18. These things have I suffered without the iniquity of my hand,
@c    when I offered pure prayers to God.

@c    16:19. O earth, cover not thou my blood, neither let my cry find a
@c    hiding place in thee.

@c    16:20. For behold my witness is in heaven, and he that knoweth my
@c    conscience is on high.

@c    16:21. My friends are full of words:  my eye poureth out tears to God.

@c    16:22. And O that a man might so be judged with God, as the son of man
@c    is judged with his companion!

@c    16:23. For behold short years pass away, and I am walking in a path by
@c    which I shall not return.



@c    Job Chapter 17


@c    Job's hope in God:  he expects rest in death.

@c    17:1. My spirit shall be wasted, my days shall be shortened and only
@c    the grave remaineth for me.

@c    17:2. I have not sinned, and my eye abideth in bitterness.

@c    Not sinned. . .That is, I am not guilty of such sins as they charge me
@c    with.

@c    17:3. Deliver me, O Lord, and set me beside thee, and let any man's
@c    hand fight against me.

@c    17:4. Thou hast set their heart far from understanding, therefore they
@c    shall not be exalted.

@c    17:5. He promiseth a prey to his companions, and the eyes of his
@c    children shall fail.

@c    17:6. He hath made me as it were a byword of the people, and I am an
@c    example before them.

@c    17:7. My eye is dim through indignation, and my limbs are brought as it
@c    were to nothing.

@c    17:8. The just shall be astonished at this, and the innocent shall be
@c    raised up against the hypocrite.

@c    17:9. And the just man shall hold on his way, and he that hath clean
@c    hands shall be stronger and stronger.

@c    17:10. Wherefore be you all converted, and come, and I shall not find
@c    among you any wise man.

@c    17:11. My days have passed away, my thoughts are dissipated, tormenting
@c    my heart.

@c    17:12. They have turned night into day, and after darkness I hope for
@c    light again.

@c    17:13. If I wait hell is my house, and I have made my bed in darkness.

@c    Hell. . .Sheol.  The region of the dead.

@c    17:14. I have said to rottenness:  Thou art my father; to worms, my
@c    mother and my sister.

@c    17:15. Where is now then my expectation, and who considereth my
@c    patience?

@c    17:16. All that I have shall go down into the deepest pit:  thinkest
@c    thou that there at least I shall have rest?

@c    Deepest pit. . .Literally, hell.



@c    Job Chapter 18


@c    Baldad again reproves Job and describes the miseries of the wicked.

@c    18:1. Then Baldad the Suhite answered, and said:

@c    18:2. How long will you throw out words?  understand first, and so let
@c    us speak.

@c    18:3. Why are we reputed as beasts, and counted vile before you?

@c    18:4. Thou that destroyest thy soul in thy fury, shall the earth be
@c    forsaken for thee, and shall rocks be removed out of their place?

@c    18:5. Shall not the light of the wicked be extinguished, and the flame
@c    of his fire not shine?

@c    18:6. The light shall be dark in his tabernacle, and the lamp that is
@c    over him, shall be put out.

@c    18:7. The step of his strength shall be straitened, and his own counsel
@c    shall cast him down headlong.

@c    18:8. For he hath thrust his feet into a net, and walketh in its
@c    meshes.

@c    18:9. The sole of his foot shall be held in a snare, and thirst shall
@c    burn against him.

@c    18:10. A gin is hidden for him in the earth, and his trap upon the
@c    path.

@c    18:11. Fears shall terrify him on every side, and shall entangle his
@c    feet.

@c    18:12. Let his strength be wasted with famine, and let hunger invade
@c    his ribs.

@c    18:13. Let it devour the beauty of his skin, let the firstborn death
@c    consume his arms.

@c    18:14. Let his confidence be rooted out of his tabernacle, and let
@c    destruction tread upon him like a king.

@c    18:15. Let the companions of him that is not, dwell in his tabernacle,
@c    let brimstone be sprinkled in his tent.

@c    18:16. Let his roots be dried up beneath, and his harvest destroyed
@c    above.

@c    18:17. Let the memory of him perish from the earth, and let not his
@c    name be renowned in the streets.

@c    18:18. He shall drive him out of light into darkness, and shall remove
@c    him out of the world.

@c    18:19. His seed shall not subsist, nor his offspring among his people,
@c    nor any remnants in his country.

@c    18:20. They that come after him shall be astonished at his day, and
@c    horror shall fall upon them that went before.

@c    18:21. These then are the tabernacles of the wicked, and this the place
@c    of him that knoweth not God.



@c    Job Chapter 19


@c    Job complains of the cruelty of his friends; he describes his own
@c    sufferings:  and his belief of a future resurrection.

@c    19:1. Then Job answered, and said:

@c    19:2. How long do you afflict my soul, and break me in pieces with
@c    words?

@c    19:3. Behold, these ten times you confound me, and are not ashamed to
@c    oppress me.

@c    19:4. For if I have been ignorant, my ignorance shall be with me.

@c    19:5. But you set yourselves up against me, and reprove me with my
@c    reproaches.

@c    19:6. At least now understand, that God hath not afflicted me with an
@c    equal judgment, and compassed me with his scourges.

@c    With an equal judgment. . .St. Gregory explains these words thus:  Job
@c    being a just man, and truly considering his own life, thought that his
@c    affliction was greater than his sins deserved:  and in that respect,
@c    that the punishment was not equal, yet it was just, as coming from God,
@c    who gives a crown of justice to those who suffer for righteousness'
@c    sake, and proves the just with tribulations, as gold is tried by fire.

@c    19:7. Behold I shall cry suffering violence, and no one will hear:  I
@c    shall cry aloud, and there is none to judge.

@c    19:8. He hath hedged in my path round about, and I cannot pass, and in
@c    my way he hath set darkness.

@c    19:9. He hath stripped me of my glory, and hath taken the crown from my
@c    head.

@c    19:10. He hath destroyed me on every side, and I am lost, and he hath
@c    taken away my hope, as from a tree that is plucked up.

@c    19:11. His wrath is kindled against me, and he hath counted me as his
@c    enemy.

@c    19:12. His troops have come together, and have made themselves a way by
@c    me, and have besieged my tabernacle round about.

@c    19:13. He hath put my brethren far from me, and my acquaintance like
@c    strangers have departed from me.

@c    19:14. My kinsmen have forsaken me, and they that knew me, have
@c    forgotten me.

@c    19:15. They that dwell in my house, and my maidservants have counted me
@c    as a stranger, and I have been like an alien in their eyes.

@c    19:16. I called my servant, and he gave me no answer, I entreated him
@c    with my own mouth.

@c    19:17. My wife hath abhorred my breath, and I entreated the children of
@c    my womb.

@c    19:18. Even fools despised me, and when I was gone from them, they
@c    spoke against me.

@c    19:19. They that were sometime my counsellors, have abhorred me:  and he
@c    whom I loved most is turned against me.

@c    19:20. The flesh being consumed, my bone hath cleaved to my skin, and
@c    nothing but lips are left about my teeth.

@c    19:21. Have pity on me, have pity on me, at least you my friends,
@c    because the hand of the Lord hath touched me.

@c    19:22. Why do you persecute me as God, and glut yourselves with my
@c    flesh?

@c    19:23. Who will grant me that my words may be written?  who will grant
@c    me that they may be marked down in a book?

@c    19:24. With an iron pen and in a plate of lead, or else be graven with
@c    an instrument in flint stone?

@c    19:25. For I know that my Redeemer liveth, and in the last day I shall
@c    rise out of the earth.

@c    Ver. 25, 26, and 27 shew Job's explicit belief in his Redeemer, and
@c    also of the resurrection of the flesh, not as one tree riseth in place
@c    of another, but that the selfsame flesh shall rise at the last day, by
@c    the power of God, changed in quality but not in substance, every one to
@c    receive sentence according to his works in this life.

@c    19:26. And I shall be clothed again with my skin, and in my flesh I
@c    shall see my God.

@c    19:27. Whom I myself shall see, and my eyes shall behold, and not
@c    another:  this my hope is laid up in my bosom.

@c    19:28. Why then do you say now:  Let us persecute him, and let us find
@c    occasion of word against him?

@c    19:29. Flee then from the face of the sword, for the sword is the
@c    revenger of iniquities:  and know ye that there is a judgment.



@c    Job Chapter 20


@c    Sophar declares the shortness of the prosperity of the wicked:  and
@c    their sudden downfall.

@c    20:1. Then Sophar the Naamathite answered, and said:

@c    20:2. Therefore various thoughts succeed one another in me, and my mind
@c    is hurried away to different things.

@c    20:3. The doctrine with which thou reprovest me, I will hear, and the
@c    spirit of my understanding shall answer for me.

@c    20:4. This I know from the beginning, since man was placed upon the
@c    earth,

@c    20:5. That the praise of the wicked is short, and the joy of the
@c    hypocrite but for a moment.

@c    20:6. If his pride mount up even to heaven, and his head touch the
@c    clouds:

@c    20:7. In the end he shall be destroyed like a dunghill, and they that
@c    had seen him, shall say:  Where is he?

@c    20:8. As a dream that fleeth away he shall not be found, he shall pass
@c    as a vision of the night:

@c    20:9. The eyes that had seen him, shall see him no more, neither shall
@c    his place any more behold him.

@c    20:10. His children shall be oppressed with want, and his hands shall
@c    render to him his sorrow.

@c    20:11. His bones shall be filled with the vices of his youth, and they
@c    shall sleep with him in the dust.

@c    20:12. For when evil shall be sweet in his mouth, he will hide it under
@c    his tongue.

@c    20:13. He will spare it, and not leave it, and will hide it in his
@c    throat.

@c    20:14. His bread in his belly shall be turned into the gall of asps
@c    within him,

@c    20:15. The riches which he hath swallowed, he shall vomit up, and God
@c    shall draw them out of his belly.

@c    20:16. He shall suck the head of asps, and the viper's tongue shall
@c    kill him.

@c    20:17. Let him not see the streams of the river, the brooks of honey
@c    and of butter.

@c    20:18. He shall be punished for all that he did, and yet shall not be
@c    consumed:  according to the multitude of his devices so also shall he
@c    suffer.

@c    According to the multitude of his devices. . .That is, his stratagems to
@c    gratify his passions and to oppress and destroy the poor.

@c    20:19. Because he broke in and stripped the poor:  he hath violently
@c    taken away a house which he did not build.

@c    20:20. And yet his belly was not filled:  and when he hath the things he
@c    coveted, he shall not be able to possess them.

@c    20:21. There was nothing left of his meat, and therefore nothing shall
@c    continue of his goods:

@c    20:22. When he shall be filled, he shall be straitened, he shall burn,
@c    and every sorrow shall fall upon him.

@c    20:23. May his belly be filled, that God may send forth the wrath of
@c    his indignation upon him, and rain down his war upon him.

@c    20:24. He shall flee from weapons of iron, and shall fall upon a bow of
@c    brass.

@c    20:25. The sword is drawn out, and cometh forth from its scabbard, and
@c    glittereth in his bitterness:  the terrible ones shall go and come upon
@c    him.

@c    20:26. All darkness is hid in his secret places:  a fire that is not
@c    kindled shall devour him, he shall be afflicted when left in his
@c    tabernacle.

@c    20:27. The heavens shall reveal his iniquity, and the earth shall rise
@c    up against him.

@c    20:28. The offspring of his house shall be exposed, he shall be pulled
@c    down in the day of God's wrath.

@c    20:29. This is the portion of a wicked man from God, and the
@c    inheritance of his doings from the Lord.



@c    Job Chapter 21


@c    Job shews that the wicked often prosper in this world, even to the end
@c    of their life:  but that their judgment is in another world.

@c    21:1. Then Job answered, and said:

@c    21:2. Hear, I beseech you, my words, and do penance.

@c    21:3. Suffer me, and I will speak, and after, if you please, laugh at
@c    my words.

@c    21:4. Is my debate against man, that I should not have just reason to
@c    be troubled?

@c    21:5. Hearken to me and be astonished, and lay your finger on your
@c    mouth.

@c    21:6. As for me, when I remember, I am afraid, and trembling taketh
@c    hold on my flesh.

@c    21:7. Why then do the wicked live, are they advanced, and strengthened
@c    with riches?

@c    21:8. Their seed continueth before them, a multitude of kinsmen, and of
@c    children's children in their sight.

@c    21:9. Their houses are secure and peaceable, and the rod of God is not
@c    upon them.

@c    21:10. Their cattle have conceived, and failed not:  their cow has
@c    calved, and is not deprived of her fruit.

@c    21:11. Their little ones go out like a flock, and their children dance
@c    and play.

@c    21:12. They take the timbrel, and the harp, and rejoice at the sound of
@c    the organ.

@c    21:13. They spend their days in wealth, and in a moment they go down to
@c    hell.

@c    21:14. Who have said to God:  Depart from us, we desire not the
@c    knowledge of thy ways.

@c    21:15. Who is the Almighty, that we should serve him?  and what doth it
@c    profit us if we pray to him?

@c    21:16. Yet because their good things are not in their hand, may the
@c    counsel of the wicked be far from me.

@c    21:17. How often shall the lamp of the wicked be put out, and a deluge
@c    come upon them, and he shall distribute the sorrows of his wrath?

@c    21:18. They shall be as chaff before the face of the wind, and as ashes
@c    which the whirlwind scattereth.

@c    21:19. God shall lay up the sorrow of the father for his children:  and
@c    when he shall repay, then shall he know.

@c    21:20. His eyes shall see his own destruction, and he shall drink of
@c    the wrath of the Almighty.

@c    21:21. For what is it to him what befalleth his house after him:  and if
@c    the number of his months be diminished by one half?

@c    21:22. Shall any one teach God knowledge, who judgeth those that are
@c    high?

@c    21:23. One man dieth strong, and hale, rich and happy.

@c    21:24. His bowels are full of fat, and his bones are moistened with
@c    marrow.

@c    21:25. But another dieth in bitterness of soul without any riches:

@c    21:26. And yet they shall sleep together in the dust, and worms shall
@c    cover them.

@c    21:27. Surely I know your thoughts, and your unjust judgments against
@c    me.

@c    21:28. For you say:  Where is the house of the prince?  and where are the
@c    dwelling places of the wicked?

@c    21:29. Ask any one of them that go by the way, and you shall perceive
@c    that he knoweth these same things.

@c    21:30. Because the wicked man is reserved to the day of destruction,
@c    and he shall be brought to the day of wrath.

@c    21:31. Who shall reprove his way to his face?  and who shall repay him
@c    what he hath done?

@c    21:32. He shall be brought to the graves, and shall watch in the heap
@c    of the dead.

@c    21:33. He hath been acceptable to the gravel of Cocytus, and he shall
@c    draw every man after him, and there are innumerable before him.

@c    Acceptable to the gravel of Cocytus. . .The Hebrew word, which St.
@c    Jerome has here rendered by the name Cocytus, (which the poets
@c    represent as a river in hell,) signifies a valley or a torrent:  and in
@c    this place, is taken for the low region of death and hell:  which
@c    willingly, as it were, receives the wicked at their death:  who are
@c    ushered in by innumerable others that have gone before them; and are
@c    followed by multitudes above number.

@c    21:34. How then do ye comfort me in vain, whereas your answer is shewn
@c    to be repugnant to truth?



@c    Job Chapter 22


@c    Eliphaz falsely imputes many crimes to Job, but promises him prosperity
@c    if he will repent.

@c    22:1. Then Eliphaz the Themanite answered, and said:

@c    22:2. Can man be compared with God, even though he were of perfect
@c    knowledge?

@c    22:3. What doth it profit God if thou be just?  or what dost thou give
@c    him if thy way be unspotted?

@c    22:4. Shall he reprove thee for fear, and come with thee into judgment:

@c    22:5. And not for thy manifold wickedness and thy infinite iniquities?

@c    22:6. For thou hast taken away the pledge of thy brethren without
@c    cause, and stripped the naked of their clothing.

@c    22:7. Thou hast not given water to the weary, thou hast withdrawn bread
@c    from the hungry.

@c    22:8. In the strength of thy arm thou didst possess the land, and being
@c    the most mighty thou holdest it.

@c    22:9. Thou hast sent widows away empty, and the arms of the fatherless
@c    thou hast broken in pieces.

@c    22:10. Therefore art thou surrounded with shares, and sudden fear
@c    troubleth thee.

@c    22:11. And didst thou think that thou shouldst not see darkness, and
@c    that thou shouldst not be covered with the violence of overflowing
@c    waters?

@c    22:12. Dost not thou think that God is higher than heaven, and is
@c    elevated above the height of the stars?

@c    22:13. And thou sayst:  What doth God know?  and he judgeth as it were
@c    through a mist.

@c    22:14. The clouds are his covert, and he doth not consider our things,
@c    and he walketh about the poles of heaven.

@c    22:15. Dost thou desire to keep the path of ages, which wicked men have
@c    trodden?

@c    22:16. Who were taken away before their time, and a flood hath
@c    overthrown their foundation.

@c    22:17. Who said to God:  Depart from us:  and looked upon the Almighty as
@c    if he could do nothing:

@c    22:18. Whereas he had filled their houses with good things:  whose way
@c    of thinking be far from me.

@c    22:19. The just shall see, and shall rejoice, and the innocent shall
@c    laugh them to scorn.

@c    22:20. Is not their exaltation cut down, and hath not fire devoured the
@c    remnants of them?

@c    22:21. Submit thyself then to him, and be at peace:  and thereby thou
@c    shalt have the best fruits.

@c    22:22. Receive the law of his mouth, and lay up his words in thy heart.

@c    22:23. If thou wilt return to the Almighty, thou shalt be built up, and
@c    shalt put away iniquity far from thy tabernacle.

@c    22:24. He shall give for earth flint, and for flint torrents of gold.

@c    22:25. And the Almighty shall be against thy enemies, and silver shall
@c    be heaped together for thee.

@c    22:26. Then shalt thou abound in delights in the Almighty, and shalt
@c    lift up thy face to God.

@c    22:27. Thou shalt pray to him, and he will hear thee, and thou shalt
@c    pay vows.

@c    22:28. Thou shalt decree a thing, and it shall come to thee, and light
@c    shall shine in thy ways.

@c    22:29. For he that hath been humbled, shall be in glory:  and he that
@c    shall bow down his eyes, he shall be saved.

@c    22:30. The innocent shall be saved, and he shall be saved by the
@c    cleanness of his hands.



@c    Job Chapter 23


@c    Job wishes to be tried at God's tribunal.

@c    23:1. Then Job answered, and said:

@c    23:2. Now also my words are in bitterness, and the hand of my scourge
@c    is more grievous than my mourning.

@c    23:3. Who will grant me that I might know and find him, and come even
@c    to his throne?

@c    23:4. I would set judgment before him, and would fill my mouth with
@c    complaints.

@c    23:5. That I might know the words that he would answer me, and
@c    understand what he would say to me.

@c    23:6. I would not that he should contend with me with much strength,
@c    nor overwhelm me with the weight of his greatness.

@c    23:7. Let him propose equity against me, and let my judgment come to
@c    victory.

@c    23:8. But if I go to the east, he appeareth not; if to the west, I
@c    shall not understand him.

@c    23:9. If to the left hand, what shall I do?  I shall not take hold on
@c    him:  if I turn myself to the right hand, I shall not see him.

@c    23:10. But he knoweth my way, and has tried me as gold that passeth
@c    through the fire:

@c    23:11. My foot hath followed his steps, I have kept his way, and have
@c    not declined from it.

@c    23:12. I have not departed from the commandments of his lips, and the
@c    words of his mouth I have hid in my bosom.

@c    23:13. For he is alone, and no man can turn away his thought:  and
@c    whatsoever his soul hath desired, that hath he done.

@c    23:14. And when he shall have fulfilled his will in me, many other like
@c    things are also at hand with him.

@c    23:15. And therefore I am troubled at his presence, and when I consider
@c    him I am made pensive with fear.

@c    23:16. God hath softened my heart, and the Almighty hath troubled me.

@c    23:17. For I have not perished because of the darkness that hangs over
@c    me, neither hath the mist covered my face.



@c    Job Chapter 24


@c    God's providence often suffers the wicked to go on a long time in their
@c    sins:  but punisheth them in another life.

@c    24:1. Times are not hid from the Almighty:  but they that know him, know
@c    not his days.

@c    24:2. Some have removed landmarks, have taken away flocks by force, and
@c    fed them.

@c    24:3. They have driven away the ass of the fatherless, and have taken
@c    away the widow's ox for a pledge.

@c    24:4. They have overturned the way of the poor, and have oppressed
@c    together the meek of the earth.

@c    24:5. Others like wild asses in the desert go forth to their work:  by
@c    watching for a prey they get bread for their children.

@c    24:6. They reap the field that is not their own, and gather the vintage
@c    of his vineyard whom by violence they have oppressed.

@c    24:7. They send men away naked, taking away their clothes who have no
@c    covering in the cold:

@c    24:8. Who are wet, with the showers of the mountains, and having no
@c    covering embrace the stones.

@c    24:9. They have violently robbed the fatherless, and stripped the poor
@c    common people.

@c    24:10. From the naked and them that go without clothing, and from the
@c    hungry they have taken away the ears of corn.

@c    24:11. They have taken their rest at noon among the stores of them, who
@c    after having trodden the winepresses suffer thirst.

@c    24:12. Out of the cities they have made men to groan, and the soul of
@c    the wounded hath cried out, and God doth not suffer it to pass
@c    unrevenged.

@c    24:13. They have been rebellious to the light, they have not known his
@c    ways, neither have they returned by his paths.

@c    24:14. The murderer riseth at the very break of day, he killeth the
@c    needy, and the poor man:  but in the night he will be as a thief.

@c    24:15. The eye of the adulterer observeth darkness, saying:  No eye
@c    shall see me:  and he will cover his face.

@c    24:16. He diggeth through houses in the dark, as in the day they had
@c    appointed for themselves, and they have not known the light.

@c    24:17. If the morning suddenly appear, it is to them the shadow of
@c    death:  and they walk in darkness as if it were in light.

@c    24:18. He is light upon the face of the water:  cursed be his portion on
@c    the earth, let him not walk by the way of the vineyards.

@c    24:19. Let him pass from the snow waters to excessive heat, and his sin
@c    even to hell.

@c    24:20. Let mercy forget him:  may worms be his sweetness:  let him be
@c    remembered no more, but be broken in pieces as an unfruitful tree.

@c    24:21. For he hath fed the barren that beareth not, and to the widow he
@c    hath done no good.

@c    24:22. He hath pulled down the strong by his might:  and when he
@c    standeth up, he shall not trust to his life.

@c    24:23. God hath given him place for penance, and he abuseth it unto
@c    pride:  but his eyes are upon his ways.

@c    24:24. They are lifted up for a little while and shall not stand, and
@c    shall be brought down as all things, and shall be taken away, and as
@c    the tops of the ears of corn they shall be broken.

@c    24:25. And if it be not so, who can convince me that I have lied, and
@c    set my words before God?



@c    Job Chapter 25


@c    God's providence often suffers the wicked to go on a long time in their
@c    sins:  but punisheth them in another life.

@c    25:1. Times are not hid from the Almighty:  but they that know him, know
@c    not his days.

@c    25:2. Some have removed landmarks, have taken away flocks by force, and
@c    fed them.

@c    25:3. They have driven away the ass of the fatherless, and have taken
@c    away the widow's ox for a pledge.

@c    25:4. They have overturned the way of the poor, and have oppressed
@c    together the meek of the earth.

@c    25:5. Others like wild asses in the desert go forth to their work:  by
@c    watching for a prey they get bread for their children.

@c    25:6. They reap the field that is not their own, and gather the vintage
@c    of his vineyard whom by violence they have oppressed.

@c    25:7. They send men away naked, taking away their clothes who have no
@c    covering in the cold:

@c    25:8. Who are wet, with the showers of the mountains, and having no
@c    covering embrace the stones.

@c    25:9. They have violently robbed the fatherless, and stripped the poor
@c    common people.

@c    25:10. From the naked and them that go without clothing, and from the
@c    hungry they have taken away the ears of corn.

@c    25:11. They have taken their rest at noon among the stores of them, who
@c    after having trodden the winepresses suffer thirst.

@c    25:12. Out of the cities they have made men to groan, and the soul of
@c    the wounded hath cried out, and God doth not suffer it to pass
@c    unrevenged.

@c    25:13. They have been rebellious to the light, they have not known his
@c    ways, neither have they returned by his paths.

@c    25:14. The murderer riseth at the very break of day, he killeth the
@c    needy, and the poor man:  but in the night he will be as a thief.

@c    25:15. The eye of the adulterer observeth darkness, saying:  No eye
@c    shall see me:  and he will cover his face.

@c    25:16. He diggeth through houses in the dark, as in the day they had
@c    appointed for themselves, and they have not known the light.

@c    25:17. If the morning suddenly appear, it is to them the shadow of
@c    death:  and they walk in darkness as if it were in light.

@c    25:18. He is light upon the face of the water:  cursed be his portion on
@c    the earth, let him not walk by the way of the vineyards.

@c    25:19. Let him pass from the snow waters to excessive heat, and his sin
@c    even to hell.

@c    25:20. Let mercy forget him:  may worms be his sweetness:  let him be
@c    remembered no more, but be broken in pieces as an unfruitful tree.

@c    25:21. For he hath fed the barren that beareth not, and to the widow he
@c    hath done no good.

@c    25:22. He hath pulled down the strong by his might:  and when he
@c    standeth up, he shall not trust to his life.

@c    25:23. God hath given him place for penance, and he abuseth it unto
@c    pride:  but his eyes are upon his ways.

@c    25:24. They are lifted up for a little while and shall not stand, and
@c    shall be brought down as all things, and shall be taken away, and as
@c    the tops of the ears of corn they shall be broken.

@c    25:25. And if it be not so, who can convince me that I have lied, and
@c    set my words before God?



@c    Job Chapter 26


@c    Job declares his sentiments of the wisdom and power of God.

@c    26:1. Then Job answered, and said:

@c    26:2. Whose helper art thou?  is it of him that is weak?  and dost thou
@c    hold up the arm of him that has no strength?

@c    26:3. To whom hast thou given counsel?  perhaps to him that hath no
@c    wisdom, and thou hast shewn thy very great prudence.

@c    26:4. Whom hast thou desired to teach?  was it not him that made life?

@c    26:5. Behold the giants groan under the waters, and they that dwell
@c    with them.

@c    26:6. Hell is naked before him, and there is no covering for
@c    destruction.

@c    26:7. He stretched out the north over the empty space, and hangeth the
@c    earth upon nothing.

@c    26:8. He bindeth up the waters in his clouds, so that they break not
@c    out and fall down together.

@c    26:9. He withholdeth the face of his throne, and spreadeth his cloud
@c    over it.

@c    26:10. He hath set bounds about the waters, till light and darkness
@c    come to an end.

@c    26:11. The pillars of heaven tremble, and dread at his beck.

@c    26:12. By his power the seas are suddenly gathered together, and his
@c    wisdom has struck the proud one.

@c    26:13. His spirit hath adorned the heavens, and his obstetric hand
@c    brought forth the winding serpent.

@c    His obstetric hand brought forth the winding serpent. . .That is, the
@c    omnipotent power of God:  which brought forth all things created in
@c    time, but conceived in the Divine mind from all eternity.  The winding
@c    serpent, a constellation of fixed stars winding round the north pole,
@c    called Draco.  This appears from the foregoing part of the same verse,
@c    His spirit hath adorned the heavens.

@c    26:14. Lo, these things are said in part of his ways:  and seeing we
@c    have heard scarce a little drop of his word, who shall be able to
@c    behold the thunder of his greatness?



@c    Job Chapter 27


@c    Job persists in asserting his own innocence, and that hypocrites will
@c    be punished in the end.

@c    27:1. Job also added, taking up his parable, and said:

@c    27:2. As God liveth, who hath taken away my judgment, and the Almighty,
@c    who hath brought my soul to bitterness,

@c    27:3. As long as breath remaineth in me, and the spirit of God in my
@c    nostrils,

@c    27:4. My lips shall not speak iniquity, neither shall my tongue
@c    contrive lying.

@c    27:5. God forbid that I should judge you to be just:  till I die I will
@c    not depart from my innocence.

@c    27:6. My justification, which I have begun to hold, I will not forsake:
@c    for my heart doth not reprehend me in all my life.

@c    27:7. Let my enemy be as the ungodly, and my adversary as the wicked
@c    one.

@c    27:8. For what is the hope of the hypocrite if through covetousness he
@c    take by violence, and God deliver not his soul?

@c    27:9. Will God hear his cry, when distress shall come upon him?

@c    27:10. Or can he delight himself in the Almighty, and call upon God at
@c    all times?

@c    27:11. I will teach you by the hand of God, what the Almighty hath, and
@c    I will not conceal it.

@c    27:12. Behold you all know it, and why do you speak vain things without
@c    cause?

@c    27:13. This is the portion of a wicked man with God, and the
@c    inheritance of the violent, which they shall receive of the Almighty.

@c    27:14. If his sons be multiplied, they shall be for the sword, and his
@c    grandsons shall not be filled with bread.

@c    27:15. They that shall remain of him, shall be buried in death, and his
@c    widows shall not weep.

@c    27:16. If he shall heap together silver as earth, and prepare raiment
@c    as clay,

@c    27:17. He shall prepare indeed, but the just man shall be clothed with
@c    it:  and the innocent shall divide the silver.

@c    27:18. He hath built his house as a moth, and as a keeper he hath made
@c    a booth.

@c    27:19. The rich man when he shall sleep shall take away nothing with
@c    him:  he shall open his eyes and find nothing.

@c    27:20. Poverty like water shall take hold on him, a tempest shall
@c    oppress him in the night:

@c    27:21. A burning wind shall take him up, and carry him away, and as a
@c    whirlwind shall snatch him from his place.

@c    27:22. And he shall cast upon him, and shall not spare:  out of his hand
@c    he would willingly flee.

@c    27:23. He shall clasp his hands upon him, and shall hiss at him,
@c    beholding his place.



@c    Job Chapter 28


@c    Man's industry searcheth out many things:  true wisdom is taught by God
@c    alone.

@c    28:1. Silver hath beginnings of its veins, and gold hath a place
@c    wherein it is melted.

@c    28:2. Iron is taken out of the earth, and stone melted with heat is
@c    turned into brass.

@c    28:3. He hath set a time for darkness, and the end of all things he
@c    considereth, the stone also that is in the dark and the shadow of
@c    death.

@c    28:4. The flood divideth from the people that are on their journey,
@c    those whom the food of the needy man hath forgotten, and who cannot be
@c    come at.

@c    28:5. The land, out of which bread grew in its place, hath been
@c    overturned with fire.

@c    28:6. The stones of it are the place of sapphires, and the clods of it
@c    are gold.

@c    28:7. The bird hath not known the path, neither hath the eye of the
@c    vulture beheld it.

@c    28:8. The children of the merchants have not trodden it, neither hath
@c    the lioness passed by it.

@c    28:9. He hath stretched forth his hand to the flint, he hath overturned
@c    mountains from the roots.

@c    28:10. In the rocks he hath cut out rivers, and his eye hath seen every
@c    precious thing.

@c    28:11. The depths also of rivers he hath searched, and hidden things he
@c    hath brought forth to light.

@c    28:12. But where is wisdom to be found, and where is the place of
@c    understanding?

@c    28:13. Man knoweth not the price thereof, neither is it found in the
@c    land of them that live in delights.

@c    28:14. The depth saith:  It is not in me:  and the sea saith:  It is not
@c    with me.

@c    28:15. The finest gold shall not purchase it, neither shall silver be
@c    weighed in exchange for it.

@c    28:16. It shall not be compared with the dyed colours of India, or with
@c    the most precious stone sardonyx, or the sapphire.

@c    28:17. Gold or crystal cannot equal it, neither shall any vessels of
@c    gold be changed for it.

@c    28:18. High and eminent things shall not be mentioned in comparison of
@c    it:  but wisdom is drawn out of secret places.

@c    28:19. The topaz of Ethiopia shall not be equal to it, neither shall it
@c    be compared to the cleanest dyeing.

@c    28:20. Whence then cometh wisdom?  and where is the place of
@c    understanding?

@c    28:21. It is hid from the eyes of all living, and the fowls of the air
@c    know it not.

@c    28:22. Destruction and death have said:  With our ears we have heard the
@c    fame thereof.

@c    28:23. God understandeth the way of it, and he knoweth the place
@c    thereof.

@c    28:24. For he beholdeth the ends of the world:  and looketh on all
@c    things that are under heaven.

@c    28:25. Who made a weight for the winds, and weighed the waters by
@c    measure.

@c    28:26. When he gave a law for the rain, and a way for the sounding
@c    storms.

@c    28:27. Then he saw it, and declared, and prepared, and searched it.

@c    28:28. And he said to man:  Behold the fear of the Lord, that is wisdom:
@c    and to depart from evil, is understanding.



@c    Job Chapter 29


@c    Job relates his former happiness, and the respect that all men shewed
@c    him.

@c    29:1. Job also added, taking up his parable, and said:

@c    29:2. Who will grant me, that I might be according to the months past,
@c    according to the days in which God kept me?

@c    29:3. When his lamp shined over my head, and I walked by his light in
@c    darkness?

@c    29:4. As I was in the days of my youth, when God was secretly in my
@c    tabernacle?

@c    29:5. When the Almighty was with me:  and my servants round about me?

@c    29:6. When I washed my feet with butter, and the rock poured me out
@c    rivers of oil?

@c    29:7. When I went out to the gate of the city, and in the street they
@c    prepared me a chair?

@c    29:8. The young men saw me, and hid themselves:  and the old men rose up
@c    and stood.

@c    29:9. The princes ceased to speak, and laid the finger on their mouth.

@c    29:10. The rulers held their peace, and their tongue cleaved to their
@c    throat.

@c    29:11. The ear that heard me blessed me, and the eye that saw me gave
@c    witness to me:

@c    29:12. Because I had delivered the poor man that cried out; and the
@c    fatherless, that had no helper.

@c    29:13. The blessing of him that was ready to perish came upon me, and I
@c    comforted the heart of the widow.

@c    29:14. I was clad with justice:  and I clothed myself with my judgment,
@c    as with a robe and a diadem.

@c    29:15. I was an eye to the blind, and a foot to the lame.

@c    29:16. I was the father of the poor:  and the cause which I knew not, I
@c    searched out most diligently.

@c    29:17. I broke the jaws of the wicked man, and out of his teeth I took
@c    away the prey.

@c    29:18. And I said:  I shall die in my nest, and as a palm tree shall
@c    multiply my days.

@c    29:19. My root is opened beside the waters, and dew shall continue in
@c    my harvest.

@c    29:20. My glory shall always be renewed, and my bow in my hand shall be
@c    repaired.

@c    29:21. They that heard me, waited for my sentence, and being attentive
@c    held their peace at my counsel.

@c    29:22. To my words they durst add nothing, and my speech dropped upon
@c    them.

@c    29:23. They waited for me as for rain, and they opened their mouth as
@c    for a latter shower.

@c    29:24. If at any time I laughed on them, they believed not, and the
@c    light of my countenance fell not on earth.

@c    29:25. If I had a mind to go to them, I sat first, and when I sat as a
@c    king, with his army standing about him, yet I was a comforter of them
@c    that mourned.



@c    Job Chapter 30


@c    Job shews the wonderful change of his temporal estate, from welfare to
@c    great calamity.

@c    30:1. But now the younger in time scorn me, whose fathers I would not
@c    have set with the dogs of my flock:

@c    But now the younger in time. . .That is, younger than I am, and as it
@c    were obscure, when I was conspicuous and in magnificence; they now look
@c    down on me.

@c    30:2. The strength of whose hands was to me as nothing, and they were
@c    thought unworthy of life itself.

@c    30:3. Barren with want and hunger, who gnawed in the wilderness,
@c    disfigured with calamity and misery.

@c    30:4. And they ate grass, and barks of trees, and the root of junipers
@c    was their food.

@c    30:5. Who snatched up these things out of the valleys, and when they
@c    had found any of them, they ran to them with a cry.

@c    30:6. They dwelt in the desert places of torrents, and in caves of
@c    earth, or upon the gravel.

@c    30:7. They pleased themselves among these kind of things, and counted
@c    it delightful to be under the briers.

@c    30:8. The children of foolish and base men, and not appearing at all
@c    upon the earth.

@c    30:9. Now I am turned into their song, and am become their byword.

@c    30:10. They abhor me, and flee far from me, and are not afraid to spit
@c    in my face.

@c    30:11. For he hath opened his quiver, and hath afflicted me, and hath
@c    put a bridle into my mouth.

@c    30:12. At the right hand of my rising, my calamities forthwith arose:
@c    they have overthrown my feet, and have overwhelmed me with their paths
@c    as with waves.

@c    30:13. They have destroyed my ways, they have lain in wait against me,
@c    and they have prevailed, and there was none to help.

@c    30:14. They have rushed in upon me, as when a wall is broken, and a
@c    gate opened, and have rolled themselves down to my miseries.

@c    30:15. I am brought to nothing:  as a wind thou hast taken away my
@c    desire:  and my prosperity hath passed away like a cloud.

@c    30:16. And now my soul fadeth within myself, and the days of affliction
@c    possess me.

@c    30:17. In the night my bone is pierced with sorrows:  and they that feed
@c    upon me, do not sleep.

@c    30:18. With the multitude of them my garment is consumed, and they have
@c    girded me about, as with the collar of my coat.

@c    30:19. I am compared to dirt, and am likened to embers and ashes.

@c    30:20. I cry to thee, and thou hearest me not:  I stand up, and thou
@c    dost not regard me.

@c    30:21. Thou art changed to be cruel toward me, and in the hardness of
@c    thy hand thou art against me.

@c    30:22. Thou hast lifted me up, and set me as it were upon the wind, and
@c    thou hast mightily dashed me.

@c    30:23. I know that thou wilt deliver me to death, where a house is
@c    appointed for every one that liveth.

@c    30:24. But yet thou stretchest not forth thy hand to their consumption:
@c    and if they shall fall down thou wilt save.

@c    30:25. I wept heretofore for him that was afflicted, and my soul had
@c    compassion on the poor.

@c    30:26. I expected good things, and evils are come upon me:  I waited for
@c    light, and darkness broke out.

@c    30:27. My inner parts have boiled without any rest, the days of
@c    affliction have prevented me.

@c    30:28. I went mourning without indignation; I rose up, and cried in the
@c    crowd.

@c    30:29. I was the brother of dragons, and companion of ostriches.

@c    Brother of dragons, etc. . .Imitating these creatures in their
@c    lamentable noise.

@c    30:30. My skin is become black upon me, and my bones are dried up with
@c    heat.

@c    30:31. My harp is turned to mourning, and my organ into the voice of
@c    those that weep.



@c    Job Chapter 31


@c    Job, to defend himself from the unjust judgments of his friends, gives
@c    a sincere account of his own virtues.

@c    31:1. I made a covenant with my eyes, that I would not so much as think
@c    upon a virgin.

@c    31:2. For what part should God from above have in me, and what
@c    inheritance the Almighty from on high?

@c    31:3. Is not destruction to the wicked, and aversion to them that work
@c    iniquity?

@c    31:4. Doth not he consider my ways, and number all my steps?

@c    31:5. If I have walked in vanity, and my foot hath made haste to
@c    deceit:

@c    31:6. Let him weigh me in a just balance, and let God know my
@c    simplicity.

@c    31:7. If my step hath turned out of the way, and if my heart hath
@c    followed my eyes, and if a spot hath cleaved to my hands:

@c    31:8. Then let me sow and let another reap:  and let my offspring be
@c    rooted out.

@c    31:9. If my heart hath been deceived upon a woman, and if I have laid
@c    wait at my friend's door:

@c    31:10. Let my wife be the harlot of another, and let other men lie with
@c    her.

@c    31:11. For this is a heinous crime, and a most grievous iniquity.

@c    31:12. It is a fire that devoureth even to destruction, and rooteth up
@c    all things that spring.

@c    31:13. If I have despised to abide judgment with my manservant, or my
@c    maidservant, when they had any controversy against me:

@c    31:14. For what shall I do when God shall rise to judge?  and when he
@c    shall examine, what shall I answer him?

@c    31:15. Did not he that made me in the womb make him also:  and did not
@c    one and the same form me in the womb?

@c    31:16. If I have denied to the poor what they desired, and have made
@c    the eyes of the widow wait:

@c    31:17. If I have eaten my morsel alone, and the fatherless hath not
@c    eaten thereof:

@c    31:18. (For from my infancy mercy grew up with me:  and it came out with
@c    me from my mother's womb:)

@c    31:19. If I have despised him that was perishing for want of clothing,
@c    and the poor man that had no covering:

@c    31:20. If his sides have not blessed me, and if he were not warmed with
@c    the fleece of my sheep:

@c    31:21. If I have lifted up my hand against the fatherless, even when I
@c    saw myself superior in the gate:

@c    31:22. Let my shoulder fall from its joint, and let my arm with its
@c    bones be broken.

@c    31:23. For I have always feared God as waves swelling over me, and his
@c    weight I was unable to bear.

@c    31:24. If I have thought gold my strength, and have said to fine gold:
@c    My confidence:

@c    31:25. If I have rejoiced over my great riches, and because my hand had
@c    gotten much.

@c    31:26. If I beheld the sun when it shined and the moon going in
@c    brightness:

@c    If I beheld the sun, etc. . .If I behold the sun and moon with
@c    admiration, knowing them to be created and governed by the power of
@c    God, I call on my adversaries to produce any thing against me, whereby
@c    I could be charged with worshipping the sun or moon.

@c    31:27. And my heart in secret hath rejoiced, and I have kissed my hand
@c    with, my mouth:

@c    31:28. Which is a very great iniquity, and a denial against the most
@c    high God.

@c    31:29. If I have been glad at the downfall of him that hated me, and
@c    have rejoiced that evil had found him.

@c    31:30. For I have not given my mouth to sin, by wishing a curse to his
@c    soul.

@c    31:31. If the men of my tabernacle have not said:  Who will give us of
@c    his flesh that we may be filled?

@c    31:32. The stranger did not stay without, my door was open to the
@c    traveller.

@c    31:33. If as a man I have hid my sin, and have concealed my iniquity in
@c    my bosom.

@c    31:34. If I have been afraid at a very great multitude, and the
@c    contempt of kinsmen hath terrified me:  and have not rather held my
@c    peace, and not gone out of the door.

@c    31:35. Who would grant me a hearing, that the Almighty may hear my
@c    desire:  and that he himself that judgeth would write a book,

@c    31:36. That I may carry it on my shoulder, and put it about me as a
@c    crown?

@c    31:37. At every step of mine I would pronounce it, and offer it as to a
@c    prince.

@c    31:38. If my land cry against me, and with it the furrows thereof
@c    mourn:

@c    31:39. If I have eaten the fruits thereof without money, and have
@c    afflicted the son of the tillers thereof:

@c    31:40. Let thistles grow up to me instead of wheat, and thorns instead
@c    of barley.

@c    The words of Job are ended.



@c    Job Chapter 32


@c    Eliu is angry with Job and his friends.  He boasts of himself.

@c    32:1. So these three men ceased to answer Job, because he seemed just
@c    to himself.

@c    32:2. And Eliu the son of Barachel the Buzite of the kindred of Ram,
@c    was angry and was moved to indignation:  now he was angry against Job,
@c    because he said he was just before God.

@c    32:3. And he was angry with his friends, because they had not found a
@c    reasonable answer, but only had condemned Job.

@c    32:4. So Eliu waited while Job was speaking because they were his
@c    elders that were speaking.

@c    32:5. But when he saw that the three were not able to answer, he was
@c    exceedingly angry.

@c    32:6. Then Eliu the son of Barachel the Buzite answered, and said:  I am
@c    younger in days, and you are more ancient, therefore hanging down my
@c    head, I was afraid to shew you my opinion.

@c    32:7. For I hoped that greater age would speak, and that a multitude of
@c    years would teach wisdom.

@c    32:8. But, as I see, there is a spirit in men, and the inspiration of
@c    the Almighty giveth understanding.

@c    32:9. They that are aged are not the wise men, neither do the ancients
@c    understand judgment.

@c    32:10. Therefore I will speak:  Hearken to me, I also will shew you my
@c    wisdom.

@c    32:11. For I have waited for your words, I have given ear to your
@c    wisdom, as long as you were disputing in words.

@c    32:12. And as long as I thought you said some thing, I considered:  but,
@c    as I see, there is none of you that can convince Job, and answer his
@c    words.

@c    32:13. Lest you should say:  We have found wisdom, God hath cast him
@c    down, not man.

@c    32:14. He hath spoken nothing to me, and I will not answer him
@c    according to your words.

@c    32:15. They were afraid, and answered no more, and they left off
@c    speaking.

@c    32:16. Therefore because I have waited, and they have not spoken:  they
@c    stood, and answered no more:

@c    32:17. I also will answer my part, and will shew my knowledge.

@c    32:18. For I am full of matter to speak of, and the spirit of my bowels
@c    straiteneth me.

@c    32:19. Behold, my belly is as new wine which wanteth vent, which
@c    bursteth the new vessels.

@c    32:20. I will speak and take breath a little:  I will open my lips, and
@c    will answer.

@c    32:21. I will not accept the person of man, and I will not level God
@c    with man.

@c    I will not level God with man. . .Here Eliu considers that Job hath put
@c    himself on a level with God, by the manner he assumed to justify his
@c    own life in speaking to God as if he spoke to an equal:  Eliu expresses
@c    in the following ver. 22 his fear of punishment hereafter for such an
@c    attempt.

@c    32:22. For I know not how long I shall continue, and whether after a
@c    while my Maker may take me away.



@c    Job Chapter 33


@c    Eliu blames Job for asserting his own innocence.

@c    33:1. Hear therefore, O Job, my speeches, and hearken to all my words.

@c    33:2. Behold now I have opened my mouth, let my tongue speak within my
@c    jaws.

@c    33:3. My words are from my upright heart, and my lips shall speak a
@c    pure sentence.

@c    33:4. The spirit of God made me, and the breath of the Almighty gave me
@c    life.

@c    33:5. If thou canst, answer me, and stand up against my face.

@c    33:6. Behold God hath made me as well as thee, and of the same clay I
@c    also was formed.

@c    33:7. But yet let not my wonder terrify thee, and let not my eloquence
@c    be burdensome to thee.

@c    33:8. Now thou hast said in my hearing, and I have heard the voice of
@c    thy words:

@c    33:9. I am clean, and without sin:  I am unspotted, and there is no
@c    iniquity in me.

@c    33:10. Because he hath found complaints against me, therefore he hath
@c    counted me for his enemy.

@c    33:11. He hath put my feet in the stocks, he hath observed all my
@c    paths.

@c    33:12. Now this is the thing in which thou art not justified:  I will
@c    answer thee, that God is greater than man.

@c    33:13. Dost thou strive against him, because he hath not answered thee
@c    to all words?

@c    33:14. God speaketh once, and repeateth not the selfsame thing the
@c    second time.

@c    33:15. By a dream in a vision by night, when deep sleep falleth upon
@c    men, and they are sleeping in their beds:

@c    33:16. Then he openeth the ears of men, and teaching instructeth them
@c    in what they are to learn.

@c    33:17. That he may withdraw a man from the things he is doing, and may
@c    deliver him from pride.

@c    33:18. Rescuing his soul from corruption:  and his life from passing to
@c    the sword.

@c    33:19. He rebuketh also by sorrow in the bed, and he maketh all his
@c    bones to wither.

@c    33:20. Bread becometh abominable to him in his life, and to his soul
@c    the meat which before he desired.

@c    33:21. His flesh shall be consumed away, and his bones that were
@c    covered shall be made bare.

@c    33:22. His soul hath drawn near to corruption, and his life to the
@c    destroyers.

@c    33:23. If there shall be an angel speaking for him, one among
@c    thousands, to declare man's uprightness,

@c    33:24. He shall have mercy on him, and shall say:  Deliver him, that he
@c    may not go down to corruption:  I have found wherein I may be merciful
@c    to him.

@c    33:25. His flesh is consumed with punishments, let him return to the
@c    days of his youth.

@c    33:26. He shall pray to God, and he will be gracious to him:  and he
@c    shall see his face with joy, and he will render to man his justice.

@c    33:27. He shall look upon men, and shall say:  I have sinned, and indeed
@c    I have offended, and I have not received what I have deserved.

@c    33:28. He hath delivered his soul from going into destruction, that it
@c    may live and see the light.

@c    33:29. Behold, all these things God worketh three times within every
@c    one.

@c    33:30. That he may withdraw their souls from corruption, and enlighten
@c    them with the light of the living.

@c    33:31. Attend, Job, and hearken to me, and hold thy peace, whilst I
@c    speak.

@c    33:32. But if thou hast any thing to say, answer me, speak:  for I would
@c    have thee to appear just.

@c    33:33. And if thou have not, hear me:  hold thy peace, and I will teach
@c    thee wisdom.



@c    Job Chapter 34


@c    Eliu charges Job with blasphemy:  and sets forth the power and justice
@c    of God.

@c    34:1. And Eliu continued his discourse, and said:

@c    34:2. Hear ye, wise men, my words, and ye learned, hearken to me:

@c    34:3. For the ear trieth words, and the mouth discerneth meats by the
@c    taste.

@c    34:4. Let us choose to us judgment, and let us see among ourselves what
@c    is the best.

@c    34:5. For Job hath said:  I am just, and God hath overthrown my
@c    judgment.

@c    34:6. For in judging me there is a lie:  my arrow is violent without any
@c    sin.

@c    34:7. What man is there like Job, who drinketh up scorning like water?

@c    34:8. Who goeth in company with them that work iniquity, and walketh
@c    with wicked men?

@c    34:9. For he hath said:  Man shall not please God, although he run with
@c    him.

@c    34:10. Therefore, ye men of understanding, hear me:  far from God be
@c    wickedness, and iniquity from the Almighty.

@c    34:11. For he will render to a man his work, and according to the ways
@c    of every one he will reward them.

@c    34:12. For in very deed God will not condemn without cause, neither
@c    will the Almighty pervert judgment.

@c    34:13. What other hath he appointed over the earth?  or whom hath he set
@c    over the world which he made?

@c    34:14. If he turn his heart to him, he shall draw his spirit and breath
@c    unto himself.

@c    34:15. All flesh shall perish together, and man shall return into
@c    ashes.

@c    34:16. If then thou hast understanding, hear what is said, and hearken
@c    to the voice of my words.

@c    34:17. Can he be healed that loveth not judgment?  and how dost thou so
@c    far condemn him that is just?

@c    34:18. Who saith to the king:  Thou art an apostate:  who calleth rulers
@c    ungodly:

@c    34:19. Who accepteth not the persons of princes:  nor hath regarded the
@c    tyrant, when he contended against the poor man:  for all are the work of
@c    his hands.

@c    34:20. They shall suddenly die, and the people shall be troubled at
@c    midnight, and they shall pass, and take away the violent without hand.

@c    34:21. For his eyes are upon the ways of men, and he considereth all
@c    their steps.

@c    34:22. There is no darkness, and there is no shadow of death, where
@c    they may be hid who work iniquity.

@c    34:23. For it is no longer in the power of man to enter into judgment
@c    with God.

@c    34:24. He shall break in pieces many and innumerable, and shall make
@c    others to stand in their stead.

@c    34:25. For he knoweth their works:  and therefore he shall bring night
@c    on them, and they shall be destroyed.

@c    34:26. He hath struck them, as being wicked, in open sight.

@c    34:27. Who as it were on purpose have revolted from him, and would not
@c    understand all his ways:

@c    34:28. So that they caused the cry of the needy to come to him, and he
@c    heard the voice of the poor.

@c    34:29. For when he granteth peace, who is there that can condemn?  When
@c    he hideth his countenance, who is there that can behold him, whether it
@c    regard nations, or all men?

@c    34:30. Who maketh a man that is a hypocrite to reign for the sins of
@c    the people?

@c    34:31. Seeing then I have spoken of God, I will not hinder thee in thy
@c    turn.

@c    34:32. If I have erred, teach thou me:  if I have spoken iniquity, I
@c    will add no more.

@c    34:33. Doth God require it of thee, because it hath displeased thee?
@c    for thou begannest to speak, and not I:  but if thou know any thing
@c    better, speak.

@c    34:34. Let men of understanding speak to me, and let a wise man hearken
@c    to me.

@c    34:35. But Job hath spoken foolishly, and his words sound not
@c    discipline.

@c    34:36. My father, let Job be tried even to the end:  cease not from the
@c    man of iniquity.

@c    34:37. Because he addeth blasphemy upon his sins, let him be tied fast
@c    in the mean time amongst us:  and then let him provoke God to judgment
@c    with his speeches.



@c    Job Chapter 35


@c    Eliu declares that the good or evil done by man cannot reach God.

@c    35:1. Moreover Eliu spoke these words:

@c    35:2. Doth thy thought seem right to thee, that thou shouldst say:  I am
@c    more just than God?

@c    35:3. For thou saidst:  That which is right doth not please thee:  or
@c    what will it profit thee if I sin?

@c    35:4. Therefore I will answer thy words, and thy friends with thee.

@c    35:5. Look up to heaven and see, and behold the sky, that it is higher
@c    than thee.

@c    35:6. If thou sin, what shalt thou hurt him?  and if thy iniquities be
@c    multiplied, what shalt thou do against him?

@c    35:7. And if thou do justly, what shalt thou give him, or what shall he
@c    receive of thy hand?

@c    35:8. Thy wickedness may hurt a man that is like thee:  and thy justice
@c    may help the son of man.

@c    35:9. By reason of the multitude of oppressors they shall cry out:  and
@c    shall wail for the violence of the arm of tyrants.

@c    35:10. And he hath not said:  Where is God, who made me, who hath given
@c    songs in the night?

@c    35:11. Who teacheth us more than the beasts of the earth, and
@c    instructeth us more than the fowls of the air.

@c    35:12. There shall they cry, and he will not hear, because of the pride
@c    of evil men.

@c    35:13. God therefore will not hear in vain, and the Almighty will look
@c    into the causes of every one.

@c    35:14. Yea, when thou shalt say:  He considereth not:  be judged before
@c    him, and expect him.

@c    35:15. For he doth not now bring on his fury, neither doth he revenge
@c    wickedness exceedingly.

@c    35:16. Therefore Job openeth his mouth in vain, and multiplieth words
@c    without knowledge.



@c    Job Chapter 36


@c    Eliu proceeds in setting forth the justice and power of God.

@c    36:1. Eliu also proceeded, and said:

@c    36:2. Suffer me a little, and I will shew thee:  for I have yet somewhat
@c    to speak in God's behalf.

@c    36:3. I will repeat my knowledge from the beginning, and I will prove
@c    my Maker just.

@c    36:4. For indeed my words are without a lie, and perfect knowledge
@c    shall be proved to thee.

@c    36:5. God doth not cast away the mighty, whereas he himself also is
@c    mighty.

@c    36:6. But he saveth not the wicked, and he giveth judgment to the poor.

@c    36:7. He will not take away his eyes from the just, and he placeth
@c    kings on the throne for ever, and they are exalted.

@c    36:8. And if they shall be in chains, and be bound with the cords of
@c    poverty:

@c    36:9. He shall shew them their works, and their wicked deeds, because
@c    they have been violent.

@c    36:10. He also shall open their ear, to correct them:  and shall speak,
@c    that they may return from iniquity.

@c    36:11. If they shall hear and observe, they shall accomplish their days
@c    in good, and their years in glory.

@c    36:12. But if they hear not, they shall pass by the sword, and shall be
@c    consumed in folly.

@c    36:13. Dissemblers and crafty men prove the wrath of God, neither shall
@c    they cry when they are bound.

@c    36:14. Their soul shall die in a storm, and their life among the
@c    effeminate.

@c    36:15. He shall deliver the poor out of his distress, and shall open
@c    his ear in affliction.

@c    36:16. Therefore he shall set thee at large out of the narrow mouth,
@c    and which hath no foundation under it:  and the rest of thy table shall
@c    be full of fatness.

@c    Out of the narrow mouth. . .That is, out of hell, whose entrance is
@c    narrow, and its depth bottomless; but figuratively meant here, that is,
@c    from his miseries and calamity to be restored to his former state of
@c    happiness.

@c    36:17. Thy cause hath been judged as that of the wicked, cause and
@c    judgment thou shalt recover.

@c    36:18. Therefore let not anger overcome thee to oppress any man:
@c    neither let multitude of gifts turn thee aside.

@c    36:19. Lay down thy greatness without tribulation, and all the mighty
@c    of strength.

@c    36:20. Prolong not the night that people may come up for them.

@c    36:21. Beware thou turn not aside to iniquity:  for this thou hast begun
@c    to follow after misery.

@c    For this thou hast begun to follow after misery. . .Eliu charges Job,
@c    that notwithstanding his misery, he does not fear God as he ought:  but
@c    in his judgment, falls into iniquity.

@c    36:22. Behold, God is high in his strength, and none is like him among
@c    the lawgivers.

@c    36:23. Who can search out his ways?  or who can say to him:  Thou hast
@c    wrought iniquity?

@c    36:24. Remember that thou knowest not his work, concerning which men
@c    have sung.

@c    36:25. All men see him, every one beholdeth afar off.

@c    36:26. Behold, God is great, exceeding our knowledge:  the number of his
@c    years is inestimable.

@c    36:27. He lifteth up the drops of rain, and poureth out showers like
@c    floods:

@c    36:28. Which flow from the clouds that cover all above.

@c    36:29. If he will spread out clouds as his tent,

@c    36:30. And lighten with his light from above, he shall cover also the
@c    ends of the sea.

@c    36:31. For by these he judgeth people, and giveth food to many mortals.

@c    36:32. In his hands he hideth the light, and commandeth it to come
@c    again.

@c    36:33. He sheweth his friend concerning it, that it is his possession,
@c    and that he may come up to it.



@c    Job Chapter 37


@c    Eliu goes on in his discourse, shewing God's wisdom and power, by his
@c    wonderful works.

@c    37:1. At this my heart trembleth, and is moved out of its place.

@c    37:2. Hear ye attentively the terror of his voice, and the sound that
@c    cometh out of his mouth.

@c    37:3. He beholdeth under all the heavens, and his light is upon the
@c    ends of the earth.

@c    37:4. After it a noise shall roar, he shall thunder with the voice of
@c    his majesty, and shall not be found out, when his voice shall be heard.

@c    37:5. God shall thunder wonderfully with his voice, he that doth great
@c    and unsearchable things.

@c    37:6. He commandeth the snow to go down upon the earth, and the winter
@c    rain, and the shower of his strength.

@c    37:7. He sealeth up the hand of all men, that every one may know his
@c    works.

@c    He sealeth up, etc. . .When he sends those showers of his strength, that
@c    is, those storms of rain, he seals up, that is, he shuts up the hands
@c    of men from their usual works abroad, and confines them within doors,
@c    to consider his works; or to forecast their works, that is, what they
@c    themselves are to do.

@c    37:8. Then the beast shall go into his covert, and shall abide in his
@c    den.

@c    37:9. Out of the inner parts shall a tempest come, and cold out of the
@c    north.

@c    37:10. When God bloweth there cometh frost, and again the waters are
@c    poured out abundantly.

@c    37:11. Corn desireth clouds, and the clouds spread their light:

@c    37:12. Which go round about, whithersoever the will of him that
@c    governeth them shall lead them, to whatsoever he shall command them
@c    upon the face of the whole earth:

@c    37:13. Whether in one tribe, or in his own land, or in what place
@c    soever of his mercy he shall command them to be found.

@c    37:14. Hearken to these things, Job:  Stand, and consider the wondrous
@c    works of God.

@c    37:15. Dost thou know when God commanded the rains, to shew his light
@c    of his clouds?

@c    37:16. Knowest thou the great paths of the clouds, and the perfect
@c    knowledges?

@c    37:17. Are not thy garments hot, when the south wind blows upon the
@c    earth?

@c    37:18. Thou perhaps hast made the heavens with him, which are most
@c    strong, as if they were of molten brass.

@c    37:19. Shew us what we may say to him:  or we are wrapped up in
@c    darkness.

@c    37:20. Who shall tell him the things I speak?  even if a man shall
@c    speak, he shall be swallowed up.

@c    He shall be swallowed up. . .All that man can say when he speaks of God,
@c    is so little and inconsiderable in comparison with the subject, that
@c    man is lost, and as it were swallowed up in so immense an ocean.

@c    37:21. But now they see not the light:  the air on a sudden shall be
@c    thickened into clouds, and the wind shall pass and drive them away.

@c    37:22. Cold cometh out of the north, and to God praise with fear.

@c    37:23. We cannot find him worthily:  he is great in strength, and in
@c    judgment, and in justice, and he is ineffable.

@c    37:24. Therefore men shall fear him, and all that seem to themselves to
@c    be wise, shall not dare to behold him.



@c    Job Chapter 38


@c    God interposes and shews from the things he hath made, that man cannot
@c    comprehend his power and wisdom.

@c    38:1. Then the Lord answered Job out of a whirlwind, and said:
38:1. ni'o la .iaves. to'o le vilbi'e cu spuda be tu'a la .i,OV. cusku lu

@c    The Lord.  That is, an angel speaking in the name of the Lord.

@c    38:2. Who is this that wrappeth up sentences in unskilful words?
38:2. ma vi te mangu'i le <`etsah> lei juncau valsi?

@c    38:3. Gird up thy loins like a man:  I will ask thee, and answer thou
@c    me.
38:3. .i ko tatygau le befsri tai lo'e vlinau .i mi terpreti fo do .ije
ko jungau mi

@c    38:4. Where wast thou when I laid the foundations of the earth?  tell me
@c    if thou hast understanding.
38:4. ni'o do zvati ma ca le terdi krazba? .i ko cusku le se jimpe

@c    38:5. Who hath laid the measures thereof, if thou knowest or who hath
@c    stretched the line upon it?
38:5. .i ma cimde platu ty to xu do djuno toi .i ma ty skori merli?

@c    38:6. Upon what are its bases grounded?  or who laid the corner stone
@c    thereof,
38:6. .i le ty zbepi ma cu vreta? .i ma punji le ty manri rokci?

@c    38:7. When the morning stars praised me together, and all the sons of
@c    God made a joyful melody?
38:7. ca lenu lei cerni tarci cu slagleki .ije ro cevni bersa cu girsanga kei

@c    38:8. Who shut up the sea with doors, when it broke forth as issuing
@c    out of the womb:
38:8. .i ga'orgau le re vorme fo le xamsi noi pojli'a le xy gutra

@c    38:9. When I made a cloud the garment thereof, and wrapped it in a mist
@c    as in swaddling bands?
38:9. .i mi taxygau le dilnu xy gi'e sruro dasygau le xamsi fi le bumru

@c    38:10. I set my bounds around it, and made it bars and doors:
38:10. .i mi jitygau fi xy gi'e punji le xy garna le re vorme

@c    38:11. And I said:  Hitherto thou shalt come, and shalt go no further,
@c    and here thou shalt break thy swelling waves.
38:11. .i mi cusku lu ko fe'epu'o klama gi'enai vy pagre .i le punli boxna
be ko cu vi porpi li'u

@c    38:12. Didst thou since thy birth command the morning, and shew the
@c    dawning of the day its place?

@c    38:13. And didst thou hold the extremities of the earth shaking them,
@c    and hast thou shaken the ungodly out of it?

@c    38:14. The seal shall be restored as clay, and shall stand as a
@c    garment.

@c    38:15. From the wicked their light shall be taken away, and the high
@c    arm shall be broken.

@c    38:16. Hast thou entered into the depths of the sea, and walked in the
@c    lowest parts of the deep?

@c    38:17. Have the gates of death been opened to thee, and hast thou seen
@c    the darksome doors?

@c    38:18. Hast thou considered the breadth of the earth?  tell me, if thou
@c    knowest all things?

@c    38:19. Where is the way where light dwelleth, and where is the place of
@c    darkness?

@c    38:20. That thou mayst bring every thing to its own bounds, and
@c    understand the paths of the house thereof.

@c    38:21. Didst thou know then that thou shouldst be born?  and didst thou
@c    know the number of thy days?

@c    38:22. Hast thou entered into the storehouses of the snow, or hast thou
@c    beheld the treasures of the hail:

@c    38:23. Which I have prepared for the time of the enemy, against the day
@c    of battle and war?

@c    38:24. By what way is the light spread, and heat divided upon the
@c    earth?

@c    38:25. Who gave a course to violent showers, or a way for noisy
@c    thunder:

@c    38:26. That it should rain on the earth without man in the wilderness,
@c    where no mortal dwelleth:

@c    38:27. That it should fill the desert and desolate land, and should
@c    bring forth green grass?

@c    38:28. Who is the father of rain?  or who begot the drops of dew?

@c    38:29. Out of whose womb came the ice?  and the frost from heaven who
@c    hath gendered it?

@c    38:30. The waters are hardened like a stone, and the surface of the
@c    deep is congealed.

@c    38:31. Shalt thou be able to join together the shining stars the
@c    Pleiades, or canst thou stop the turning about of Arcturus?

@c    Pleiades. . .Hebrew, Cimah.  A cluster of seven stars in the
@c    constellation Taurus or the Bull.  Arcturus, a bright star in the
@c    constellation Bootes.  The Hebrew name Cesil, is variously interpreted;
@c    by some, Orion; by others, the Great Bear is understood.

@c    38:32. Canst thou bring forth the day star in its time, and make the
@c    evening star to rise upon the children of the earth?

@c    38:33. Dost thou know the order of heaven, and canst thou set down the
@c    reason thereof on the earth?

@c    38:34. Canst thou lift up thy voice to the clouds, that an abundance of
@c    waters may cover thee?

@c    38:35. Canst thou send lightnings, and will they go, and will they
@c    return and say to thee:  Here we are?

@c    38:36. Who hath put wisdom in the heart of man?  or who gave the cock
@c    understanding?

@c    Understanding. . .That instinct by which he distinguishes the times of
@c    crowing in the night.

@c    38:37. Who can declare the order of the heavens, or who can make the
@c    harmony of heaven to sleep?

@c    38:38. When was the dust poured on the earth, and the clods fastened
@c    together?

@c    38:39. Wilt thou take the prey for the lioness, and satisfy the
@c    appetite of her whelps,

@c    38:40. When they couch in the dens and lie in wait in holes?

@c    38:41. Who provideth food for the raven, when her young ones cry to
@c    God, wandering about, because they have no meat?



@c    Job Chapter 39


@c    The wonders of the power and providence of God in many of his creatures.

@c    39:1. Knowest thou the time when the wild goats bring forth among the
@c    rocks, or hast thou observed the hinds when they fawn?

@c    39:2. Hast thou numbered the months of their conceiving, or knowest
@c    thou the time when they bring forth?

@c    39:3. They bow themselves to bring forth young, and they cast them, and
@c    send forth roarings.

@c    39:4. Their young are weaned and go to feed:  they go forth, and return
@c    not to them.

@c    39:5. Who hath sent out the wild ass free, and who hath loosed his
@c    bonds?

@c    39:6. To whom I have given a house in the wilderness, and his dwellings
@c    in the barren land.

@c    39:7. He scorneth the multitude of the city, he heareth not the cry of
@c    the driver.

@c    39:8. He looketh round about the mountains of his pasture, and seeketh
@c    for every green thing,

@c    39:9. Shall the rhinoceros be willing to serve thee, or will he stay at
@c    thy crib?

@c    39:10. Canst thou bind the rhinoceros with thy thong to plough, or will
@c    he break the clods of the valleys after thee?

@c    39:11. Wilt thou have confidence in his great strength, and leave thy
@c    labours to him?

@c    39:12. Wilt thou trust him that he will render thee the seed, and
@c    gather it into thy barnfloor?

@c    39:13. The wing of the ostrich is like the wings of the heron, and of
@c    the hawk.

@c    39:14. When she leaveth her eggs on the earth, thou perhaps wilt warm
@c    them in the dust.

@c    39:15. She forgetteth that the foot may tread upon them, or that the
@c    beasts of the field may break them.

@c    39:16. She is hardened against her young ones, as though they were not
@c    hers, she hath laboured in vain, no fear constraining her.

@c    39:17. For God hath deprived her of wisdom, neither hath he given her
@c    understanding.

@c    39:18. When time shall be, she setteth up her wings on high:  she
@c    scorneth the horse and his rider.

@c    39:19. Wilt thou give strength to the horse or clothe his neck with
@c    neighing?

@c    39:20. Wilt thou lift him up like the locusts?  the glory of his
@c    nostrils is terror.

@c    39:21. He breaketh up the earth with his hoof, he pranceth boldly, he
@c    goeth forward to meet armed men.

@c    39:22. He despiseth fear, he turneth not his back to the sword.

@c    39:23. Above him shall the quiver rattle, the spear and shield shall
@c    glitter.

@c    39:24. Chasing and raging he swalloweth the ground, neither doth he
@c    make account when the noise of the trumpet soundeth.

@c    39:25. When he heareth the trumpet he saith:  Ha, ha:  he smelleth the
@c    battle afar off, the encouraging of the captains, and the shouting of
@c    the army.

@c    39:26. Doth the hawk wax feathered by thy wisdom, spreading her wings
@c    to the south?

@c    39:27. Will the eagle mount up at thy command, and make her nest in
@c    high places?

@c    39:28. She abideth among the rocks, and dwelleth among cragged flints,
@c    and stony hills, where there is no access.

@c    39:29. From thence she looketh for the prey, and her eyes behold afar
@c    off.

@c    39:30. Her young ones shall suck up blood:  and wheresoever the carcass
@c    shall be, she is immediately there.

@c    39:31. And the Lord went on, and said to Job:

@c    39:32. Shall he that contendeth with God be so easily silenced?  surely
@c    he that reproveth God, ought to answer him.

@c    39:33. Then Job answered the Lord, and said:

@c    39:34. What can I answer, who hath spoken inconsiderately?  I will lay
@c    my hand upon my mouth.

@c    Spoken inconsiderately. . .If we discuss all Job's words (saith St.
@c    Gregory), we shall find nothing impiously spoken; as may be gathered
@c    from the words of the Lord himself, chap. 42, ver. 7, 8; but what was
@c    reprehensible in him, was the manner of expressing himself at times,
@c    speaking too much of his own affliction, and too little of God's
@c    goodness towards him, which here he acknowledges as inconsiderate.

@c    39:35. One thing I have spoken, which I wish I had not said:  and
@c    another, to which I will add no more.



@c    Job Chapter 40


@c    Of the power of God in the behemoth and the leviathan.

@c    40:1. And the Lord answering Job out of the whirlwind, said:

@c    40:2. Gird up thy loins like a man:  I will ask thee, and do thou tell
@c    me.

@c    40:3. Wilt thou make void my judgment:  and condemn me, that thou mayst
@c    be justified?

@c    40:4. And hast thou an arm like God, and canst thou thunder with a
@c    voice like him?

@c    40:5. Clothe thyself with beauty, and set thyself up on high, and be
@c    glorious, and put on goodly garments.

@c    40:6. Scatter the proud in thy indignation, and behold every arrogant
@c    man, and humble him.

@c    40:7. Look on all that are proud, and confound them, and crush the
@c    wicked in their place,

@c    40:8. Hide them in the dust together, and plunge their faces into the
@c    pit.

@c    40:9. Then I will confess that thy right hand is able to save thee.

@c    40:10. Behold behemoth whom I made with thee, he eateth grass like an
@c    ox.

@c    Behemoth. . .In Hebrew, behema, which signifies in general an animal;
@c    but many authors explain, that here it is put for the elephant.

@c    40:11. His strength is in his loins, and his force in the navel of his
@c    belly.

@c    40:12. He setteth up his tail like a cedar, the sinews of his testicles
@c    are wrapped together.

@c    40:13. His bones are like pipes of brass, his gristle like plates of
@c    iron.

@c    40:14. He is the beginning of the ways of God, who made him, he will
@c    apply his sword.

@c    He will apply his sword. . .This text is variously explained:  some
@c    explain the sword, the horn given to the animal for his defence:
@c    others, the power that God hath given to the animal for his defence:
@c    others, the power that God hath given to man to slay him,
@c    notwithstanding his great size and strength.

@c    40:15. To him the mountains bring forth grass:  there all the beasts of
@c    the field shall play.

@c    40:16. He sleepeth under the shadow, in the covert of the reed, and in
@c    moist places.

@c    40:17. The shades cover his shadow, the willows of the brook shall
@c    compass him about.

@c    40:18. Behold, he will drink up a river, and not wonder:  and he
@c    trusteth that the Jordan may run into his mouth.

@c    40:19. In his eyes as with a hook he shall take him, and bore through
@c    his nostrils with stakes.

@c    40:20. Canst thou draw out the leviathan with a hook, or canst thou tie
@c    his tongue with a cord?

@c    Leviathan. . .The whale or some sea monster.

@c    40:21. Canst thou put a ring in his nose, or bore through his jaw with
@c    a buckle?

@c    40:22. Will he make many supplications to thee, or speak soft words to
@c    thee?

@c    40:23. Will he make a covenant with thee, and wilt thou take him to be
@c    a servant for ever,

@c    40:24. Shalt thou play with him as with a bird, or tie him up for thy
@c    handmaids?

@c    40:25. Shall friends cut him in pieces, shall merchants divide him?

@c    40:26. Wilt thou fill nets with his skin, and the cabins of fishes with
@c    his head?

@c    40:27. Lay thy hand upon him:  remember the battle, and speak no more.

@c    40:28. Behold his hope shall fail him, and in the sight of all he shall
@c    be cast down.



@c    Job Chapter 41


@c    A further description of the leviathan.

@c    41:1. I will not stir him up, like one that is cruel, for who can
@c    resist my countenance?

@c    41:2. Who hath given me before that I should repay him?  All things that
@c    are under heaven are mine.

@c    41:3. I will not spare him, nor his mighty words, and framed to make
@c    supplication.

@c    41:4. Who can discover the face of his garment?  or who can go into the
@c    midst of his mouth?

@c    41:5. Who can open the doors of his face?  his teeth are terrible round
@c    about.

@c    41:6. His body is like molten shields, shut close up with scales
@c    pressing upon one another.

@c    41:7. One is joined to another, and not so much as any air can come
@c    between them:

@c    41:8. They stick one to another and they hold one another fast, and
@c    shall not be separated.

@c    41:9. His sneezing is like the shining of fire, and his eyes like the
@c    eyelids of the morning.

@c    41:10. Out of his mouth go forth lamps, like torches of lighted fire.

@c    41:11. Out of his nostrils goeth smoke, like that of a pot heated and
@c    boiling.

@c    41:12. His breath kindleth coals, and a flame cometh forth out of his
@c    mouth.

@c    41:13. In his neck strength shall dwell, and want goeth before his
@c    face.

@c    41:14. The members of his flesh cleave one to another:  he shall send
@c    lightnings against him, and they shall not be carried to another place.

@c    41:15. His heart shall be as hard as a stone, and as firm as a smith's
@c    anvil,

@c    41:16. When he shall raise him up, the angels shall fear, and being
@c    affrighted shall purify themselves.

@c    Angels. . .Elim, Hebrew:  which signifies here, the mighty, the most
@c    valiant, shall fear this monstrous fish, and in their fear shall seek
@c    to be purified.

@c    41:17. When a sword shall lay at him, it shall not be able to hold, nor
@c    a spear, nor a breastplate.

@c    41:18. For he shall esteem iron as straw, and brass as rotten wood.

@c    41:19. The archer shall not put him to flight, the stones of the sling
@c    are to him like stubble.

@c    41:20. As stubble will he esteem the hammer, and he will laugh him to
@c    scorn who shaketh the spear.

@c    41:21. The beams of the sun shall be under him, and he shall strew gold
@c    under him like mire.

@c    Under him. . .He shall not value the beams of the sun; and gold to him
@c    shall be like mire.

@c    41:22. He shall make the deep sea to boil like a pot, and shall make it
@c    as when ointments boil.

@c    41:23. A path shall shine after him, he shall esteem the deep as
@c    growing old.

@c    The deep as growing old. . .Growing hoary, as it were with the froth
@c    which he leaves behind him.

@c    41:24. There is no power upon earth that can be compared with him who
@c    was made to fear no one,

@c    41:25. He beholdeth every high thing, he is king over all the children
@c    of pride.

@c    He is king, etc. . .He is superior in strength to all that are great and
@c    strong amongst living creatures:  mystically it is understood of the
@c    devil, who is king over all the proud.



@c    Job Chapter 42


@c    Job submits himself.  God pronounces in his favour.  Job offers sacrifice
@c    for his friends.  He is blessed with riches and children, and dies
@c    happily,

@c    42:1. Then Job answered the Lord, and said:

@c    42:2. I know that thou canst do all things, and no thought is hid from
@c    thee.

@c    42:3. Who is this that hideth counsel without knowledge?  Therefore I
@c    have spoken unwisely, and things that above measure exceeded my
@c    knowledge.

@c    42:4. Hear, and I will speak:  I will ask thee, and do thou tell me.

@c    42:5. With the hearing of the ear, I have heard thee, but now my eye
@c    seeth thee.

@c    42:6. Therefore I reprehend myself, and do penance in dust and ashes.

@c    42:7. And after the Lord had spoken these words to Job, he said to
@c    Eliphaz the Themanite:  My wrath is kindled against thee, and against
@c    thy two friends, because you have not spoken the thing that is right
@c    before me, as my servant Job hath.

@c    42:8. Take unto you therefore seven oxen and seven rams, and go to my
@c    servant Job, and offer for yourselves a holocaust, and my servant Job
@c    shall pray for you:  his face I will accept, that folly be not imputed
@c    to you:  for you have not spoken right things before me, as my servant
@c    Job hath.

@c    42:9. So Eliphaz the Themanite, and Baldad the Suhite, and Sophar the
@c    Naamathite went, and did as the Lord had spoken to them, and the Lord
@c    accepted the face of Job.

@c    42:10. The Lord also was turned at the penance of Job, when he prayed
@c    for his friends.  And the Lord gave Job twice as much as he had before.

@c    42:11. And all his brethren came to him, and all his sisters, and all
@c    that knew him before, and they ate bread with him in his house:  and
@c    bemoaned him, and comforted him upon all the evil that God had brought
@c    upon him.  And every man gave him one ewe, and one earring of gold.

@c    42:12. And the Lord blessed the latter end of Job more than his
@c    beginning.  And he had fourteen thousand sheep, and six thousand camels,
@c    and a thousand yoke of oxen, and a thousand she asses.

@c    42:13. And he had seven sons, and three daughters.

@c    42:14. And he called the name of one Dies, and the name of the second
@c    Cassia, and the name of the third Cornustibii.

@c    42:15. And there were not found in all the earth women so beautiful as
@c    the daughters of Job:  and their father gave them inheritance among
@c    their brethren.

@c    42:16. And Job lived after these things, a hundred and forty years, and
@c    he saw his children, and his children's children, unto the fourth
@c    generation, and he died an old man, and full of days.
