@c    THE PROPHECY OF JEREMIAS



@c    Jeremias was a priest, a native of Anathoth, a priestly city in the
@c    tribe of Benjamin:  and was sanctified from his mother's womb, to be a
@c    prophet of God; which office he began to execute when he was yet a
@c    child in age.  He was in his whole life, according to the signification
@c    of his name, Great before the Lord; and a special figure of Jesus
@c    Christ, in the persecutions he underwent for discharging his duty; in
@c    his charity for his persecutors; and in the violent death he suffered
@c    at their hands:  it being an ancient tradition of the Hebrews, that he
@c    was stoned to death by the remnant of the Jews who had retired into
@c    Egypt.



@c    Jeremias Chapter 1


@c    The time, and the calling, of Jeremias:  his prophetical visions.  God
@c    encourages him.

@c    1:1. The words of Jeremias the son of Helcias, of the priests that were
@c    in Anathoth, in the land of Benjamin.

@c    1:2. The word of the Lord which came to him in the days of Josias the
@c    son of Amon king of Juda, in the thirteenth year of his reign.

@c    1:3. And which came to him in the days of Joakim the son of Josias king
@c    of Juda, unto the end of the eleventh year of Sedecias the son of
@c    Josias king of Juda, even unto the carrying away of Jerusalem captive,
@c    in the fifth month.

@c    1:4. And the word of the Lord came to me, saying:

@c    1:5. Before I formed thee in the bowels of thy mother, I knew thee:  and
@c    before thou camest forth out of the womb, I sanctified thee, and made
@c    thee a prophet unto the nations.

@c    1:6. And I said:  Ah, ah, ah, Lord God:  behold, I cannot speak, for I am
@c    a child.

@c    1:7. And the Lord said to me:  Say not:  I am a child:  for thou shalt go
@c    to all that I shall send thee:  and whatsoever I shall command thee,
@c    thou shalt speak.

@c    1:8. Be not afraid at their presence:  for I am with thee to deliver
@c    thee, saith the Lord.

@c    1:9. And the Lord put forth his hand, and touched my mouth:  and the
@c    Lord said to me:  Behold I have given my words in thy mouth:

@c    1:10. Lo, I have set thee this day over the nations, and over kingdoms,
@c    to root up, and to pull down, and to waste, and to destroy, and to
@c    build, and to plant.

@c    1:11. And the word of the Lord came to me, saying:  What seest thou,
@c    Jeremias?  And I said:  I see a rod watching.

@c    1:12. And the Lord said to me:  Thou hast seen well:  for I will watch
@c    over my word to perform it.

@c    1:13. And the word of the Lord came to me a second time saying:  What
@c    seest thou?  And I said:  I see a boiling caldron, and the face thereof
@c    from the face of the north.

@c    1:14. And the Lord said to me:  From the north shall an evil break forth
@c    upon all the inhabitants of the land.

@c    1:15. For behold I will call together all the families of the kingdoms
@c    of the north, saith the Lord:  and they shall come, and shall set every
@c    one his throne in the entrance of the gates of Jerusalem, and upon all
@c    the walls thereof round about, and upon all the cities of Juda.

@c    1:16. And I will pronounce my judgments against them, touching all
@c    their wickedness, who have forsaken me, and have sacrificed to strange
@c    gods, and have adored the work of their own hands.

@c    1:17. Thou therefore gird up thy loins, and arise, and speak to them
@c    all that I command thee.  Be not afraid at their presence:  for I will
@c    make thee not to fear their countenance.

@c    1:18. For behold I have made thee this day a fortified city, and a
@c    pillar of iron, and a wall of brass, over all the land, to the kings of
@c    Juda, to the princes thereof, and to the priests, and to the people of
@c    the land.

@c    1:19. And they shall fight against them, and shall not prevail:  for I
@c    am with thee, saith the Lord, to deliver thee.



@c    Jeremias Chapter 2


@c    God expostulates with the Jews for their ingratitude and infidelity.

@c    2:1. And the word of the Lord came to me, saying:

@c    2:2. Go, and cry in the ears of Jerusalem, saying:  Thus saith the Lord:
@c    I have remembered thee, pitying thy youth, and the love of thy
@c    espousals, when thou followedst me in the desert, in a land that is not
@c    sown.

@c    2:3. Israel is holy to the Lord, the firstfruits of his increase:  all
@c    they that devour him offend:  evils shall come upon them, saith the
@c    Lord.

@c    2:4. Hear ye the word of the Lord, O house of Jacob, and all ye
@c    families of the house of Israel:

@c    2:5. Thus saith the Lord:  What iniquity have your fathers found in me,
@c    that they are gone far from me, and have walked after vanity, and are
@c    become vain?

@c    2:6. And they have not said:  Where is the Lord, that made us come up
@c    out of the land of Egypt?  that led us through the desert, through a
@c    land uninhabited and unpassable, through a land of drought, and the
@c    image of death, through a land wherein no man walked, nor any man
@c    dwelt?

@c    2:7. And I brought you into the land of Carmel, to eat the fruit
@c    thereof, and the best things thereof:  and when ye entered in, you
@c    defiled my land and made my inheritance an abomination.

@c    Carmel. . .That is, a fruitful, plentiful land.

@c    2:8. The priests did not say:  Where is the Lord?  and they that held the
@c    law knew me not, and the pastors transgressed against me:  and the
@c    prophets prophesied in Baal, and followed idols.

@c    2:9. Therefore will I yet contend in judgment with you, saith the Lord,
@c    and I will plead with your children.

@c    2:10. Pass over to the isles of Cethim, and see:  and send into Cedar,
@c    and consider diligently:  and see if there hath been done any thing like
@c    this.

@c    2:11. If a nation hath changed their gods, and indeed they are not
@c    gods:  but my people have changed their glory into an idol.

@c    2:12. Be astonished, O ye heavens, at this, and ye gates thereof, be
@c    very desolate, saith the Lord.

@c    2:13. For my people have done two evils.  They have forsaken me, the
@c    fountain of living water, and have digged to themselves cisterns,
@c    broken cisterns, that can hold no water.

@c    2:14. Is Israel a bondman, or a homeborn slave?  why then is he become a
@c    prey?

@c    2:15. The lions have roared upon him, and have made a noise, they have
@c    made his land a wilderness:  his cities are burnt down, and there is
@c    none to dwell in them.

@c    2:16. The children also of Memphis, and of Taphnes have defloured thee,
@c    even to the crown of the head.

@c    2:17. Hath not this been done to thee, because thou hast forsaken the
@c    Lord thy God at that time, when he led thee by the way?

@c    2:18. And now what hast thou to do in the way of Egypt, to drink the
@c    troubled water?  And what hast thou to do with the way of the Assyrians,
@c    to drink the water of the river?

@c    2:19. Thy own wickedness shall reprove thee, and thy apostasy shall
@c    rebuke thee.  Know thou, and see that it is an evil and a bitter thing
@c    for thee, to have left the Lord thy God, and that my fear is not with
@c    thee, saith the Lord the God of hosts.

@c    2:20. Of old time thou hast broken my yoke, thou hast burst my bands,
@c    and thou saidst:  I will not serve.  For on every high hill, and under
@c    every green tree thou didst prostitute thyself.

@c    2:21. Yet, I planted thee a chosen vineyard, all true seed:  how then
@c    art thou turned unto me into that which is good for nothing, O strange
@c    vineyard?

@c    2:22. Though thou wash thyself with nitre, and multiply to thyself the
@c    herb borith, thou art stained in thy iniquity before me, saith the Lord
@c    God.

@c    Borith. . .An herb used to clean clothes, and take out spots and dirt.

@c    2:23. How canst thou say:  I am not polluted, I have not walked after
@c    Baalim?  see thy ways in the valley, know what thou hast done:  as a
@c    swift runner pursuing his course.

@c    2:24. A wild ass accustomed to the wilderness in the desire of his
@c    heart, snuffed up the wind of his love:  none shall turn her away:  all
@c    that seek her shall not fail:  in her monthly filth they shall find her.

@c    2:25. Keep thy foot from being bare, and thy throat from thirst.  But
@c    thou saidst:  I have lost all hope, I will not do it:  for I have loved
@c    strangers, and I will walk after them.

@c    2:26. As the thief is confounded when he is taken, so is the house of
@c    Israel confounded, they and their kings, their princes and their
@c    priests, and their prophets.

@c    2:27. Saying to a stock:  Thou art my father:  and to a stone:  Thou hast
@c    begotten me:  they have turned their back to me, and not their face:  and
@c    in the time of their affliction they will say:  Arise, and deliver us.

@c    2:28. Where are the gods, whom thou hast made thee?  let them arise and
@c    deliver thee in the time of thy affliction:  for according to the number
@c    of thy cities were thy gods, O Juda.

@c    2:29. Why will you contend with me in judgment?  you have all forsaken
@c    me, saith the Lord.

@c    2:30. In vain have I struck your children, they have not received
@c    correction:  your sword hath devoured your prophets, your generation is
@c    like a ravaging lion.

@c    2:31. See ye the word of the Lord:  Am I become a wilderness to Israel,
@c    or a lateward springing land?  why then have my people said:  We are
@c    revolted, we will come to thee no more?

@c    2:32. Will a virgin forget her ornament, or a bride her stomacher?  but
@c    my people hath forgotten me days without number.

@c    2:33. Why dost thou endeavour to shew thy way good to seek my love,
@c    thou who hast also taught thy malices to be thy ways,

@c    2:34. And in thy skirts is found the blood of the souls of the poor and
@c    innocent?  not in ditches have I found them, but in all places, which I
@c    mentioned before.

@c    2:35. And thou hast said:  I am without sin and am innocent:  and
@c    therefore let thy anger be turned away from me.  Behold, I will contend
@c    with thee in judgment, because thou hast said:  I have not sinned.

@c    2:36. How exceeding base art thou become, going the same ways over
@c    again! and thou shalt be ashamed of Egypt, as thou wast ashamed of
@c    Assyria.

@c    2:37. For from thence thou shalt go, and thy hand shall be upon thy
@c    head:  for the Lord hath destroyed thy trust, and thou shalt have
@c    nothing prosperous therein.



@c    Jeremias Chapter 3


@c    God invites the rebel Jews to return to him, with a promise to receive
@c    them:  he foretells the conversion of the Gentiles.

@c    3:1. It is commonly said:  If a man put away his wife, and she go from
@c    him, and marry another man, shall he return to her any more?  shall not
@c    that woman be polluted, and defiled?  but thou hast prostituted thyself
@c    to many lovers:  nevertheless return to me, saith the Lord, and I will
@c    receive thee.

@c    3:2. Lift up thy eyes on high:  and see where thou hast not prostituted
@c    thyself:  thou didst sit in the ways, waiting for them as a robber in
@c    the wilderness:  and thou hast polluted the land with thy fornications,
@c    and with thy wickedness.

@c    3:3. Therefore the showers were withholden, and there was no lateward
@c    rain:  thou hadst a harlot's forehead, thou wouldst not blush.

@c    3:4. Therefore at the least from this time call to me:  Thou art my
@c    father, the guide of my virginity:

@c    3:5. Wilt thou be angry for ever, or wilt thou continue unto the end?
@c    Behold, thou hast spoken, and hast done evil things, and hast been
@c    able.

@c    3:6. And the Lord said to me in the days of king Josias:  Hast thou seen
@c    what rebellious Israel hath done?  she hath gone of herself upon every
@c    high mountain, and under every green tree, and hath played the harlot
@c    there.

@c    3:7. And when she had done all these things, I said:  Return to me, and
@c    she did not return.  And her treacherous sister Juda saw,

@c    3:8. That because the rebellious Israel had played the harlot, I had
@c    put her away, and given her a bill of divorce:  yet her treacherous
@c    sister Juda was not afraid, but went and played the harlot also
@c    herself.

@c    3:9. And by the facility of her fornication she defiled the land, and
@c    played the harlot with stones and with stocks.

@c    3:10. And after all this, her treacherous sister Juda hath not returned
@c    to me with her whole heart, but with falsehood, saith the Lord.

@c    3:11. And the Lord said to me:  The rebellious Israel hath justified her
@c    soul, in comparison of the treacherous Juda.

@c    3:12. Go, and proclaim these words towards the north, and thou shalt
@c    say:  Return, O rebellious Israel, saith the Lord, and I will not turn
@c    away my face from you:  for I am holy, saith the Lord, and I will not be
@c    angry for ever.

@c    3:13. But yet acknowledge thy iniquity, that thou hast transgressed
@c    against the Lord thy God:  and thou hast scattered thy ways to strangers
@c    under every green tree, and hast not heard my voice, saith the Lord.

@c    3:14. Return, O ye revolting children, saith the Lord:  for I am your I
@c    husband:  and I will take you, one of a city, and two of a kindred, and
@c    will bring you into Sion.

@c    3:15. And I will give you pastors according to my own heart, and they
@c    shall feed you with knowledge and doctrine.

@c    3:16. And when you shall be multiplied, and increase in the land in
@c    those days, saith the Lord, they shall say no more:  The ark of the
@c    covenant of the Lord:  neither shall it come upon the heart, neither
@c    shall they remember it, neither shall it be visited, neither shall that
@c    be done any more.

@c    3:17. At that time Jerusalem shall be called the throne of the Lord:
@c    and all the nations shall be gathered together to it, in the name of
@c    the Lord to Jerusalem, and they shall not walk after the perversity of
@c    their most wicked heart.

@c    3:18. In those days the house of Juda shall go to the house of Israel,
@c    and they shall come together out of the land of the north to the land
@c    which I gave to your fathers.

@c    3:19. But I said:  How shall I put thee among the children, and give
@c    thee a lovely land, the goodly inheritance of the armies of the
@c    Gentiles?  And I said:  Thou shalt call me father and shalt not cease to
@c    walk after me.

@c    3:20. But as a woman that despiseth her lover, so hath the house of
@c    Israel despised me, saith the Lord.

@c    3:21. A voice was heard in the highways, weeping and howling of the
@c    children of Israel:  because they have made their way wicked, they have
@c    forgotten the Lord their God.

@c    3:22. Return, you rebellious children, and I will heal your rebellions.
@c    Behold we come to thee:  for thou art the Lord our God.

@c    3:23. In very deed the hills were liars, and the multitude of the
@c    mountains:  truly in the Lord our God is the salvation of Israel.

@c    3:24. Confusion hath devoured the labour of our fathers from our youth,
@c    their flocks and their herds, their sons and their daughters.

@c    3:25. We shall sleep in our confusion, and our shame shall cover us,
@c    because we have sinned against the Lord our God, we and our fathers
@c    from our youth even to this day, and we have not hearkened to the voice
@c    of the Lord our God.



@c    Jeremias Chapter 4


@c    And admonition to sincere repentance, and circumcision of the heart,
@c    with threats of grievous punishment to those that persist in sin.

@c    4:1. If thou wilt return, O Israel, saith the Lord, return to me:  if
@c    thou wilt take away thy stumblingblocks out of my sight, thou shalt not
@c    be moved.

@c    4:2. And thou shalt swear:  As the Lord liveth, in truth, and in
@c    judgment, and in justice:  and the Gentiles shall bless him, and shall
@c    praise him.

@c    4:3. For thus saith the Lord to the men of Juda and Jerusalem:  Break up
@c    anew your fallow ground, and sow not upon thorns:

@c    4:4. Be circumcised to the Lord, and take away the foreskins of your
@c    hearts, ye men of Juda, and ye inhabitants of Jerusalem:  lest my
@c    indignation come forth like fire, and burn, and there be none that can
@c    quench it because of the wickedness of your thoughts.

@c    4:5. Declare ye in Juda, and make it heard in Jerusalem:  speak, and
@c    sound with the trumpet in the land:  cry aloud, and say:  Assemble
@c    yourselves, and let us go into strong cities.

@c    4:6. Set up the standard in Sion.  Strengthen yourselves, stay not:  for
@c    I bring evil from the north, and great destruction.

@c    4:7. The lion is come up out of his den, and the robber of nations hath
@c    roused himself:  he is come forth out of his place, to make thy land
@c    desolate:  thy cities shall be laid waste, remaining without an
@c    inhabitant.

@c    4:8. For this gird yourselves with haircloth, lament and howl:  for the
@c    fierce anger of the Lord is not turned away from us.

@c    4:9. And it shall come to pass in that day, saith the Lord:  That the
@c    heart of the king shall perish, and the heart of the princes:  and the
@c    priests shall be astonished, and the prophets shall be amazed.

@c    4:10. And I said:  Alas, alas, alas, O Lord God, hast thou then deceived
@c    this people and Jerusalem, saying:  You shall have peace:  and behold the
@c    sword reacheth even to the soul?

@c    4:11. At that time it shall be said to this people, and to Jerusalem:  A
@c    burning wind is in the ways that are in the desert of the way of the
@c    daughter of my people, not to fan, nor to cleanse.

@c    4:12. A full wind from these places shall come to me:  and now I will
@c    speak my judgments with them.

@c    4:13. Behold he shall come up as a cloud, and his chariots as a
@c    tempest:  his horses are swifter than eagles:  woe unto us, for we are
@c    laid waste.

@c    4:14. Wash thy heart from wickedness, O Jerusalem, that thou mayst be
@c    saved:  how long shall hurtful thoughts abide in thee?

@c    4:15. For a voice of one declaring from Dan, and giving notice of the
@c    idol from mount Ephraim.

@c    4:16. Say ye to the nations:  Behold it is heard in Jerusalem, that
@c    guards are coming from a far country, and give out their voice against
@c    the cities of Juda.

@c    4:17. They are set round about her, as keepers of fields:  because she
@c    hath provoked me to wrath, saith the Lord.

@c    4:18. Thy ways, and thy devices have brought these things upon thee:
@c    this is thy wickedness, because it is bitter, because it hath touched
@c    thy heart.

@c    4:19. My bowels, my bowels are in part, the senses of my heart are
@c    troubled within me, I will not hold my peace, for my soul hath heard
@c    the sound of the trumpet, the cry of battle.

@c    4:20. Destruction upon destruction is called for, and all the earth is
@c    laid waste:  my tents are destroyed on a sudden, and my pavilions in a
@c    moment.

@c    4:21. How long shall I see men fleeing away, how long shall I hear the
@c    sound of the trumpet?

@c    4:22. For my foolish people have not known me:  they are foolish and
@c    senseless children:  they are wise to do evil, but to do good they have
@c    no knowledge.

@c    4:23. I beheld the earth, and lo it was void, and nothing:  and the
@c    heavens, and there was no light in them.

@c    4:24. I looked upon the mountains, and behold they trembled:  and all
@c    the hills were troubled.

@c    4:25. I beheld, and lo there was no man:  and all the birds of the air
@c    were gone.

@c    4:26. I looked, and behold Carmel was a wilderness:  and all its cities
@c    were destroyed at the presence of the Lord, and at the presence of the
@c    wrath of his indignation.

@c    4:27. For thus saith the Lord:  All the land shall be desolate, but yet
@c    I will not utterly destroy.

@c    4:28. The Earth shall mourn, and the heavens shall lament from above:
@c    because I have spoken, I have purposed, and I have not repented,
@c    neither am I turned away from it.

@c    4:29. At the voice of the horsemen, and the archers, all the city is
@c    fled away:  they have entered into thickets and climbed up the rocks:
@c    all the cities are forsaken, and there dwelleth not a man in them.

@c    4:30. But when thou art spoiled what wilt thou do?  though thou clothest
@c    thyself with scarlet, though thou deckest thee with ornaments of gold,
@c    and paintest thy eyes with stibic stone, thou shalt dress thyself out
@c    in vain:  thy lovers have despised thee, they will seek thy life.

@c    4:31. For I have heard the voice as of a woman in travail, anguishes as
@c    of a woman in labour of a child.  The voice of the daughter of Sion,
@c    dying away, spreading her hands:  Woe is me, for my soul hath fainted
@c    because of them that are slain.



@c    Jeremias Chapter 5


@c    The judgments of God shall fall upon the Jews for their manifold sins.

@c    5:1. Go about through the streets of Jerusalem, and see, and consider,
@c    and seek in the broad places thereof, if you can find a man that
@c    executeth judgment, and seeketh faith:  and I will be merciful unto it.

@c    5:2. And though they say:  The Lord liveth; this also they will swear
@c    falsely.

@c    5:3. O Lord, thy eyes are upon truth:  thou hast struck them, and they
@c    have not grieved:  thou hast bruised them, and they have refused to
@c    receive correction:  they have made their faces harder than the rock,
@c    and they have refused to return.

@c    5:4. But I said:  Perhaps these are poor and foolish, that know not the
@c    way of the Lord, the judgment of their God.

@c    5:5. I will go therefore to the great men, and will speak to them:  for
@c    they have known the way of the Lord, the judgment of their God:  and
@c    behold these have altogether broken the yoke more, and have burst the
@c    bonds.

@c    5:6. Wherefore a lion out of the wood hath slain them, a wolf in the
@c    evening hath spoiled them, a leopard watcheth for their cities:  every
@c    one that shall go out thence shall be taken, because their
@c    transgressions are multiplied, their rebellions are strengthened.

@c    5:7. How can I be merciful to thee?  thy children have forsaken me, and
@c    swear by them that are not gods:  I fed them to the full, and they
@c    committed adultery, and rioted in the harlot's house.

@c    5:8. They are become as amorous horses and stallions:  every one neighed
@c    after his neighbour's wife.

@c    5:9. Shall I not visit for these things, saith the Lord?  and shall not
@c    my soul take revenge on such a nation?

@c    5:10. Scale the walls thereof, and throw them down, but do not utterly
@c    destroy:  take away the branches thereof, because they are not the
@c    Lord's.

@c    5:11. For the house of Israel, and the house of Juda have greatly
@c    transgressed against me, saith the Lord.

@c    5:12. They have denied the Lord, and said, It is not he:  and the evil
@c    shall not come upon us:  we shall not see the sword and famine.

@c    5:13. The prophets have spoken in the wind, and there was no word of
@c    God in them:  these things therefore shall befall them.

@c    5:14. Thus saith the Lord the God of hosts:  because you have spoken
@c    this word, behold I will make my words in thy mouth as fire, and this
@c    people as wood, and it shall devour them.

@c    5:15. Behold I will bring upon you a nation from afar, O house of
@c    Israel, saith the Lord:  a strong nation, an ancient nation, a nation
@c    whose language thou shalt not know, nor understand what they say.

@c    5:16. Their quiver is as an open sepulchre, they are all valiant.

@c    5:17. And they shall eat up thy corn, and thy bread:  they shall devour
@c    thy sons, and thy daughters:  they shall eat up thy flocks, and thy
@c    herds:  they shall eat thy vineyards, and thy figs:  and with the sword
@c    they shall destroy thy strong cities, wherein thou trustest.

@c    5:18. Nevertheless in those days, saith the Lord, I will not bring you
@c    to utter destruction.

@c    5:19. And if you shall say:  Why hath the Lord our God done all these
@c    things to us?  thou shalt say to them:  As you have forsaken me, and
@c    served a strange god in your own land, so shall you serve strangers in
@c    a land that is not your own.

@c    5:20. Declare ye this to the house of Jacob, and publish it in Juda,
@c    saying:

@c    5:21. Hear, O foolish people, and without understanding:  who have eyes,
@c    and see not:  and ears, and hear not.

@c    5:22. Will not you then fear me, saith the Lord:  and will you not
@c    repent at my presence?  I have set the sand a bound for the sea, an
@c    everlasting ordinance, which it shall not pass over:  and the waves
@c    thereof shall toss themselves, and shall not prevail:  they shall swell,
@c    and shall not pass over it.

@c    5:23. But the heart of this people is become hard of belief and
@c    provoking, they are revolted and gone away.

@c    5:24. And they have not said in their heart:  Let us fear the Lord our
@c    God, who giveth us the early and the latter rain in due season:  who
@c    preserveth for us the fulness of the yearly harvest.

@c    5:25. Your iniquities have turned these things away, and your sins have
@c    withholden good things from you.

@c    5:26. For among my people are found wicked men, that lie in wait as
@c    fowlers, setting snares and traps to catch men.

@c    5:27. As a net is full of birds, so their houses are full of deceit:
@c    therefore are they become great and enriched.

@c    5:28. They are grown gross and fat:  and have most wickedly transgressed
@c    my words.  They have not judged the cause of the widow, they have not
@c    managed the cause of the fatherless, and they have not judged the
@c    judgment of the poor.

@c    5:29. Shall I not visit for these things, saith the Lord?  or shall not
@c    my soul take revenge on such a nation?

@c    5:30. Astonishing and wonderful things have been done in the land.

@c    5:31. The prophets prophesied falsehood, and the priests clapped their
@c    hands:  and my people loved such things:  what then shall be done in the
@c    end thereof?



@c    Jeremias Chapter 6


@c    The evils that threaten Jerusalem.  She is invited to return, and walk
@c    in the good way, and not to rely on sacrifices without obedience.

@c    6:1. Strengthen yourselves, ye sons of Benjamin, in the midst of
@c    Jerusalem, and sound the trumpet in Thecua, and set up the standard
@c    over Bethacarem:  for evil is seen out of the north, and a great
@c    destruction.

@c    6:2. I have likened the daughter of Sion to a beautiful and delicate
@c    woman.

@c    6:3. The shepherds shall come to her with their flocks:  they have
@c    pitched their tents against her round about:  every one shall feed them
@c    that are under his hand.

@c    6:4. Prepare ye war against her:  arise, and let us go up at midday:  woe
@c    unto us, for the day is declined, for the shadows of the evening are
@c    grown longer.

@c    6:5. Arise, and let us go up in the night, and destroy her houses.

@c    6:6. For thus saith the Lord of hosts:  Hew down her trees, cast up a
@c    trench about Jerusalem:  this is the city to be visited, all oppression
@c    is in the midst of her.

@c    6:7. As a cistern maketh its water cold, so hath she made her
@c    wickedness cold:  violence and spoil shall be heard in her, infirmity
@c    and stripes are continually before me.

@c    6:8. Be thou instructed, O Jerusalem, lest my soul depart from thee,
@c    lest I make thee desolate, a land uninhabited.

@c    6:9. Thus saith the Lord of hosts:  They shall gather the remains of
@c    Israel, as in a vine, even to one cluster:  turn back thy hand, as a
@c    grapegatherer into the basket.

@c    6:10. To whom shall I speak?  and to whom shall I testify, that he may
@c    hear?  behold, their ears are uncircumcised, and they cannot hear:
@c    behold the word of the Lord is become unto them a reproach:  and they
@c    will not receive it.

@c    6:11. Therefore am I full of the fury of the Lord, I am weary with
@c    holding in:  pour it out upon the child abroad, and upon the council of
@c    the young men together:  for man and woman shall be taken, the ancient
@c    and he that is full of days.

@c    6:12. And their houses shall be turned over to others, with their lands
@c    and their wives together:  for I will stretch forth my hand upon the
@c    inhabitants of the land, saith the Lord.

@c    6:13. For from the least of them even to the greatest, all are given to
@c    covetousness:  and from the prophet even to the priest, all are guilty
@c    of deceit.

@c    6:14. And they healed the breach of the daughter of my people
@c    disgracefully, saying:  Peace, peace:  and there was no peace.

@c    6:15. They were confounded, because they committed abomination:  yea,
@c    rather they were not confounded with confusion, and they knew not how
@c    to blush:  wherefore they shall fall among them that fall:  in the time
@c    of their visitation they shall fall down, saith the Lord.

@c    6:16. Thus saith the Lord:  Stand ye on the ways, and see, and ask for
@c    the old paths, which is the good way, and walk ye in it:  and you shall
@c    find refreshment for your souls.  And they said:  We will not walk.

@c    6:17. And I appointed watchmen over you, saying:  Hearken ye to the
@c    sound of the trumpet.  And they said:  We will not hearken.

@c    6:18. Therefore hear, ye nations, and know, O congregation, what great
@c    things I will do to them.

@c    6:19. Hear, O earth:  Behold I will bring evils upon this people, the
@c    fruits of their own thoughts:  because they have not heard my words, and
@c    they have cast away my law.

@c    6:20. To what purpose do you bring me frankincense from Saba, and the
@c    sweet smelling cane from a far country?  your holocausts are not
@c    acceptable, nor are your sacrifices pleasing to me.

@c    6:21. Therefore thus saith the Lord:  Behold I will bring destruction
@c    upon this people, by which fathers and sons together shall fall,
@c    neighbour and kinsman shall perish.

@c    6:22. Thus saith the Lord:  Behold a people cometh from the land of the
@c    north, and a great nation shall rise up from the ends of the earth.

@c    6:23. They shall lay hold on arrow and shield:  they are cruel, and will
@c    have no mercy.  Their voice shall roar like the sea:  and they shall
@c    mount upon horses, prepared as men for war, against thee, O daughter of
@c    Sion.

@c    6:24. We have heard the fame thereof, our hands grow feeble:  anguish
@c    hath taken hold of us, as a woman in labour.

@c    6:25. Go not out into the fields, nor walk in the highway:  for the
@c    sword of the enemy, and fear is on every side.

@c    6:26. Gird thee with sackcloth, O daughter of my people, and sprinkle
@c    thee with ashes:  make thee mourning as for an only son, a bitter
@c    lamentation, because the destroyer shall suddenly come upon us.

@c    6:27. I have set thee for a strong trier among my people:  and thou
@c    shalt know, and prove their way.

@c    6:28. All these princes go out of the way, they walk deceitfully, they
@c    are brass and iron:  they are all corrupted.

@c    6:29. The bellows have failed, the lead is consumed in the fire, the
@c    founder hath melted in vain:  for their wicked deeds are not consumed.

@c    6:30. Call them reprobate silver, for the Lord hath rejected them.



@c    Jeremias Chapter 7


@c    The temple of God shall not protect a sinful people, without a sincere
@c    conversion.  The Lord will not receive the prayers of the prophet for
@c    them:  because they are obstinate in their sins.

@c    7:1. The word that came to Jeremias from the Lord, saying:

@c    7:2. Stand in the gate of the house of the Lord, and proclaim there
@c    this word, and say:  Hear ye the word of the Lord, all ye men of Juda,
@c    that enter in at these gates, to adore the Lord.

@c    7:3. Thus saith the Lord of hosts the God of Israel:  Make your ways and
@c    your doings good:  and I will dwell with you in this place.

@c    7:4. Trust not in lying words, saying:  The temple of the Lord, the
@c    temple of the Lord, it is the temple of the Lord.

@c    7:5. For if you will order well your ways, and your doings:  if you will
@c    execute judgment between a man and his neighbour,

@c    7:6. If you oppress not the stranger, the fatherless, and the widow,
@c    and shed not innocent blood in this place, and walk not after strange
@c    gods to your own hurt,

@c    7:7. I will dwell with you in this place:  in the land, which I gave to
@c    your fathers from the beginning and for evermore.

@c    7:8. Behold you put your trust in lying words, which shall not profit
@c    you:

@c    7:9. To steal, to murder, to commit adultery, to swear falsely, to
@c    offer to Baalim, and to go after strange gods, which you know not.

@c    7:10. And you have come, and stood before me in this house, in which my
@c    name is called upon, and have said:  We are delivered, because we have
@c    done all these abominations.

@c    7:11. Is this house then, in which my name hath been called upon, in
@c    your eyes become a den of robbers?  I, I am he:  I have seen it, saith
@c    the Lord.

@c    7:12. Go ye to my place in Silo, where my name dwelt from the
@c    beginning:  and see what I did to it for the wickedness of my people
@c    Israel:

@c    7:13. And now, because you have done all these works, saith the Lord:
@c    and I have spoken to you rising up early, and speaking, and you have
@c    not heard:  and I have called you, and you have not answered:

@c    7:14. I will do to this house, in which my name is called upon, and in
@c    which you trust, and to the place which I have given you and your
@c    fathers, as I did to Silo.

@c    7:15. And I will cast you away from before my face, as I have cast away
@c    all your brethren, the whole seed of Ephraim.

@c    7:16. Therefore do not thou pray for this people, nor take to thee
@c    praise and supplication for them:  and do not withstand me:  for I will
@c    not hear thee.

@c    7:17. Seest thou not what they do in the cities of Juda, and in the
@c    streets of Jerusalem?

@c    7:18. The children gather wood, and the fathers kindle the fire, and
@c    the women knead the dough, to make cakes to the queen of heaven, and to
@c    offer libations to strange gods, and to provoke me to anger.

@c    Queen of heaven. . .That is, the moon, which they worshipped under that
@c    name.

@c    7:19. Do they provoke me to anger, saith the Lord?  is it not
@c    themselves, to the confusion of their own countenance?

@c    7:20. Therefore thus saith the Lord God:  Behold my wrath and my
@c    indignation is enkindled against this place, upon men and upon beasts,
@c    and upon the trees of the field, and upon the fruits of the land, and
@c    it shall burn, and shall not be quenched.

@c    7:21. Thus saith the Lord of hosts the God of Israel:  Add your burnt
@c    offerings to your sacrifices, and eat ye the flesh.

@c    7:22. For I spoke not to your fathers, and I commanded them not, in the
@c    day that I brought them out of the land of Egypt, concerning the matter
@c    of burnt offerings and sacrifices.

@c    I commanded them not. . .Viz., such sacrifices as the Jews at this time
@c    offered, without obedience; which was the thing principally commanded:
@c    so that in comparison with it, the offering of the holocausts and
@c    sacrifices was of small account.

@c    7:23. But this thing I commanded them, saying:  Hearken to my voice, and
@c    I will be your God, and you shall be my people:  and walk ye in all the
@c    way that I have commanded you, that it may be well with you.

@c    7:24. But they hearkened not, nor inclined their ear:  but walked in
@c    their own will, and in the perversity of their wicked heart:  and went
@c    backward and not forward,

@c    7:25. From the day that their fathers came out of the land of Egypt,
@c    even to this day.  And I have sent to you all my servants the prophets,
@c    from day to day, rising up early and sending.

@c    7:26. And they have not hearkened to me:  nor inclined their ear:  but
@c    have hardened their neck, and have done worse than their fathers.

@c    7:27. And thou shalt speak to them all these words, but they will not
@c    hearken to thee:  and thou shalt call them, but they will not answer
@c    thee.

@c    7:28. And thou shalt say to them:  This is a nation which hath not
@c    hearkened to the voice of the Lord their God, nor received instruction:
@c    faith is lost, and is taken away out of their mouth.

@c    7:29. Cut off thy hair, and cast it away:  and take up a lamentation on
@c    high:  for the Lord hath rejected, and forsaken the generation of his
@c    wrath,

@c    7:30. Because the children of Juda have done evil in my eyes, saith the
@c    Lord.  They have set their abominations in the house in which my name is
@c    called upon, to pollute it;

@c    7:31. And they have built the high places of Topheth, which is in the
@c    valley of the son of Ennom, to burn their sons, and their daughters in
@c    the fire:  which I commanded not, nor thought on in my heart.

@c    7:32. Therefore behold the days shall come, saith the Lord, and it
@c    shall no more be called Topheth, nor the valley of the son of Ennom:
@c    but the valley of slaughter:  and they shall bury in Topheth, because
@c    there is no place.

@c    7:33. And the carcasses of this people shall be meat for the fowls of
@c    the air, and for the beasts of the earth, and there shall be none to
@c    drive them away.

@c    7:34. And I will cause to cease out of the cities of Juda, and out of
@c    the streets of Jerusalem, the voice of joy, and the voice of gladness,
@c    the voice of the bridegroom and the voice of the bride:  for the land
@c    shall be desolate.



@c    Jeremias Chapter 8


@c    Other evils that shall fall upon the Jews for their impenitence.

@c    8:1. At that time, saith the Lord, they shall cast out the bones of the
@c    kings of Juda, and the bones of the princes thereof, and the bones of
@c    the priests, and the bones of the prophets, and the bones of the
@c    inhabitants of Jerusalem, out of their graves.

@c    8:2. And they shall spread them abroad to the sun, and the moon, and
@c    all the host of heaven, whom they have loved, and whom they have
@c    served, and after whom have walked, and whom they have sought, and
@c    adored:  they shall not be gathered, and they shall not be buried:  they
@c    shall be as dung upon the face of the earth.

@c    8:3. And death shall be chosen rather than life by all that shall
@c    remain of this wicked kindred in all places, which are left, to which I
@c    have cast them out, saith the Lord of hosts.

@c    8:4. And thou shalt say to them:  Thus saith the Lord:  Shall not he that
@c    falleth, rise again?  and he that is turned away, shall he not turn
@c    again?

@c    8:5. Why then is this people in Jerusalem turned away with a stubborn
@c    revolting?  they have laid hold on lying, and have refused to return.

@c    8:6. I attended, and hearkened; no man speaketh what is good, there is
@c    none that doth penance for his sin, saying:  What have I done?  They are
@c    all turned to their own course, as a horse rushing to the battle.

@c    8:7. The kite in the air hath known her time:  the turtle, and the
@c    swallow, and the stork have observed the time of their coming:  but my
@c    people have not known the judgment of the Lord.

@c    8:8. How do you say:  We are wise, and the law of the Lord is with us?
@c    Indeed the lying pens of the scribes hath wrought falsehood.

@c    8:9. The wise men are confounded, they are dismayed, and taken:  for
@c    they have cast away the word of the Lord, and there is no wisdom in
@c    them.

@c    8:10. Therefore will I give their women to strangers, their fields to
@c    others for an inheritance:  because from the least even to the greatest
@c    all follow covetousness:  from the prophet even to the priest all deal
@c    deceitfully.

@c    8:11. And they healed the breach of the daughter of my people
@c    disgracefully, saying:  Peace, peace:  when there was no peace.

@c    8:12. They are confounded, because they have committed abomination:  yea
@c    rather they are not confounded with confusion, and they have not known
@c    how to blush:  therefore shall they fall among them that fall; in the
@c    time of their visitation they shall fall, saith the Lord.

@c    8:13. Gathering I will gather them together, saith the Lord, there is
@c    no grape on the vines, and there are no figs on the fig tree, the leaf
@c    is fallen:  and I have given them the things that are passed away.

@c    8:14. Why do we sit still?  assemble yourselves, and let us enter into
@c    the fenced city, and let us be silent there:  for the Lord our God hath
@c    put us to silence, and hath given us water of gall to drink:  for we
@c    have sinned against the Lord.

@c    8:15. We looked for peace and no good came:  for a time of healing, and
@c    behold fear.

@c    8:16. The snorting of his horses was heard from Dan, all the land was
@c    moved at the sound of the neighing of his warriors:  and they came and
@c    devoured the land, and all that was in it:  the city and its
@c    inhabitants.

@c    8:17. For behold I will send among you serpents, basilisks, against
@c    which there is no charm:  and they shall bite you, saith the Lord.

@c    8:18. My sorrow is above sorrow, my heart mourneth within me.

@c    8:19. Behold the voice of the daughter of my people from a far country:
@c    Is not the Lord in Sion, or is not her king in her?  why then have they
@c    provoked me to wrath with their idols, and strange vanities?

@c    8:20. The harvest is past, the summer is ended, and we are not saved.

@c    8:21. For the affliction of the daughter of my people I am afflicted,
@c    and made sorrowful, astonishment hath taken hold on me.

@c    8:22. Is there no balm in Galaad?  or is there no physician there?  Why
@c    then is not the wound of the daughter of my people closed?



@c    Jeremias Chapter 9


@c    The prophet laments the miseries of his people:  and their sins, which
@c    are the cause of them.  He exhorts them to repentance.

@c    9:1. Who will give water to my head, and a fountain of tears to my
@c    eyes?  and I will weep day and night for the slain of the daughter of my
@c    people.

@c    9:2. Who will give me in the wilderness a lodging place of wayfaring
@c    men, and I will leave my people, and depart from them?  because they are
@c    all adulterers, an assembly of transgressors.

@c    9:3. And they have bent their tongue, as a bow, for lies, and not for
@c    truth:  they have strengthened themselves upon the earth, for they have
@c    proceeded from evil to evil, and me they have not known, saith the
@c    Lord.

@c    9:4. Let every man take heed of his neighbour, and let him not trust in
@c    any brother of his:  for every brother will utterly supplant, and every
@c    friend will walk deceitfully.

@c    9:5. And a man shall mock his brother, and they will not speak the
@c    truth:  for they have taught their tongue to speak lies:  they have
@c    laboured to commit iniquity.

@c    9:6. Thy habitation is in the midst of deceit:  through deceit they have
@c    refused to know me, saith the Lord.

@c    9:7. Therefore thus saith the Lord of hosts:  Behold I will melt, and
@c    try them:  for what else shall I do before the daughter of my people?

@c    9:8. Their tongue is a piercing arrow, it hath spoken deceit:  with his
@c    mouth one speaketh peace with his friend, and secretly he lieth in wait
@c    for him.

@c    9:9. Shall I not visit them for these things, saith the Lord?  or shall
@c    not my soul be revenged on such a nation?

@c    9:10. For the mountains I will take up weeping and lamentation, and for
@c    the beautiful places of the desert, mourning:  because they are burnt
@c    up, for that there is not a man that passeth through them:  and they
@c    have not heard the voice of the owner:  from the fowl of the air to the
@c    beasts they are gone away and departed.

@c    9:11. And I will make Jerusalem to be heaps of sand, and dens of
@c    dragons:  and I will make the cities of Juda desolate, for want of an
@c    inhabitant.

@c    9:12. Who is the wise man, that may understand this, and to whom the
@c    word of the mouth of the Lord may come that he may declare this, why
@c    the land hath perished, and is burnt up like a wilderness, which none
@c    passeth through?

@c    9:13. And the Lord said:  Because they have forsaken my law, which I
@c    gave them, and have not heard my voice, and have not walked in it.

@c    9:14. But they have gone after the perverseness of their own heart, and
@c    after Baalim, which their fathers taught them.

@c    9:15. Therefore thus saith the Lord of hosts the God of Israel:  Behold
@c    I will feed this people with wormwood, and give them water of gall to
@c    drink.

@c    9:16. And I will scatter them among the nations, which they and their
@c    fathers have not known:  and I will send the sword after them till they
@c    be consumed.

@c    9:17. Thus saith the Lord of hosts the God of Israel:  Consider ye, and
@c    call for the mourning women, and let them come:  and send to them that
@c    are wise women, and let them make haste:

@c    9:18. Let them hasten and take up a lamentation for us:  let our eyes
@c    shed tears, and our eyelids run down with waters.

@c    9:19. For a voice of wailing is heard out of Sion:  How are we wasted
@c    and greatly confounded?  because we have left the land, because our
@c    dwellings are cast down.

@c    9:20. Hear therefore, ye women, the word of the Lord:  and let your ears
@c    receive the word of his mouth:  and teach your daughters wailing:  and
@c    every one her neighbour mourning.

@c    9:21. For death is come up through our windows, it is entered into our
@c    houses to destroy the children from without, the young men from the
@c    streets.

@c    9:22. Speak:  Thus saith the Lord:  Even the carcass of man shall fall as
@c    dung upon the face of the country, and as grass behind the back of the
@c    mower, and there is none to gather it.

@c    9:23. Thus saith the Lord:  Let not the wise man glory in his wisdom,
@c    and let not the strong man glory in his strength, and let not the rich
@c    man glory in his riches:

@c    9:24. But let him that glorieth glory in this, that he understandeth
@c    and knoweth me, for I am the Lord that exercise mercy, and judgment,
@c    and justice in the earth:  for these things please me, saith the Lord.

@c    9:25. Behold, the days come, saith the Lord, and I will visit upon
@c    every one that hath the foreskin circumcised.

@c    9:26. Upon Egypt, and upon Juda, and upon Edom, and upon the children
@c    of Ammon, and upon Moab, and upon all that have their hair polled
@c    round, that dwell in the desert:  for all the nations are uncircumcised
@c    in the flesh, but all the house of Israel are uncircumcised in the
@c    heart.



@c    Jeremias Chapter 10


@c    Neither stars nor idols are to be feared, but the great Creator of all
@c    things.  The chastisement of Jerusalem for her sins.

@c    10:1. Hear ye the word which the Lord hath spoken concerning you, O
@c    house of Israel.

@c    10:2. Thus saith the Lord:  Learn not according to the ways of the
@c    Gentiles:  and be not afraid of the signs of heaven, which the heathens
@c    fear:

@c    10:3. For the laws of the people are vain:  for the works of the hand of
@c    the workman hath cut a tree out of the forest with an axe.

@c    10:4. He hath decked it with silver and gold:  he hath put it together
@c    with nails and hammers, that it may not fall asunder.

@c    10:5. They are framed after the likeness of a palm tree, and shall not
@c    speak:  they must be carried to be removed, because they cannot go.
@c    Therefore fear them not, for they can neither do evil nor good.

@c    10:6. There is none like to thee, O Lord:  thou art great, and great is
@c    thy name in might.

@c    10:7. Who shall not fear thee, O king of nations?  for thine is the
@c    glory:  among all the wise men of the nations, and in all their kingdoms
@c    there is none like unto thee.

@c    10:8. They shall be all proved together to be senseless and foolish:
@c    the doctrine of their vanity is wood.

@c    10:9. Silver spread into plates is brought from Tharsis, and gold from
@c    Ophaz:  the work of the artificer, and of the hand of the coppersmith:
@c    violet and purple is their clothing:  all these things are the work of
@c    artificers.

@c    10:10. But the Lord is the true God:  he is the living God, and the
@c    everlasting king:  at his wrath the earth shall tremble, and the nations
@c    shall not be able to abide his threatening.

@c    10:11. Thus then shall you say to them:  The gods that have not made
@c    heaven and earth, let them perish from the earth, and from among those
@c    places that are under heaven.

@c    10:12. He that maketh the earth by his power, that prepareth the world
@c    by his wisdom, and stretcheth out the heavens by his knowledge.

@c    10:13. At his voice he giveth a multitude of waters in the heaven, and
@c    lifteth up the clouds from the ends of the earth:  he maketh lightnings
@c    for rain, and bringeth forth the wind out of his treasures.

@c    10:14. Every man is become a fool for knowledge, every artist is
@c    confounded in his graven idol:  for what he hath cast is false, and
@c    there is no spirit in them.

@c    10:15. They are vain things, and a ridiculous work:  in the time of
@c    their visitation they shall perish.

@c    10:16. The portion of Jacob is not like these:  for it is he who formed
@c    all things:  and Israel is the rod of his inheritance:  the Lord of hosts
@c    is his name.

@c    10:17. Gather up thy shame out of the land, thou that dwellest in a
@c    siege.

@c    10:18. For thus saith he Lord:  Behold I will cast away far off the
@c    inhabitants of the land at this time:  and I will afflict them, so that
@c    they may be found.

@c    10:19. Woe is me for my destruction, my wound is very grievous.  But I
@c    said:  Truly this is my own evil, and I will bear it.

@c    10:20. My tabernacle is laid waste, all my cords are broken:  my
@c    children are gone out from me, and they are not:  there is none to
@c    stretch forth my tent any more, and to set up my curtains.

@c    10:21. Because the pastors have done foolishly, and have not sought the
@c    Lord:  therefore have they not understood, and all their flock is
@c    scattered.

@c    10:22. Behold the sound of a noise cometh, a great commotion out of the
@c    land of the north:  to make the cities of Juda a desert, and a dwelling
@c    for dragons.

@c    10:23. I know, O Lord, that the way of a man is not his:  neither is it
@c    in a man to walk, and to direct his steps.

@c    The way of a man is not his. . .The meaning is, that notwithstanding
@c    man's free will, yet he can do no good without God's help, nor evil
@c    without his permission.  So that, in the present case, all the evils
@c    which Nabuchodonosor was about to bring upon Jerusalem, could not have
@c    come but by the will of God.

@c    10:24. Correct me, O Lord, but yet with judgment:  and not in thy fury,
@c    lest thou bring me to nothing.

@c    10:25. Pour out thy indignation upon the nations that have not known
@c    thee, and upon the provinces that have not called upon thy name:
@c    because they have eaten up Jacob, and devoured him, and consumed him,
@c    and have destroyed his glory.



@c    Jeremias Chapter 11


@c    The prophet proclaims the covenant of God:  and denounces evils to the
@c    obstinate transgressors of it.  The conspiracy of the Jews against him,
@c    a figure of their conspiracy against Christ.

@c    11:1. The word that came from the Lord to Jeremias, saying:

@c    11:2. Hear ye the words of this covenant, and speak to the men of Juda,
@c    and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem,

@c    11:3. And thou shalt say to them:  Thus saith the Lord the God of
@c    Israel:  Cursed is the man that shall not hearken to the words of this
@c    covenant,

@c    11:4. Which I commanded your fathers in the day that I brought them out
@c    of the land of Egypt, from the iron furnace, saying:  Hear ye my voice,
@c    and do all things that I command you:  and you shall be my people, and I
@c    will be your God:

@c    11:5. That I may accomplish the oath which I swore to your fathers, to
@c    give them a land flowing with milk and honey, as it is this day.  And I
@c    answered and said:  Amen, O Lord.

@c    11:6. And the Lord said to me:  Proclaim aloud all these words in the
@c    cities of Juda, and in the streets of Jerusalem, saying:  Hear ye the
@c    words of the covenant, and do them:

@c    11:7. For protesting I conjured your fathers in the day that I brought
@c    them out of the land of Egypt even to this day:  rising early I conjured
@c    them, and said:  Hearken ye to my voice:

@c    11:8. And they obeyed not, nor inclined their ear:  but walked every one
@c    in the perverseness of his own wicked heart:  and I brought upon them
@c    all the words of this covenant, which I commanded them to do, but they
@c    did them not.

@c    11:9. And the Lord said to me:  A conspiracy is found among the men of
@c    Juda, and among the inhabitants of Jerusalem.

@c    11:10. They are returned to the former iniquities of their fathers, who
@c    refused to hear my words:  so these likewise have gone after strange
@c    gods, to serve them:  the house of Israel, and the house of Juda have
@c    made void my covenant, which I made with their fathers.

@c    11:11. Wherefore thus saith the Lord:  Behold I will bring in evils upon
@c    them, which they shall not be able to escape:  and they shall cry to me,
@c    and I will not hearken to them.

@c    11:12. And the cities of Juda, and the inhabitants of Jerusalem shall
@c    go, and cry to the gods to whom they offer sacrifice, and they shall
@c    not save them in the time of their affliction.

@c    11:13. For according to the number of thy cities were thy gods, O Juda:
@c    and according to the number of the streets of Jerusalem thou hast set
@c    up altars of confusion, altars to offer sacrifice to Baalim.

@c    11:14. Therefore do not thou pray for this people, and do not take up
@c    praise and prayer for them:  for I will not hear them in the time of
@c    their cry to me, in the time of their affliction.

@c    11:15. What is the meaning that my beloved hath wrought much wickedness
@c    in my house?  shall the holy flesh take away from thee thy crimes, in
@c    which thou hast boasted?

@c    11:16. The Lord called thy name, a plentiful olive tree, fair,
@c    fruitful, and beautiful:  at the noise of a word, a great fire was
@c    kindled in it, and the branches thereof are burnt.

@c    11:17. And the Lord of hosts that planted thee, hath pronounced evil
@c    against thee:  for the evils of the house of Israel, and of the house of
@c    Juda, which they have done to themselves, to provoke me, offering
@c    sacrifice to Baalim.

@c    11:18. But thou, O Lord, hast shewn me, and I have known:  then thou
@c    shewedst me their doings.

@c    11:19. And I was as a meek lamb, that is carried to be a victim:  and I
@c    knew not that they had devised counsels against me, saying:  Let us put
@c    wood on his bread, and cut him off from the land of the living, and let
@c    his name be remembered no more.

@c    11:20. But thou, O Lord of Sabaoth, who judgest justly, and triest the
@c    reins and the hearts, let me see thy revenge on them:  for to thee have
@c    I revealed my cause.

@c    Sabaoth. . .That is, of hosts or armies, a name frequently given to God
@c    in the scriptures.--Ibid.  Thy revenge. . .This was rather a prediction
@c    of what was to happen, with an approbation of the divine justice, than an
@c    imprecation.

@c    11:21. Therefore thus saith the Lord to the men of Anathoth, who seek
@c    thy life, and say:  Thou shalt not prophesy in the name of the Lord, and
@c    thou shalt not die in our hands.

@c    11:22. Therefore thus saith the Lord of hosts:  Behold I will visit upon
@c    them:  their young men shall die by the sword, their sons and their
@c    daughters shall die by famine.

@c    11:23. And there shall be no remains of them:  for I will bring in evil
@c    upon the men of Anathoth, the year of their visitation.



@c    Jeremias Chapter 12


@c    The prosperity of the wicked shall be but for a short time.  The
@c    desolation of the Jews for their sins.  Their return from their
@c    captivity.

@c    12:1. Thou indeed, O Lord, art just, if I plead with thee, but yet I
@c    will speak what is just to thee:  Why doth the way of the wicked
@c    prosper:  why is it well with all them that transgress, and do wickedly?

@c    12:2. Thou hast planted them, and they have taken root:  they prosper
@c    and bring forth fruit:  thou art near in their mouth, and far from their
@c    reins.

@c    12:3. And thou, O Lord, hast known me, thou hast seen me, and proved my
@c    heart with thee:  gather them together as for the day of slaughter.

@c    12:4. How long shall the land mourn, and the herb of every field wither
@c    for the wickedness of them that dwell therein?  The beasts and the birds
@c    are consumed:  because they have said:  He shall not see our last end.

@c    12:5. If thou hast been wearied with running with footmen, how canst
@c    thou contend with horses?  and if thou hast been secure in a land of
@c    peace, what wilt thou do in the swelling of the Jordan?

@c    12:6. For even thy brethren, and the house of thy father, even they
@c    have fought against thee, and have cried after thee with full voice:
@c    believe them not when they speak good things to thee.

@c    12:7. I have forsaken my house, I have left my inheritance:  I have
@c    given my dear soul into the hand of her enemies.

@c    12:8. My inheritance is become to me as a lion in the wood:  it hath
@c    cried out against me, therefore have I hated it.

@c    12:9. Is my inheritance to me as a speckled bird?  is it as a bird dyed
@c    throughout?  come ye, assemble yourselves, all ye beasts of the earth,
@c    make haste to devour.

@c    12:10. Many pastors have destroyed my vineyard, they have trodden my
@c    portion under foot:  they have changed my delightful portion into a
@c    desolate wilderness.

@c    12:11. They have laid it waste, and it hath mourned for me.  With
@c    desolation is all the land made desolate; because there is none that
@c    considereth in the heart.

@c    12:12. The spoilers are come upon all the ways of the wilderness, for
@c    the sword of the Lord shall devour from one end of the land to the
@c    other end thereof:  there is no peace for all flesh.

@c    12:13. They have sown wheat, and reaped thorns:  they have received an
@c    inheritance, and it shall not profit them:  you shall be ashamed of your
@c    fruits, because of the fierce wrath of the Lord.

@c    12:14. Thus saith the Lord against all wicked neighbours, that touch
@c    the inheritance that I have shared out to my people Israel:  Behold I
@c    will pluck them out of their land, and I will pluck the house of Juda
@c    out of the midst of them.

@c    12:15. And when I shall have plucked them out, I will return, and have
@c    mercy on them:  and will bring them back, every man to his inheritance,
@c    and every man into his land.

@c    12:16. And it shall come to pass, if they will be taught, and will
@c    learn the ways of my people, to swear by my name:  The Lord liveth, as
@c    they have taught my people to swear by Baal:  that they shall be built
@c    up in the midst of my people.

@c    12:17. But if they will not hear, I will utterly pluck out and destroy
@c    that nation, saith the Lord.



@c    Jeremias Chapter 13


@c    Under the figure of a linen girdle is foretold the destruction of the
@c    Jews.  Their obstinacy in sin brings all miseries upon them.

@c    13:1. Thus saith the Lord to me:  Go, and get thee a linen girdle, and
@c    thou shalt put it about thy loins, and shalt not put it into water.

@c    13:2. And I got a girdle according to the word of the Lord, and put it
@c    about my loins.

@c    13:3. And the word of the Lord came to me the second time, saying:

@c    13:4. Take the girdle which thou hast got, which is about thy loins,
@c    and arise, go to the Euphrates, and hide it there in a hole of the
@c    rock.

@c    13:5. And I went, and hid it by the Euphrates, as the Lord had
@c    commanded me.

@c    13:6. And it came to pass after many days, that the Lord said to me:
@c    Arise, go to the Euphrates, and take from thence the girdle, which I
@c    commanded thee to hide there.

@c    13:7. And I went to the Euphrates, and digged, and took the girdle out
@c    of the place where I had hid it and behold the girdle was rotten, so
@c    that it was fit for no use.

@c    13:8. And the word of the Lord came to me, saying:

@c    13:9. Thus saith the Lord:  After this manner will I make the pride of
@c    Juda, and the great pride of Jerusalem to rot.

@c    13:10. This wicked people, that will not hear my words, and that walk
@c    in the perverseness of their heart, and have gone after strange gods to
@c    serve them, and to adore them:  and they shall be as this girdle ,which
@c    is fit for no use.

@c    13:11. For as the girdle sticketh close to the loins of a man, so have
@c    I brought close to me all the house of Israel, and all the house of
@c    Juda, saith the Lord:  that they might be my people, and for a name, and
@c    for a praise, and for a glory:  but they would not hear.

@c    13:12. Thou shalt speak therefore to them this word:  Thus saith the
@c    Lord the God of Israel:  Every bottle shall be filled with wine.  And
@c    they shall say to thee:  Do we not know that every bottle shall be
@c    filled with wine?

@c    13:13. And thou shalt say to them:  Thus saith the Lord:  Behold I will
@c    fill all the inhabitants of this land, and the kings of the race of
@c    David that sit upon his throne, and the priests, and the prophets, and
@c    all the inhabitants of Jerusalem, with drunkenness.

@c    13:14. And I will scatter them every man from his brother, and fathers
@c    and sons in like manner, saith the Lord:  I will not spare, and I will
@c    not pardon:  nor will I have mercy, but to destroy them.

@c    13:15. Hear ye, and give ear:  Be not proud, for the Lord hath spoken.

@c    13:16. Give ye glory to the Lord your God, before it be dark, and
@c    before your feet stumble upon the dark mountains:  you shall look for
@c    light, and he will turn it into the shadow of death, and into darkness.

@c    13:17. But if you will not hear this, my soul shall weep in secret for
@c    your pride:  weeping it shall weep, and my eyes shall run down with
@c    tears, because the flock of the Lord is carried away captive.

@c    13:18. Say to the king, and to the queen:  Humble yourselves, sit down:
@c    for the crown of your glory is come down from your head.

@c    13:19. The cities of the south are shut up, and there is none to open
@c    them:  all Juda is carried away captive with an entire captivity.

@c    13:20. Lift up your eyes, and see, you that come from the north:  where
@c    is the flock that is given thee, thy beautiful cattle?

@c    13:21. What wilt thou say when he shall visit thee?  for thou hast
@c    taught them against thee, and instructed them against thy own head:
@c    shall not sorrows lay hold on thee, as a woman in labour?

@c    13:22. And if thou shalt say in thy heart:  Why are these things come
@c    upon me?  For the greatness of thy iniquity, thy nakedness is
@c    discovered, the soles of thy feet are defiled.

@c    13:23. If the Ethiopian can change his skin, or the leopard his spots:
@c    you also may do well, when you have learned evil.

@c    13:24. And I will scatter them as stubble, which is carried away by the
@c    wind in the desert.

@c    13:25. This is thy lot, and the portion of thy measure from me, saith
@c    the Lord, because thou hast forgotten me, and hast trusted in
@c    falsehood.

@c    13:26. Wherefore I have also bared thy thighs against thy face, and thy
@c    shame hath appeared.

@c    13:27. I have seen thy adulteries, and thy neighing, the wickedness of
@c    thy fornication:  and thy abominations, upon the hills in the field.  Woe
@c    to thee, Jerusalem, wilt thou not be made clean after me:  how long yet?



@c    Jeremias Chapter 14


@c    A grievous famine:  and the prophet's prayer on that occasion.  Evils
@c    denounced to false prophets.  The prophet mourns for his people.

@c    14:1. The word of the Lord that came to Jeremias concerning the words
@c    of the drought.

@c    14:2. Judea hath mourned, and the gates thereof are fallen, and are
@c    become obscure on the ground, and the cry of Jerusalem is gone up.

@c    14:3. The great ones sent their inferiors to the water:  they came to
@c    draw, they found no water, they carried back their vessels empty:  they
@c    were confounded and afflicted, and covered their heads.

@c    14:4. For the destruction of the land, because there came no rain upon
@c    the earth, the husbandman were confounded, they covered their heads.

@c    14:5. Yea, the hind also brought forth in the field, and left it,
@c    because there was no grass.

@c    14:6. And the wild asses stood upon the rocks, they snuffed up the wind
@c    like dragons, their eyes failed, because there was no grass.

@c    14:7. If our iniquities have testified against us, O Lord, do thou it
@c    for thy name's sake, for our rebellions are many, we have sinned
@c    against thee.

@c    14:8. O expectation of Israel, the Saviour thereof in time of trouble:
@c    why wilt thou be as a stranger in the land, and as a wayfaring man
@c    turning in to lodge?

@c    14:9. Why wilt thou be as a wandering man, as a mighty man that cannot
@c    save?  but thou, O Lord, art among us, and thy name is called upon by
@c    us, forsake us not.

@c    14:10. Thus saith the Lord to this people, that have loved to move
@c    their feet, and have not rested, and have not pleased the Lord:  He will
@c    now remember their iniquities, and visit their sins.

@c    14:11. And the Lord said to me:  Pray not for this people for their
@c    good.

@c    14:12. When they fast I will not hear their prayers:  and if they offer
@c    holocausts and victims, I will not receive them:  for I will consume
@c    them by the sword, and by famine, and by the pestilence.

@c    14:13. And I said:  Ah, ah, ah, O Lord God, the prophets say to them:
@c    You shall not see the sword, and there shall be no famine among you,
@c    but he will give you true peace in this place.

@c    14:14. And the Lord said to me:  The prophets prophesy falsely in my
@c    name:  I sent them not, neither have I commanded them, nor have I spoken
@c    to them:  they prophesy unto you a lying vision, and divination and
@c    deceit, and the seduction of their own heart.

@c    14:15. Therefore thus saith the Lord concerning the prophets that
@c    prophesy in my name, whom I did not send, that say:  Sword and famine
@c    shall not be in this land:  By sword and famine shall those prophets be
@c    consumed.

@c    14:16. And the people to whom they prophesy, shall be cast out in the
@c    streets of Jerusalem because of the famine and the sword, and there
@c    shall be none to bury them:  they and their wives, their sons and their
@c    daughters, and I will pour out their own wickedness upon them.

@c    14:17. And thou shalt speak this word to them:  Let my eyes shed down
@c    tears night and day, and let them not cease, because the virgin
@c    daughter of my people is afflicted with a great affliction, with an
@c    exceeding grievous evil.

@c    14:18. If I go forth into the fields, behold the slain with the sword:
@c    and if I enter into the city, behold them that are consumed with
@c    famine.  The prophet also and the priest are gone into a land which they
@c    knew not.

@c    14:19. Hast thou utterly cast away Juda, or hath thy soul abhorred
@c    Sion?  why then hast thou struck us, so that there is no healing for us?
@c    we have looked for peace, and there is no good:  and for the time of
@c    healing, and behold trouble.

@c    14:20. We acknowledge, O Lord, our wickedness, the iniquities of our
@c    fathers, because we have sinned against thee.

@c    14:21. Give us not to be a reproach, for thy name's sake, and do not
@c    disgrace in us the throne of thy glory:  remember, break not thy
@c    covenant with us.

@c    14:22. Are there any among the graven things of the Gentiles that can
@c    send rain?  or can the heavens give showers?  art not thou the Lord our
@c    God, whom we have looked for?  for thou hast made all these things.



@c    Jeremias Chapter 15


@c    God is determined to punish the Jews for their sins.  The prophet's
@c    complaint, and God's promise to him.

@c    15:1. And the Lord said to me:  If Moses and Samuel shall stand before
@c    me, my soul is not towards this people:  cast them out from my sight,
@c    and let them go forth.

@c    15:2. And if they shall say unto thee:  Whither shall we go forth?  thou
@c    shalt say to them:  Thus saith the Lord:  Such as are for death, to
@c    death:  and such as are for the sword, to the sword:  and such as are for
@c    famine, to famine:  and such as are for captivity, to captivity.

@c    15:3. And I will visit them with four kinds, saith the Lord:  The sword
@c    to kill, and the dogs to tear, and the fowls of the air, and the beasts
@c    of the earth, to devour and to destroy.

@c    15:4. And I will give them up to the rage of all the kingdoms of the
@c    earth:  because of Manasses the son of Ezechias the king of Juda, for
@c    all that he did in Jerusalem.

@c    15:5. For who shall have pity on thee, O Jerusalem?  or who shall bemoan
@c    thee?  or who shall go to pray for thy peace?

@c    15:6. Thou hast forsaken me, saith the Lord, thou art gone backward:
@c    and I will stretch out my hand against thee, and I will destroy thee:  I
@c    am weary of entreating thee.

@c    15:7. And I will scatter them with a fan in the gates of the land:  I
@c    have killed and destroyed my people, and yet they are not returned from
@c    their ways.

@c    15:8. Their widows are multiplied unto me above the sand of the sea:  I
@c    have brought upon them against the mother of the young man a spoiler at
@c    noonday:  I have cast a terror on a sudden upon the cities.

@c    15:9. She that hath borne seven is become weak, her soul hath fainted
@c    away:  her sun is gone down, while it was yet day:  she is confounded,
@c    and ashamed:  and the residue of them I will give up to the sword in the
@c    sight of their enemies, saith the Lord.

@c    15:10. Woe is me, my mother:  why hast thou borne me a man of strife, a
@c    man of contention to all the earth?  I have not lent on usury, neither
@c    hath any man lent to me on usury:  yet all curse me.

@c    15:11. The Lord saith to me:  Assuredly it shall be well with thy
@c    remnant, assuredly I shall help thee in the time of affliction, and in
@c    the time of tribulation against the enemy.

@c    15:12. Shall iron be allied with the iron from the north, and the
@c    brass?

@c    Shall iron be allied, etc. . .Shall the iron, that is, the strength of
@c    Juda, stand against the stronger iron of the north, that is, of
@c    Babylon:  or enter into an alliance upon equal footing with it?  No
@c    certainly:  but it must be broken by it.

@c    15:13. Thy riches and thy treasures I will give unto spoil for nothing,
@c    because of all thy sins, even in all thy borders.

@c    15:14. And I will bring thy enemies out of a land, which thou knowest
@c    not:  for a fire is kindled in my rage, it shall burn upon you.

@c    15:15. O Lord, thou knowest, remember me, and visit me, and defend me
@c    from them that persecute me, do not defend me in thy patience:  know
@c    that for thy sake I have suffered reproach.

@c    Do not defend me in thy patience. . .That is, let not thy patience and
@c    longsuffering, which thou usest towards sinners, keep thee from making
@c    haste to my assistance.

@c    15:16. Thy words were found, and I did eat them, and thy word was to me
@c    a joy and gladness of my heart:  for thy name is called upon me, O Lord
@c    God of hosts.

@c    15:17. I sat not in the assembly of jesters, nor did I make a boast of
@c    the presence of thy hand:  I sat alone, because thou hast filled me with
@c    threats.

@c    15:18. Why is my sorrow become perpetual, and my wound desperate so as
@c    to refuse to be healed?  it is become to me as the falsehood of
@c    deceitful waters that cannot be trusted.

@c    15:19. Therefore thus saith the Lord:  If thou wilt be converted, I will
@c    convert thee, and thou shalt stand before my face; and thou wilt
@c    separate the precious from the vile, thou shalt be as my mouth:  they
@c    shall be turned to thee, and thou shalt not be turned to them.

@c    15:20. And I will make thee to this people as a strong wall of brass:
@c    and they shall fight against thee, and shall not prevail:  for I am with
@c    thee to save thee, and to deliver thee, saith the Lord.

@c    15:21. And I will deliver thee out of the hand of the wicked, and I
@c    will redeem thee out of the hand of the mighty.



@c    Jeremias Chapter 16


@c    The prophet is forbid to marry.  The Jews shall be utterly ruined for
@c    their idolatry:  but shall at length be released from their captivity,
@c    and the Gentiles shall be converted.

@c    16:1. And the word of the Lord came to me, saying:

@c    16:2. Thou shalt not take thee a wife, neither shalt thou have sons and
@c    daughters in this place.

@c    16:3. For thus saith the Lord concerning the sons and daughters, that
@c    are born in this place, and concerning their mothers that bore them:
@c    and concerning their fathers, of whom they were born in this land:

@c    16:4. They shall die by the death of grievous illnesses:  they shall not
@c    be lamented, and they shall not be buried, they shall be as dung upon
@c    the face of the earth:  and they shall be consumed with the sword, and
@c    with famine:  and their carcasses shall be meat for the fowls of the
@c    air, and for the beasts of the earth.

@c    16:5. For thus saith the Lord:  Enter not into the house of feasting,
@c    neither go thou to mourn, nor to comfort them:  because I have taken
@c    away my peace from this people, saith the Lord, my mercy and
@c    commiserations.

@c    16:6. Both the great and the little shall die in this land:  they shall
@c    not be buried nor lamented, and men shall not cut themselves, nor make
@c    themselves bald for them.

@c    16:7. And they shall not break bread among them to him that mourneth,
@c    to comfort him for the dead:  neither shall they give them for their
@c    father and mother.

@c    16:8. And do not thou go into the house of feasting, to sit with them,
@c    and to eat and drink:

@c    16:9. For thus saith the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel:  Behold I
@c    will take away out of this place in your sight, and in your days the
@c    voice of mirth, and the voice of gladness, the voice of the bridegroom,
@c    and the voice of the bride.

@c    16:10. And when thou shalt tell this people all these words, and they
@c    shall say to thee:  Wherefore hath the Lord pronounced against us all
@c    this great evil?  what is our iniquity?  and what is our sin, that we
@c    have sinned against the Lord our God?

@c    16:11. Thou shalt say to them:  Because your fathers forsook me, saith
@c    the Lord:  and went after strange gods, and served them, and adored
@c    them:  and they forsook me, and kept not my law.

@c    16:12. And you also have done worse than your fathers:  for behold every
@c    one of you walketh after the perverseness of his evil heart, so as not
@c    to hearken to me.

@c    16:13. So I will cast you forth out of this land, into a land which you
@c    know not, nor your fathers:  and there you shall serve strange gods day
@c    and night, which shall not give you any rest.

@c    16:14. Therefore behold the days come, saith the Lord, when it shall be
@c    said no more:  The Lord liveth, that brought forth the children of
@c    Israel out of the land of Egypt.

@c    16:15. But, The Lord liveth, that brought the children of Israel out of
@c    the land of the north, and out of all the lands to which I cast them
@c    out:  and I will bring them again into their land, which I gave to their
@c    fathers.

@c    16:16. Behold I will send many fishers, saith the Lord, and they shall
@c    fish them:  and after this I will send them many hunters, and they shall
@c    hunt them from every mountain, and from every hill and out of the holes
@c    of the rocks.

@c    16:17. For my eyes are upon all their ways:  they are not hid from my
@c    face, and their iniquity hath not been hid from my eyes.

@c    16:18. And I will repay first their double iniquities, and their sins:
@c    because they have defiled my land with the carcasses of their idols,
@c    and they have filled my inheritance with their abominations.

@c    16:19. O Lord, my might, and my strength, and my refuge in the day of
@c    tribulation:  to thee the Gentiles shall come from the ends of the
@c    earth, and shall say:  Surely our fathers have possessed lies, a vanity
@c    which hath not profited them.

@c    16:20. Shall a man make gods unto himself and they are no gods?

@c    16:21. Therefore behold I will this once cause them to know, I will
@c    shew them my hand and my power:  and they shall know that my name is the
@c    Lord.



@c    Jeremias Chapter 17


@c    For their obstinacy in sin the Jews shall be led captive.  He is cursed
@c    that trusteth in flesh.  God alone searcheth the heart, giving to every
@c    one as he deserves.  The prophet prayeth to be delivered from his
@c    enemies, and preacheth up the observance of the sabbath.

@c    17:1. The sin of Juda is written with a pen of iron, with the point of
@c    a diamond, it is graven upon the table of their heart, upon the horns
@c    of their altars.

@c    17:2. When their children shall remember their altars, and their
@c    groves, and their green trees upon the high mountains,

@c    17:3. Sacrificing in the field:  I will give thy strength, and all thy
@c    treasures to the spoil, and thy high places for sin in all thy borders.

@c    17:4. And thou shalt be left stripped of thy inheritance, which I gave
@c    thee:  and I will make thee serve thy enemies in a land which thou
@c    knowest not:  because thou hast kindled a fire in my wrath, it shall
@c    burn for ever.

@c    17:5. Thus saith the Lord:  Cursed be the man that trusteth in man, and
@c    maketh flesh his arm, and whose heart departeth from the Lord.

@c    17:6. For he shall be like tamaric in the desert, and he shall not see
@c    when good shall come:  but he shall dwell in dryness in the desert in a
@c    salt land, and not inhabited.

@c    Tamaric. . .A barren shrub that grows in the driest parts of the
@c    wilderness.

@c    17:7. Blessed be the man that trusteth in the Lord, and the Lord shall
@c    be his confidence.

@c    17:8. And he shall be as a tree that is planted by the waters, that
@c    spreadeth out its roots towards moisture:  and it shall not fear when
@c    the heat cometh.  And the leaf thereof shall be green, and in the time
@c    of drought it shall not be solicitous, neither shall it cease at any
@c    time to bring forth fruit.

@c    17:9. The heart is perverse above all things, and unsearchable, who can
@c    know it?

@c    17:10. I am the Lord who search the heart, and prove the reins:  who
@c    give to every one according to his way, and according to the fruit of
@c    his devices.

@c    17:11. As the partridge hath hatched eggs which she did not lay:  so is
@c    he that hath gathered riches, and not by right:  in the midst of his
@c    days he shall leave them, and in his latter end he shall be a fool.

@c    17:12. A high and glorious throne from the beginning is the place of
@c    our sanctification.

@c    17:13. O Lord, the hope of Israel:  all that forsake thee shall be
@c    confounded:  they that depart from thee, shall be written in the earth:
@c    because they have forsaken the Lord, the vein of living waters.

@c    17:14. Heal me, O Lord, and I shall be healed:  save me, and I shall be
@c    saved:  for thou art my praise.

@c    17:15. Behold they say to me:  Where is the word of the Lord?  let it
@c    come.

@c    17:16. And I am not troubled, following thee for my pastor, and I have
@c    not desired the day of man, thou knowest.  That which went out of my
@c    lips, hath been right in thy sight.

@c    17:17. Be not thou a terror unto me, thou art my hope in the day of
@c    affliction.

@c    17:18. Let them be confounded that persecute me, and let not me be
@c    confounded:  let them be afraid, and let not me be afraid:  bring upon
@c    them the day of affliction, and with a double destruction, destroy
@c    them.

@c    Let them be confounded, etc. . .Such expressions as these in the
@c    writings of the prophets, are not to be understood as imprecations
@c    proceeding from malice or desire of revenge:  but as prophetic
@c    predictions of evils that were about to fall upon impenitent sinners,
@c    and approbations of the ways of divine justice.

@c    17:19. Thus saith the Lord to me:  Go, and stand in the gate of the
@c    children of the people, by which the kings of Juda come in, and go out,
@c    and in all the gates of Jerusalem:

@c    17:20. And thou shalt say to them:  Hear the word of the Lord, ye kings
@c    of Juda, and al Juda, and all the inhabitants of Jerusalem, that enter
@c    in by these gates.

@c    17:21. Thus saith the Lord:  Take heed to your souls, and carry no
@c    burdens on the sabbath day:  and bring them not in by the gates of
@c    Jerusalem.

@c    17:22. And do not bring burdens out of your houses on the sabbath day,
@c    neither do ye any work:  sanctify the sabbath day, as I commanded your
@c    fathers.

@c    17:23. But they did not hear, nor incline their ear:  but hardened their
@c    neck, that they might not hear me, and might not receive instruction.

@c    17:24. And it shall come to pass:  if you will hearken to me, saith the
@c    Lord, to bring in no burdens by the gates of this city on the sabbath
@c    day:  and if you will sanctify the sabbath day, to do no work therein:

@c    17:25. Then shall there enter in by the gates of this city kings and
@c    princes, sitting upon the throne of David, and riding in chariots and
@c    on horses, they and their princes, the men of Juda, and the inhabitants
@c    of Jerusalem:  and this city shall be inhabited for ever.

@c    17:26. And they shall come from the cities of Juda, and from the places
@c    round about Jerusalem, and from the land of Benjamin, and from the
@c    plains, and from the mountains, and from the south, bringing
@c    holocausts, and victims, and sacrifices, and frankincense, and they
@c    shall bring in an offering into the house of the Lord.

@c    17:27. But if you will not hearken to me, to sanctify the sabbath day,
@c    and not to carry burdens, and not to bring them in by the gates of
@c    Jerusalem on the sabbath day:  I will kindle a fire in the gates
@c    thereof, and it shall devour the houses of Jerusalem, and it shall not
@c    be quenched.



@c    Jeremias Chapter 18


@c    As the clay in the hand of the potter, so is Israel in God's hand.  He
@c    pardoneth penitents, and punisheth the obstinate.  They conspire against
@c    Jeremias, for which he denounceth to them the miseries that hang over
@c    them.

@c    18:1. The word that came to Jeremias from the Lord, saying:

@c    18:2. Arise, and go down into the potter's house, and there thou shalt
@c    hear my words.

@c    18:3. And I went down into the potter's house, and behold he was doing
@c    a work on the wheel.

@c    18:4. And the vessel was broken which he was making of clay with his
@c    hands:  and turning he made another vessel, as it seemed good in his
@c    eyes to make it.

@c    18:5. Then the word of the Lord came to me, saying:

@c    18:6. Cannot I do with you, as this potter, O house of Israel, saith
@c    the Lord?  behold as clay is in the hand of the potter, so are you in my
@c    hand, O house of Israel.

@c    18:7. I will suddenly speak against a nation, and against a kingdom, to
@c    root out, and to pull down, and to destroy it.

@c    18:8. If that nation against which I have spoken, shall repent of their
@c    evil, I also will repent of the evil that I have thought to do to them.

@c    18:9. And I will suddenly speak of a nation and of a kingdom, to build
@c    up and plant it.

@c    18:10. If it shall do evil in my sight, that it obey not my voice:  I
@c    will repent of the good that I have spoken to do unto it.

@c    18:11. Now therefore tell the men of Juda, and the inhabitants of
@c    Jerusalem, saying:  Thus saith the Lord:  Behold I frame evil against
@c    you, and devise a device against you:  let every man of you return from
@c    his evil way, and make ye your ways and your doings good.

@c    18:12. And they said; We have no hopes:  for we will go after our own
@c    thoughts, and we will do every one according to the perverseness of his
@c    evil heart.

@c    18:13. Therefore thus saith the Lord:  Ask among the nations:  Who hath
@c    heard such horrible things, as the virgin of Israel hath done to
@c    excess?

@c    18:14. Shall the snow of Libanus fail from the rock of the field?  or
@c    can the cold waters that gush out and run down, be taken away?

@c    18:15. Because my people have forgotten me, sacrificing in vain, and
@c    stumbling in their ways, in ancient paths, to walk by them in a way not
@c    trodden:

@c    18:16. That their land might be given up to desolation, and to a
@c    perpetual hissing:  every one that shall pass by it, shall be
@c    astonished, and wag his head.

@c    18:17. As a burning wind will I scatter them before the enemy:  I will
@c    shew them the back, and not the face, in the day of their destruction.

@c    18:18. And they said:  Come, and let us invent devices against Jeremias:
@c    for the law shall not perish from the priest, nor counsel from the
@c    wise, nor the word from the prophet:  come, and let us strike him with
@c    the tongue, and let us give no heed to all his words.

@c    18:19. Give heed to me, O Lord, and hear the voice of my adversaries.

@c    18:20. Shall evil be rendered for good, because they have digged a pit
@c    for my soul?  Remember that I have stood in thy sight, to speak good for
@c    them, and to turn away thy indignation from them.

@c    Remember, etc. . .This is spoken in the person of Christ, persecuted by
@c    the Jews, and prophetically denouncing the evils that should fall upon
@c    them in punishment of their crimes.

@c    18:21. Therefore deliver up their children to famine, and bring them
@c    into the hands of the sword:  let their wives be bereaved of children
@c    and widows:  and let their husbands be slain by death:  let their young
@c    men be stabbed with the sword in battle.

@c    18:22. Let a cry be heard out of their houses:  for thou shalt bring the
@c    robber upon them suddenly:  because they have digged a pit to take me,
@c    and have hid snares for my feet.

@c    18:23. But thou, O Lord, knowest all their counsel against me unto
@c    death:  not their iniquity, and let not their sin be blotted out from
@c    thy sight:  let them be overthrown before thy eyes, in the time of thy
@c    wrath do thou destroy them.



@c    Jeremias Chapter 19


@c    Under the type of breaking a potter's vessel, the prophet foresheweth
@c    the desolation of the Jews for their sins.

@c    19:1. Thus saith the Lord:  Go, and take a potter's earthen bottle, and
@c    take of the ancients of the people, and of the ancients of the priests:

@c    19:2. And go forth into the valley of the son of Ennom, which is by the
@c    entry of the earthen gate:  and there thou shalt proclaim the words that
@c    I shall tell thee.

@c    19:3. And thou shalt say:  Hear the word of the Lord, O ye kings of
@c    Juda, and ye inhabitants of Jerusalem:  Thus saith the Lord of hosts,
@c    the God of Israel:  Behold I will bring an affliction upon this place:
@c    so that whosoever shall hear it, his ears shall tingle:

@c    19:4. Because they have forsaken me, and have profaned this place :  and
@c    have sacrificed therein to strange gods, whom neither they nor their
@c    fathers knew, nor the kings of Juda:  and they have filled this place
@c    with the blood of innocents.

@c    19:5. And they have built the high places of Baalim, to burn their
@c    children with fire for a holocaust to Baalim:  which I did not command,
@c    nor speak of, neither did it once come into my mind.

@c    19:6. Therefore behold the days come, saith the Lord, that this place
@c    shall no more be called Topheth, nor the valley of the son of Ennom,
@c    but the valley of slaughter.

@c    19:7. And I will defeat the counsel of Juda and of Jerusalem in this
@c    place:  and I will destroy them with the sword in the sight of their
@c    enemies, and by the hands of them that seek their lives:  and I will
@c    give their carcasses to be meat for the fowls of the air, and for the
@c    beasts of the earth.

@c    19:8. And I will make this city an astonishment, and a hissing:  every
@c    one that shall pass by it, shall be astonished, and shall hiss because
@c    of all the plagues thereof.

@c    19:9. And I will feed them with the flesh of their sons, and with the
@c    flesh of their daughters:  and they shall eat every one the flesh of his
@c    friend in the siege, and in the distress wherewith their enemies, and
@c    they that seek their lives, shall straiten them.

@c    19:10. And thou shalt break the bottle in the sight of the men that
@c    shall go with thee.

@c    19:11. And thou shalt say to them:  Thus saith the Lord of hosts:  Even
@c    so will I break this people, and this city, as the potter's vessel is
@c    broken, which cannot be made whole again:  and they shall be buried in
@c    Topheth, because there is no other place to bury in.

@c    19:12. Thus will I do to this place, saith the Lord, and to the
@c    inhabitants thereof:  and I will make this city as Topheth.

@c    19:13. And the houses of Jerusalem, and the houses of the kings of Juda
@c    shall be unclean as the place of Topheth:  all the houses upon whose
@c    roofs they have sacrificed to all the host of heaven, and have poured
@c    out drink offerings to strange gods.

@c    19:14. Then Jeremias came from Topheth, whither the Lord had sent him
@c    to prophesy, and he stood in the court of the house of the Lord, and
@c    said to all the people:

@c    19:15. Thus saith the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel:  Behold I will
@c    bring in upon this city, and upon all the cities thereof all the evils
@c    that I have spoken against it:  because they have hardened their necks,
@c    that they might not hear my words.



@c    Jeremias Chapter 20


@c    The prophet is persecuted:  he denounces captivity to his persecutors,
@c    and bemoans himself.

@c    20:1. Now Phassur the son of Emmer, the priest, who was appointed chief
@c    in the house of the Lord, heard Jeremias prophesying these words.

@c    20:2. And Phassur struck Jeremias the prophet, and put him in the
@c    stocks, that were in the upper gate of Benjamin, in the house of the
@c    Lord.

@c    20:3. And when it was light the next day, Phassur brought Jeremias out
@c    of the stocks.  And Jeremias said to him:  The Lord hath not called thy
@c    name Phassur, but fear on every side.

@c    Phassur. . .This name signifies increase and principality:  and therefore
@c    is here changed to Magor-Missabib, or fear on every side:  to denote the
@c    evils that should come upon him in punishment of his opposing the word
@c    of God.

@c    20:4. For thus saith the Lord:  Behold I will deliver thee up to fear,
@c    thee and all thy friends:  and they shall fall by the sword of their
@c    enemies, and thy eyes shall see it, and I will give all Juda into the
@c    hand of the king of Babylon:  and he shall carry them away to Babylon,
@c    and shall strike them with the sword.

@c    20:5. And I will give all the substance of this city, and all its
@c    labour, and every precious thing thereof, and all the treasures of the
@c    kings of Juda will I give into the hands of their enemies:  and they
@c    shall pillage them, and take them away, and carry them to Babylon.

@c    20:6. But thou Phassur, and all that dwell in thy house, shall go into
@c    captivity, and thou shalt go to Babylon, and there thou shalt die, and
@c    there thou shalt be buried, thou and all thy friends, to whom thou hast
@c    prophesied a lie.

@c    20:7. Thou hast deceived me, O Lord, and I am deceived:  thou hast been
@c    stronger than I, and thou hast prevailed.  I am become a laughingstock
@c    all the day, all scoff at me.

@c    Thou hast deceived, etc. . .The meaning of the prophet, is not to charge
@c    God with any untruth; but what he calls deceiving, was only the
@c    concealing from him, when he accepted of the prophetical commission,
@c    the greatness of the evils which the execution of that commission was
@c    to bring upon him.

@c    20:8. For I am speaking now this long time, crying out against
@c    iniquity, and I often proclaim devastation:  and the word of the Lord is
@c    made a reproach to me, and a derision all the day.

@c    20:9. Then I said:  I will not make mention of him, nor speak any more
@c    in his name:  and there came in my heart as a burning fire, shut up in
@c    my bones, and I was wearied, not being able to bear it.

@c    20:10. For I heard the reproaches of many, and terror on every side:
@c    Persecute him, and let us persecute him:  from all the men that were my
@c    familiars, and continued at my side:  if by any means he may be
@c    deceived, and we may prevail against him, and be revenged on him.

@c    20:11. But the Lord is with me as a strong warrior:  therefore they that
@c    persecute me shall fall, and shall be weak:  they shall be greatly
@c    confounded, because they have not understood the everlasting reproach,
@c    which never shall be effaced.

@c    20:12. And thou, O Lord of hosts, prover of the just, who seest the
@c    reins and the heart:  let me see, I beseech thee, thy vengeance on them:
@c    for to thee I have laid open my cause.

@c    Let me see, etc. . .This prayer proceeded not from hatred or ill will,
@c    but zeal of justice.

@c    20:13. Sing ye to the Lord, praise the Lord:  because he hath delivered
@c    the soul of the poor out of the hand of the wicked.

@c    20:14. Cursed be the day wherein I was born:  let not the day in which
@c    my mother bore me, be blessed.

@c    Cursed be the day, etc. . .In these, and the following words of the
@c    prophet, there is a certain figure of speech to express with more
@c    energy the greatness of the evils to which his birth had exposed him.

@c    20:15. Cursed be the man that brought the tidings to my father, saying:
@c    A man child is born to thee:  and made him greatly rejoice.

@c    20:16. Let that man be as the cities which the Lord hath overthrown,
@c    and hath not repented:  let him hear a cry in the morning, and howling
@c    at noontide:

@c    20:17. Who slew me not from the womb, that my mother might have been my
@c    grave, and her womb an everlasting conception.

@c    20:18. Why came I out of the womb, to see labour and sorrow, and that
@c    my days should be spent in confusion?



@c    Jeremias Chapter 21


@c    The prophet's answer to the messengers of Sedecias, when Jerusalem was
@c    besieged.

@c    21:1. The word that came to Jeremias from the Lord, when king Sedecias
@c    sent unto him Phassur, the son of Melchias, and Sophonias, the son of
@c    Maasias the priest, saying:

@c    21:2. Inquire of the Lord for us, for Nabuchodonosor king of Babylon
@c    maketh war against us:  if so be the Lord will deal with us according to
@c    all his wonderful works, that he may depart from us.

@c    21:3. And Jeremias said to them:  Thus shall you say to Sedecias:

@c    21:4. Thus saith the Lord, the God of Israel:  Behold I will turn back
@c    the weapons of war that are in your hands, and with which you fight
@c    against the king of Babylon, and the Chaldeans, that besiege you round
@c    about the walls:  and I will gather them together in the midst of this
@c    city.

@c    21:5. And I myself will fight against you with an outstretched hand,
@c    and with a strong arm, and in fury, and in indignation, and in great
@c    wrath.

@c    21:6. And I will strike the inhabitants of this city, men and beasts
@c    shall die of a great pestilence.

@c    21:7. And after this, saith the Lord, I will give Sedecias the king of
@c    Juda, and his servants, and his people, and such as are left in this
@c    city from the pestilence, and the sword, and the famine, into the hand
@c    of Nabuchodonosor the king of Babylon, and into the hand of their
@c    enemies, and into the hand of them that seek their life, and he shall
@c    strike them with the edge of the sword, and he shall not be moved to
@c    pity, nor spare them, nor shew mercy to them.

@c    21:8. And to this people thou shalt say:  Thus saith the Lord:  Behold I
@c    set before you the way of life, and the way of death.

@c    21:9. He that shall abide in this city, shall die by the sword, and by
@c    the famine, and by the pestilence:  but he that shall go out and flee
@c    over to the Chaldeans, that besiege you, shall live, and his life shall
@c    be to him as a spoil.

@c    21:10. For I have set my face against this city for evil, and not for
@c    good, saith the Lord:  it shall be given into the hand of the king of
@c    Babylon, and he shall burn it with fire.

@c    21:11. And to the house of the king of Juda:  Hear ye the word of the
@c    Lord,

@c    21:12. O house of David, thus saith the Lord:  Judge ye judgment in the
@c    morning, and deliver him that is oppressed by violence out of the hand
@c    of the oppressor:  lest my indignation go forth like a fire, and be
@c    kindled, and there be none to quench it, because of the evil of your
@c    ways.

@c    21:13. Behold I come to thee that dwellest in a valley upon a rock
@c    above a plain, saith the Lord:  and you say:  Who shall strike us and who
@c    shall enter into our houses?

@c    To thee that dwellest, etc. . .He speaks to Jerusalem, confiding in the
@c    strength of her situation upon rocks, surrounded with a deep valley.

@c    21:14. But I will visit upon you according to the fruit of your doings,
@c    saith the Lord:  and I will kindle a fire in the forest thereof:  and it
@c    shall devour all things round about it.



@c    Jeremias Chapter 22


@c    An exhortation both to king and people to return of God.  The sentence
@c    of God upon Joachaz, Joakim, and Jechonias.

@c    22:1. Thus saith the Lord:  Go down to the house of the king of Juda,
@c    and there thou shalt speak this word,

@c    Go down, etc. . .The contents of this chapter are of a more ancient date
@c    than those of the foregoing chapter:  for the order of time is not
@c    always observed in the writings of the prophets.

@c    22:2. And thou shalt say:  Hear the word of the Lord, king of Juda, that
@c    sittest upon the throne of David:  thou and thy servants, and thy
@c    people, who enter in by these gates.

@c    22:3. Thus saith the Lord:  Execute judgment and justice, and deliver
@c    him that is oppressed out of the hand of the oppressor:  and afflict not
@c    the stranger, the fatherless, and the widow, nor oppress them unjustly:
@c    and shed not innocent blood in this place.

@c    22:4. For if you will do this thing indeed, then shall there enter in
@c    by the gates of this house, kings of the race of David sitting upon his
@c    throne, and riding in chariots and on horses, they and their servants,
@c    and their people.

@c    22:5. But if you will not hearken to these words:  I swear by myself,
@c    saith the Lord, that this house shall become a desolation.

@c    22:6. For thus saith the Lord to the house of the king of Juda:  Thou
@c    art to me Galaad the head of Libanus:  yet surely I will make thee a
@c    wilderness, and cities not habitable.

@c    Galaad the head of Libanus. . .By Galaad, a rich and fruitful country,
@c    is here signified the royal palace of the kings of the house of David:
@c    by Libanus, a high mountain abounding in cedar trees, the populous city
@c    of Jerusalem.

@c    22:7. And I will prepare against thee the destroyer and his weapons:
@c    and they shall cut down thy chosen cedars, and shall cast them headlong
@c    into the fire.

@c    Prepare. . .Literally, sanctify.

@c    22:8. And many nations shall pass by this city:  and they shall say
@c    every man to his neighbour:  Why hath the Lord done so to this great
@c    city?

@c    22:9. And they shall answer:  Because they have forsaken the covenant of
@c    the Lord their God, and have adored strange gods, and served them.

@c    22:10. Weep not for him that is dead, nor bemoan him with your tears:
@c    lament him that goeth away, for he shall return no more, nor see his
@c    native country.

@c    Weep not for him that is dead, etc. . .He means the good king Josias,
@c    who by death was taken away, so as not to see the miseries of his
@c    country.--Ibid.  Him that goeth away. . .Viz., sellum, alias Joachaz, who
@c    was carried captive into Egypt.

@c    22:11. For thus saith the Lord to Sellum the son of Josias the king of
@c    Juda, who reigned instead of his father, who went forth out of this
@c    place:  He shall return hither no more:

@c    22:12. But in the place, to which I have removed him, there shall he
@c    die, and he shall not see this land any more.

@c    22:13. Woe to him that buildeth up his house by injustice, and his
@c    chambers not in judgment:  that will oppress his friend without cause,
@c    and will not pay him his wages.

@c    22:14. Who saith:  I will build me a wide house, and large chambers:  who
@c    openeth to himself windows, and maketh roofs of cedar, and painteth
@c    them with vermilion.

@c    22:15. Shalt thou reign, because thou comparest thyself to the cedar?
@c    did not thy father eat and drink, and do judgment and justice, and it
@c    was then well with him?

@c    22:16. He judged the cause of the poor and needy for his own good:  was
@c    it not therefore because he knew me, saith the Lord?

@c    22:17. But thy eyes and thy heart are set upon covetousness, and upon
@c    shedding innocent blood, and upon oppression, and running after evil
@c    works.

@c    22:18. Therefore thus saith the Lord concerning Joakim the son of
@c    Josias king of Juda:  They shall not mourn for him, Alas, my brother,
@c    and, Alas, sister:  they shall not lament for him, Alas, my lord, or,
@c    Alas, the noble one.

@c    22:19. He shall be buried with the burial of an ass, rotten and cast
@c    forth without the gates of Jerusalem.

@c    22:20. Go up to Libanus, and cry:  and lift up thy voice in Basan, and
@c    cry to them that pass by, for all thy lovers are destroyed.

@c    22:21. I spoke to thee in thy prosperity:  and thou saidst:  I will not
@c    hear:  this hath been thy way from thy youth, because thou hast not
@c    heard my voice.

@c    22:22. The wind shall feed all thy pastors, and thy lovers shall go
@c    into captivity and then shalt thou be confounded, and ashamed of all
@c    thy wickedness.

@c    22:23. Thou that sittest in Libanus, and makest thy nest in the cedars,
@c    how hast thou mourned when sorrows came upon thee, as the pains of a
@c    woman in labour?

@c    22:24. As I live, saith the Lord, if Jechonias the son of Joakim the
@c    king of Juda were a ring on my right hand, I would pluck him thence.

@c    22:25. And I will give thee into the hand of them that seek thy life,
@c    and into the hand of them whose face thou fearest, and into the hand of
@c    Nabuchodonosor king of Babylon, and into the hand of the Chaldeans.

@c    22:26. And I will send thee, and thy mother that bore thee, into a
@c    strange country, in which you were not born, and there you shall die:

@c    22:27. And they shall not return into the land, whereunto they lift up
@c    their mind to return thither.

@c    22:28. Is this man Jechonias an earthen and a broken vessel?  is he a
@c    vessel wherein is no pleasure?  why are they cast out, he and his seed,
@c    and are cast into a land which they know not?

@c    22:29. O earth, earth, earth, hear the word of the Lord.

@c    22:30. Thus saith the Lord:  Write this man barren, a man that shall not
@c    prosper in his days:  for there shall not be a man of his seed that
@c    shall sit upon the throne of David, and have power any more in Juda.

@c    Write this man barren. . .That is, childless:  not that he had no
@c    children, but that his children should never sit on the throne of Juda.



@c    Jeremias Chapter 23


@c    God reproves evil governors; and promises to send good pastors; and
@c    Christ himself the prince of the pastors.  He inveighs against false
@c    prophets preaching without being sent.

@c    23:1. Woe to the pastors, that destroy and tear the sheep of my
@c    pasture, saith the Lord.

@c    23:2. Therefore thus saith the Lord the God of Israel to the pastors
@c    that feed my people:  You have scattered my flock, and driven them away,
@c    and have not visited them:  behold I will visit upon you for the evil of
@c    your doings, saith the Lord.

@c    23:3. And I will gather together the remnant of my flock, out of all
@c    the lands into which I have cast them out:  and I will make them return
@c    to their own fields, and they shall increase and be multiplied.

@c    23:4. And I will set up pastors over them, and they shall feed them:
@c    they shall fear no more, and they shall not be dismayed:  and none shall
@c    be wanting of their number, saith the Lord.

@c    23:5. Behold the days come, saith the Lord, and I will raise up to
@c    David a just branch:  and a king shall reign, and shall be wise:  and
@c    shall execute judgment and justice in the earth.

@c    23:6. In those days shall Juda be saved, and Israel shall dwell
@c    confidently:  and this is the name that they shall call him:  The Lord
@c    our just one.

@c    23:7. Therefore behold the days come, saith the Lord, and they shall
@c    say no more:  The Lord liveth, who brought up the children of Israel out
@c    of the land of Egypt:

@c    23:8. But, The Lord liveth, who hath brought out, and brought hither
@c    the seed of the house of Israel from the land of the north, and out of
@c    all the lands, to which I had cast them forth:  and they shall dwell in
@c    their own land.

@c    23:9. To the prophets:  My heart is broken within me, all my bones
@c    tremble:  I am become as a drunken man, and as a man full of wine, at
@c    the presence of the Lord, and at the presence of his holy words.

@c    23:10. Because the land is full of adulterers, because the land hath
@c    mourned by reason of cursing, the fields of the desert are dried up:
@c    and their course is become evil, and their strength unlike.

@c    23:11. For the prophet and the priest are defiled:  and in my house I
@c    have found their wickedness, saith the Lord.

@c    23:12. Therefore their way shall be as a slippery way in the dark:  for
@c    they shall be driven on, and fall therein:  for I will bring evils upon
@c    them, the year of their visitation, saith the Lord.

@c    23:13. And I have seen folly in the prophets of Samaria:  they
@c    prophesied in Baal and deceived my people Israel.

@c    23:14. And I have seen the likeness of adulterers, and the way of lying
@c    in the prophets of Jerusalem:  and they strengthened the hands of the
@c    wicked, that no man should return from his evil doings, they are all
@c    become unto me as Sodom, and the inhabitants thereof as Gomorrha.

@c    23:15. Therefore thus saith the Lord of hosts to the prophets:  Behold I
@c    will feed them with wormwood, and will give them gall to drink:  for
@c    from the prophets of Jerusalem corruption is gone forth into all the
@c    land.

@c    23:16. Thus saith the Lord of hosts:  Hearken not to the words of the
@c    prophets that prophesy to you, and deceive you:  they speak a vision of
@c    their own heart, and not out of the mouth of the Lord.

@c    23:17. They say to them that blaspheme me:  The Lord hath said:  You
@c    shall have peace:  and to every one that walketh in the perverseness of
@c    his own heart, they have said:  No evil shall come upon you.

@c    23:18. For who hath stood in the counsel of the Lord, and hath seen and
@c    heard his word?  Who hath considered his word and heard it?

@c    23:19. Behold the whirlwind of the Lord's indignation shall come forth,
@c    and a tempest shall break out and come upon the head of the wicked.

@c    23:20. The wrath of the Lord shall not return till he execute it, and
@c    till he accomplish the thought of his heart:  in the latter days you
@c    shall understand his counsel.

@c    23:21. I did not send prophets, yet they ran:  I have not spoken to
@c    them, yet they prophesied.

@c    23:22. If they had stood in my counsel, and had made my words known to
@c    my people, I should have turned them from their evil way, and from
@c    their wicked doings.

@c    23:23. Am I, think ye, a God at hand, saith the Lord, and not a God
@c    afar off?

@c    23:24. Shall a man be hid in secret places, and I not see him, saith
@c    the Lord?  do not I fill heaven and earth, saith the Lord?

@c    23:25. I have heard what the prophets said, that prophesy lies in my
@c    name, and say:  I have dreamed, I have dreamed.

@c    23:26. How long shall this be in the heart of the prophets that
@c    prophesy lies, and that prophesy the delusions of their own heart?

@c    23:27. Who seek to make my people forget my name through their dreams,
@c    which they tell every man to his neighbour:  as their fathers forgot my
@c    name for Baal.

@c    23:28. The prophet that hath a dream, let him tell a dream:  and he that
@c    hath my word, let him speak my word with truth:  what hath the chaff to
@c    do with the wheat, saith the Lord?

@c    23:29. Are not my words as a fire, saith the Lord:  and as a hammer that
@c    breaketh the rock in pieces?

@c    23:30. Therefore behold I am against the prophets, saith the Lord:  who
@c    steal my words every one from his neighbour.

@c    23:31. Behold I am against the prophets, saith the Lord:  who use their
@c    tongues, and say:  The Lord saith it.

@c    23:32. Behold I am against the prophets that have lying dreams, saith
@c    the Lord:  and tell them, and cause my people to err by their lying, and
@c    by their wonders:  when I sent them not, nor commanded them, who have
@c    not profited this people at all, saith the Lord.

@c    23:33. If therefore this people, or the prophet, or the priest shall
@c    ask thee, saying:  What is the burden of the Lord?  thou shalt say to
@c    them:  You are the burden:  for I will cast you away, saith the Lord.

@c    23:34. And as for the prophet, and the priest, and the people that
@c    shall say:  The burden of the Lord:  I will visit upon that man, and upon
@c    his house.

@c    Burden of the Lord. . .This expression is here rejected and disallowed,
@c    at least for those times:  because it was then used in mockery and
@c    contempt by the false prophets, and unbelieving people, who ridiculed
@c    the repeated threats of Jeremias under the name of his burdens.

@c    23:35. Thus shall you say every one to his neighbour, and to his
@c    brother, What hath the Lord answered?  and what hath the Lord spoken?

@c    23:36. And the burden of the Lord shall be mentioned no more, for every
@c    man's word shall be his burden:  for you have perverted the words of the
@c    living God, of the Lord of hosts our God.

@c    23:37. Thus shalt thou say to the prophet:  What hath the Lord answered
@c    thee?  and what hath the Lord spoken?

@c    23:38. But if you shall say:  The burden of the Lord:  therefore thus
@c    saith the Lord:  Because you have said this word:  The burden of the
@c    Lord:  and I have sent to you, saying:  Say not, The burden of the Lord:

@c    23:39. Therefore behold I will take you away carrying you, and will
@c    forsake you, and the city which I gave to you, and to your fathers, out
@c    of my presence.

@c    Out of my presence. . .That is, the Lord declares that out of his
@c    presence he will cast them, and bring them to captivity for their
@c    transgressions.

@c    23:40. And I will bring an everlasting reproach upon you, and a
@c    perpetual shame which shall never be forgotten.



@c    Jeremias Chapter 24


@c    Under the type of good and bad figs, he foretells the restoration of
@c    the Jews that had been carried away captive with Jechonias, and the
@c    desolation of those that were left behind.

@c    24:1. The Lord shewed me:  and behold two baskets full of figs, set
@c    before the temple of the Lord:  after that Nabuchodonosor king of
@c    Babylon had carried away Jechonias the son of Joakim the king of Juda,
@c    and his chief men, and the craftsmen, and engravers of Jerusalem, and
@c    had brought them to Babylon.

@c    24:2. One basket had very good figs, like the figs of the first season:
@c    and the other basket had very bad figs, which could not be eaten,
@c    because they were bad.

@c    24:3. And the Lord said to me:  What seest thou, Jeremias?  And I said:
@c    Figs, the good figs, very good:  and the bad figs, very bad, which
@c    cannot be eaten because they are bad.

@c    24:4. And the word of the Lord came to me, saying:

@c    24:5. Thus saith the Lord the God of Israel:  Like these good figs, so
@c    will I regard the captives of Juda, whom I have sent forth out of this
@c    place into the land of the Chaldeans, for their good.

@c    24:6. And I will set my eyes upon them to be pacified, and I will bring
@c    them again into this land:  and I will build them up, and not pull them
@c    down:  and I will plant them, and not pluck them up.

@c    24:7. And I will give them a heart to know me, that I am the Lord:  and
@c    they shall be my people, and I will be their God:  because they shall
@c    return to me with their whole heart.

@c    24:8. And as the very bad figs, that cannot be eaten, because they are
@c    bad:  thus saith the Lord:  So will I give Sedecias the king of Juda, and
@c    his princes, and the residue of Jerusalem, that have remained in this
@c    city, and that dwell in the land of Egypt.

@c    24:9. And I will deliver them up to vexation, and affliction, to all
@c    the kingdoms of the earth:  to be a reproach, and a byword, and a
@c    proverb, and to be a curse in all places, to which I have cast them
@c    out.

@c    24:10. And I will send among them the sword, and the famine, and the
@c    pestilence:  till they be consumed out of the land which I gave to them,
@c    and their fathers.



@c    Jeremias Chapter 25


@c    The prophet foretells the seventy years captivity; after that the
@c    destruction of Babylon, and other nations.

@c    25:1. The word that came to Jeremias concerning all the people of Juda,
@c    in the fourth year of Joakim the son of Josias king of Juda, (the same
@c    is the first year of Nabuchodonosor king of Babylon,)

@c    25:2. Which Jeremias the prophet spoke to all the people of Juda, and
@c    to all the inhabitants of Jerusalem, saying:

@c    25:3. From the thirteenth year of Josias the son of Ammon king of Juda
@c    until this day:  this is the three and twentieth year, the word of the
@c    Lord hath come to me, and I have spoken to you, rising before day, and
@c    speaking, and you have not hearkened.

@c    25:4. And the Lord hath sent to you all his servants the prophets,
@c    rising early, and sending, and you have not hearkened, nor inclined
@c    your ears to hear.

@c    25:5. When he said:  Return ye, every one from his evil way, and from
@c    your wicked devices, and you shall dwell in the land which the Lord
@c    hath given to you, and your fathers for ever and ever.

@c    25:6. And go not after strange gods to serve them, and adore them:  nor
@c    provoke me to wrath by the works of your hands, and I will not afflict
@c    you.

@c    25:7. And you have not heard me, saith the Lord, that you might provoke
@c    me to anger with the works of your hands, to your own hurt.

@c    25:8. Therefore thus saith the Lord of hosts:  Because you have not
@c    heard my words:

@c    25:9. Behold I will send, and take all the kindreds of the north, saith
@c    the Lord, and Nabuchodonosor the king of Babylon my servant:  and I will
@c    bring them against this land, and against the inhabitants thereof, and
@c    against all the nations that are round about it:  and I will destroy
@c    them, and make them an astonishment and a hissing, and perpetual
@c    desolations.

@c    My servant. . .So this wicked king is here called; because God made him
@c    his instrument in punishing the sins of his people.

@c    25:10. And I will take away from them the voice of mirth, and the voice
@c    of gladness, the voice of the bridegroom, and the voice of the bride,
@c    the sound of the mill and the light of the lamp.

@c    25:11. And all this land shall be a desolation, and an astonishment:
@c    and all these nations shall serve the king of Babylon seventy years.

@c    25:12. And when the seventy years shall be expired, I will punish the
@c    king of Babylon, and that nation, saith the Lord, for their iniquity,
@c    and the land of the Chaldeans:  and I will make it perpetual
@c    desolations.

@c    Punish. . .Literally, visit upon.

@c    25:13. And I will bring upon that land all my words, that I have spoken
@c    against it, all that is written in this book, all that Jeremias hath
@c    prophesied against all nations:

@c    25:14. For they have served them, whereas they were many nations, and
@c    great kings:  and I will repay them according to their deeds, and
@c    according to the works of their hands.

@c    25:15. For thus saith the Lord of hosts the God of Israel:  Take the cup
@c    of wine of this fury at my hand:  and thou shalt make all the nations to
@c    drink thereof, into which I shall send thee.

@c    25:16. And they shall drink, and be troubled, and be mad because of the
@c    sword, which I shall send among them.

@c    25:17. And I took the cup at the hand of the Lord, and I presented it
@c    to all the nations to drink of it, to which the Lord sent me:

@c    25:18. To wit, Jerusalem, and the cities of Juda, and the kings
@c    thereof, and the princes thereof:  to make them a desolation, and an
@c    astonishment, and a hissing, and a curse, as it is at this day.

@c    25:19. Pharao the king of Egypt, and his servants, and his princes, and
@c    all his people,

@c    25:20. And all in general:  all the kings of the land of Ausitis, and
@c    all the kings of the land of the Philistines, and Ascalon, and Gaza,
@c    and Accaron, and the remnant of Azotus.

@c    25:21. And Edom, and Moab, and the children of Ammon.

@c    25:22. And all the kings of Tyre, and all the kings of Sidon:  and the
@c    kings of the land of the islands that are beyond the sea.

@c    25:23. And Dedan, and Thema, and Buz, and all that have their hair cut
@c    round.

@c    25:24. And all the kings of Arabia, and all the kings of the west, that
@c    dwell in the desert.

@c    25:25. And all the kings of Zambri, and all the kings of Elam, and all
@c    the kings of the Medes:

@c    25:26. And all the kings of the north far and near, every one against
@c    his brother:  and all the kingdoms of the earth, which are upon the face
@c    thereof:  and the king of Sesac shall drink after them.

@c    Sesac. . .That is, Babel, or Babylon; which after bringing all these
@c    people under her yoke, should quickly fall and be destroyed herself.

@c    25:27. And thou shalt say to them:  Thus saith the Lord of hosts the God
@c    of Israel:  Drink ye, and be drunken, and vomit:  and fall, and rise no
@c    more, because of the sword, which I shall send among you.

@c    25:28. And if they refuse to take the cup at thy hand to drink, thou
@c    shalt say to them:  Thus saith the Lord of hosts:  Drinking you shall
@c    drink:

@c    25:29. For behold I begin to bring evil on the city wherein my name is
@c    called upon:  and shall you be as innocent and escape free?  you shall
@c    not escape free:  for I will call for the sword upon all the inhabitants
@c    of the earth, saith the Lord of hosts.

@c    25:30. And thou shalt prophesy unto them all these words, and thou
@c    shalt say to them:  I The Lord shall roar from on high, and shall utter
@c    his voice from his holy habitation:  roaring he shall roar upon the
@c    place of his beauty:  the shout as it were of them that tread grapes
@c    shall be given out against all the inhabitants of the earth.

@c    25:31. The noise is come even to the ends of the earth:  for the Lord
@c    entereth into judgment with the nations:  he entereth into judgment with
@c    all flesh; the wicked I have delivered up to the sword, saith the Lord.

@c    25:32. Thus saith the Lord of hosts:  Behold evil shall go forth from
@c    nation to nation:  and a great whirlwind shall go forth from the ends of
@c    the earth.

@c    25:33. And the slain of the Lord shall be at that day from one end of
@c    the earth even to the other end thereof:  they shall not be lamented,
@c    and they shall not be gathered up, nor buried:  they shall lie as dung
@c    upon the face of the earth.

@c    25:34. Howl, ye shepherds, and cry:  and sprinkle yourselves with ashes,
@c    ye leaders of the flock:  for the days of your slaughter and your
@c    dispersion are accomplished, and you shall fall like precious vessels.

@c    25:35. And the shepherds shall have no way to flee, nor the leaders of
@c    the flock to save themselves.

@c    25:36. A voice of the cry of the shepherds, and a howling of the
@c    principal of the flock:  because the Lord hath wasted their pastures.

@c    25:37. And the fields of peace have been silent because of the fierce
@c    anger of the Lord.

@c    25:38. He hath forsaken his covert as the lion, for the land is laid
@c    waste because of the wrath of the dove, and because of the fierce anger
@c    of the Lord.

@c    The dove. . .This is commonly understood of Nabuchodonosor, whose
@c    military standard, it is said, was a dove.  But the Hebrew word Jonah,
@c    which is here rendered a dove, may also signify a waster or oppressor,
@c    which name better agrees to that unmerciful prince; or by comparison,
@c    as a dove's flight is the swiftest, so would their destruction come
@c    upon them.



@c    Jeremias Chapter 26


@c    The prophet is apprehended and accused by the priests:  but discharged
@c    by the princes.

@c    26:1. In the beginning of the reign of Joakim the son of Josias king of
@c    Juda, came this word from the Lord, saying:

@c    26:2. Thus saith the Lord:  stand in the court of the house of the Lord,
@c    and speak to all the cities of Juda, out of which they come, to adore
@c    in the house of the Lord, all the words which I have commanded thee to
@c    speak unto them:  leave not out one word.

@c    26:3. If so be they will hearken and be converted every one from his
@c    evil way; that I may repent me of the evil that I think to do unto them
@c    for the wickedness of their doings.

@c    26:4. And thou shalt say to them:  Thus saith the Lord:  If you will not
@c    hearken to me to walk in my law, which I have given you:

@c    26:5. To give ear to the words of my servants the prophets, whom I sent
@c    to you rising up early:  and sending, and you have not hearkened:

@c    26:6. I will make this house like Silo:  and I will make this city a
@c    curse to all the nations of the earth.

@c    26:7. And the priests, and the prophets, and all the people heard
@c    Jeremias speaking these words in the house of the Lord.

@c    26:8. And when Jeremias had made an end of speaking all that the Lord
@c    had commanded him to speak to all the people, the priests, and the
@c    prophets, and all the people laid hold on him, saying:  Let him be put
@c    to death.

@c    26:9. Why hath he prophesied in the name of the Lord, saying:  This
@c    house shall be like Silo; and this city shall be made desolate, without
@c    an inhabitant?  And all the people were gathered together against
@c    Jeremias in the house of the Lord.

@c    26:10. And the princes of Juda heard these words:  and they went up from
@c    the king's house into the house of the Lord, and sat in the entry of
@c    the new gate of the house of the Lord.

@c    26:11. And the priests and the prophets spoke to the princes, and to
@c    all the people, saying:  The judgment of death is for this man:  because
@c    he hath prophesied against this city, as you have heard with your ears.

@c    26:12. Then Jeremias spoke to all the princes, and to all the people,
@c    saying:  The Lord sent me to prophesy concerning this house, and
@c    concerning this city all the words that you have heard.

@c    26:13. Now therefore amend your ways, and your doings, and hearken to
@c    the voice of the Lord your God:  and the Lord will repent him of the
@c    evil that he hath spoken against you.

@c    26:14. But as for me, behold I am in your hands:  do with me what is
@c    good and right in your eyes:

@c    26:15. But know ye, and understand, that if you put me to death, you
@c    will shed innocent blood against your own selves, and against this
@c    city, and the inhabitants thereof.  For in truth the Lord sent me to
@c    you, to speak all these words in your hearing.

@c    26:16. Then the princes, and all the people said to the priests, and to
@c    the prophets:  There is no judgment of death for this man:  for he hath
@c    spoken to us in the name of the Lord our God.

@c    26:17. And some of the ancients of the land rose up:  and they spoke to
@c    all the assembly of the people, saying:

@c    26:18. Micheas of Morasthi was a prophet in the days of Ezechias king
@c    of Juda, and he spoke to all the people of Juda, saying:  Thus saith the
@c    Lord of hosts:  Sion shall be ploughed like a field, and Jerusalem shall
@c    be a heap of stones:  and the mountain of the house the high places of
@c    woods.

@c    26:19. Did Ezechias king of Juda, and all Juda, condemn him to death?
@c    did they not fear the Lord, and beseech the face of the Lord:  and the
@c    Lord repented of the evil that he had spoken against them?  therefore we
@c    are doing a great evil against our souls.

@c    26:20. There was also a man that prophesied in the name of the Lord,
@c    Urias the son of Semei of Cariathiarim:  and he prophesied against this
@c    city, and against this land, according to all the words of Jeremias.

@c    26:21. And Joakim, and all his men in power, and his princes heard
@c    these words:  and the king sought to put him to death.  And Urias heard
@c    it, and was afraid, and fled and went into Egypt.

@c    26:22. And king Joakim sent men into Egypt, Elnathan the son of
@c    Achobor, and men with him into Egypt.

@c    26:23. And they brought Urias out of Egypt:  and brought him to king
@c    Joakim, and he slew him with the sword:  and he cast his dead body into
@c    the graves of the common people.

@c    26:24. So the hand of Ahicam the son of Saphan was with Jeremias, that
@c    he should not be delivered into the hands of the people, to put him to
@c    death.



@c    Jeremias Chapter 27


@c    The prophet sends chains to divers kings, signifying that they must
@c    bend their necks under the yoke of the king of Babylon.  The vessels of
@c    the temple shall not be brought back till all the rest are carried
@c    away.

@c    27:1. In the beginning of the reign of Joakim the son of Josias king of
@c    Juda, this word came to Jeremias from the Lord, saying:

@c    Joakim. . .This revelation was made to the prophet in the beginning of
@c    the reign of Joakim:  but the bands were not sent to the princes here
@c    named before the reign of Sedecias, ver. 3.

@c    27:2. Thus saith the Lord to me:  Make thee bands, and chains:  and thou
@c    shalt put them on thy neck.

@c    27:3. And thou shalt send them to the king of Edom, and to the king of
@c    Moab, and to the king of the children of Ammon, and to the king of
@c    Tyre, and to the king of Sidon:  by the hand of the messengers that are
@c    come to Jerusalem to Sedecias the king of Juda.

@c    27:4. And thou shalt command them to speak to their masters:  Thus saith
@c    the Lord of hosts the God of Israel:  Thus shall you say to your
@c    masters:

@c    27:5. I made the earth, and the men and the beasts that are upon the
@c    face of the earth, by my great power, and by my stretched out arm:  and
@c    I have given it to whom it seemed good in my eyes.

@c    27:6. And now I have given all these lands into the hand of
@c    Nabuchodonosor king of Babylon my servant:  moreover also the beasts of
@c    the field I have given him to serve him.

@c    27:7. And all nations shall serve him, and his son, and his son's son:
@c    till the time come for his land and himself:  and many nations and great
@c    kings shall serve him.

@c    His son. . .Viz., Evilmerodach; and his son's son, Nabonydus, or
@c    Nabonadius, the Baltassar of Daniel, chap. 5., and the last of the
@c    Chaldean kings.

@c    27:8. But the nation and kingdom that will not serve Nabuchodonosor
@c    king of Babylon, and whosoever will not bend his neck under the yoke of
@c    the king of Babylon:  I will visit upon that nation with the sword, and
@c    with famine, and with pestilence, saith the Lord:  till I consume them
@c    by his hand.

@c    27:9. Therefore hearken not to your prophets, and diviners, and
@c    dreamers, and soothsayers, and sorcerers, that say to you:  You shall
@c    not serve the king of Babylon.

@c    27:10. For they prophesy lies to you:  to remove you far from your
@c    country, and cast you out, and to make you perish.

@c    27:11. But the nation that shall bend down their neck under the yoke of
@c    the king of Babylon, and shall serve him:  I will let them remain in
@c    their own land, saith the Lord:  and they shall till it, and dwell in
@c    it.

@c    27:12. And I spoke to Sedecias the king of Juda according to all these
@c    words, saying:  Bend down your necks under the yoke of the king of
@c    Babylon, and serve him, and his people, and you shall live.

@c    27:13. Why will you die, thou and thy people by the sword, and by
@c    famine, and by the pestilence, as the Lord hath spoken against the
@c    nation that will not serve the king of Babylon?

@c    27:14. Hearken not to the words of the prophets that say to you:  You
@c    shall not serve the king of Babylon:  for they tell you a lie.

@c    27:15. For I have not sent them, saith the Lord:  and they prophesy in
@c    my name falsely:  to drive you out, and that you may perish, both you,
@c    and the prophets that prophesy to you.

@c    27:16. I spoke also to the priests, and to this people, saying:  Thus
@c    saith the Lord:  Hearken not to the words of your prophets, that
@c    prophesy to you, saying:  Behold the vessels of the Lord shall now in a
@c    short time be brought again from Babylon:  for they prophesy a lie unto
@c    you.

@c    27:17. Therefore hearken not to them, but serve the king of Babylon,
@c    that you may live.  Why should this city be given up to desolation?

@c    27:18. But if they be prophets, and the word of the Lord be in them:
@c    let them interpose themselves before the Lord of hosts, that the
@c    vessels which were left in the house of the Lord, and in the house of
@c    the king of Juda, and in Jerusalem, may not go to Babylon.

@c    27:19. For thus saith the Lord of hosts to the pillars, and to the sea,
@c    and to the bases, and to the rest of the vessels that remain in this
@c    city:

@c    27:20. Which Nabuchodonosor the king of Babylon did not take, when he
@c    carried away Jechonias the son of Joakim the king of Juda, from
@c    Jerusalem to Babylon, and all the great men of Juda and Jerusalem.

@c    27:21. For thus saith the Lord of hosts the God of Israel, to the
@c    vessels that are left in the house of the Lord, and in the house of the
@c    king of Juda and Jerusalem:

@c    27:22. They shall be carried to Babylon, and there they shall be until
@c    the day of their visitation, saith the Lord:  and I will cause them to
@c    be brought, and to be restored in this place.



@c    Jeremias Chapter 28


@c    The false prophecy of Hananias:  he dies that same year, as Jeremias
@c    foretold.

@c    28:1. And it came to pass in that year, in the beginning of the reign
@c    of Sedecias king of Juda, in the fourth year, in the fifth month, that
@c    Hananias the son of Azur, a prophet of Gabaon spoke to me, in the house
@c    of the Lord before the priests, and all the people, saying:

@c    28:2. Thus saith the Lord of hosts the God of Israel:  I have broken the
@c    yoke of the king of Babylon.

@c    28:3. As yet two years of days, and I will cause all the vessels of the
@c    house of the Lord to be brought back into this place, which
@c    Nabuchodonosor king of Babylon took away from this place, and carried
@c    them to Babylon.

@c    28:4. And I will bring back to this place Jechonias the son of Joakim
@c    king of Juda, and all the captives of Juda, that are gone to Babylon,
@c    saith the Lord:  for I will break the yoke of the king of Babylon.

@c    28:5. And Jeremias the prophet said to Hananias the prophet in the
@c    presence of the priests, and in the presence of all the people that
@c    stood in the house of the Lord:

@c    28:6. And Jeremias the prophet said:  Amen, the Lord do so:  the Lord
@c    perform thy words, which thou hast prophesied:  that the vessels may be
@c    brought again into the house of the Lord, and all the captives may
@c    return out of Babylon to this place.

@c    28:7. Nevertheless hear this word that I speak in thy ears, and in the
@c    ears of all the people:

@c    28:8. The prophets that have been before me, and before thee from the
@c    beginning, and have prophesied concerning many countries, and
@c    concerning great kingdoms, of war, and of affliction, and of famine.

@c    28:9. The prophet that prophesied peace:  when his word shall come to
@c    pass, the prophet shall be known, whom the hath sent in truth.

@c    28:10. And Hananias the prophet took the chain from the neck of
@c    Jeremias the prophet, and broke it.

@c    28:11. And Hananias spoke in the presence of all the people, saying:
@c    Thus saith the Lord:  Even so will I break the yoke of Nabuchodonosor
@c    the king of Babylon after two full years from off the neck of all the
@c    nations.

@c    28:12. And Jeremias the prophet went his way.  And the word of the Lord
@c    came to Jeremias, after that Hananias the prophet had broken the chain
@c    from off the neck of Jeremias the prophet, saying:

@c    28:13. Go, and tell Hananias:  Thus saith the Lord:  Thou hast broken
@c    chains of wood, and thou shalt make for them chains of iron.

@c    28:14. For thus saith the Lord of hosts the God of Israel:  I have put a
@c    yoke of iron upon the neck of all these nations, to serve
@c    Nabuchodonosor king of Babylon, and they shall serve him:  moreover also
@c    I have given him the beasts of the earth.

@c    28:15. And Jeremias the prophet said to Hananias the prophet:  Hear now,
@c    Hananias:  the Lord hath not sent thee, and thou hast made this people
@c    to trust in a lie.

@c    28:16. Therefore thus saith the Lord:  Behold I will send thee away from
@c    off the face of the earth:  this year shalt thou die:  for thou hast
@c    spoken against the Lord.

@c    28:17. And Hananias the prophet died in that year, in the seventh
@c    month.



@c    Jeremias Chapter 29


@c    Jeremias writeth to the captives in Babylon, exhorting them to be easy
@c    there, and not to hearken to false prophets.  That they shall be
@c    delivered after seventy years.  But those that remain in Jerusalem shall
@c    perish by the sword, famine, and pestilence.  And that Achab, Sedecias,
@c    and Semeias, false prophets, shall die miserably.

@c    29:1. Now these are the words of the letter which Jeremias the prophet
@c    sent from Jerusalem to the residue of the ancients that were carried
@c    into captivity, and to the priests, and to the prophets, and to all the
@c    people, whom Nabuchodonosor had carried away from Jerusalem to Babylon:

@c    29:2. After that Jechonias the king, and the queen, and the eunuchs,
@c    and the princes of Juda, and of Jerusalem, and the craftsmen, and the
@c    engravers were departed out of Jerusalem:

@c    29:3. By the hand of Elasa the son of Saphan, and Gamarias the son of
@c    Helcias, whom Sedecias king of Juda sent to Babylon to Nabuchodonosor
@c    king of Babylon, saying:

@c    29:4. Thus saith the Lord of hosts the God of Israel, to all that are
@c    carried away captives, whom I have caused to be carried away from
@c    Jerusalem to Babylon:

@c    29:5. Build ye houses, and dwell in them:  and plant orchards, and eat
@c    the fruit of them.

@c    29:6. Take ye wives, and beget sons and daughters:  and take wives for
@c    your sons, and give your daughters to husbands, and let them bear sons
@c    and daughters:  and be ye multiplied there, and be not few in number.

@c    29:7. And seek the peace of the city, to which I have caused you to be
@c    carried away captives; and pray to the Lord for it:  for in the peace
@c    thereof shall be your peace.

@c    29:8. For thus saith the Lord of hosts the God of Israel:  Let not your
@c    prophets that are in the midst of you, and your diviners deceive you:
@c    and give no heed to your dreams which you dream:

@c    29:9. For they prophesy falsely to you in my name:  and I have not sent
@c    them, saith the Lord.

@c    29:10. For thus saith the Lord:  When the seventy years shall begin to
@c    be accomplished in Babylon, I will visit you:  and I will perform my
@c    good word in your favour, to bring you again to this place.

@c    29:11. For I know the thoughts that I think towards you, saith the
@c    Lord, thoughts of peace, and not of affliction, to give you an end and
@c    patience.

@c    29:12. And you shall call upon me, and you shall go.  and you shall pray
@c    to me, and I will hear you.

@c    29:13. You shall seek me, and shall find me:  when you shall seek me
@c    with all your heart.

@c    29:14. And I will be found by you, saith the Lord:  and I will bring
@c    back your captivity, and I will gather you out of all nations, and from
@c    all the places to which I have driven you out, saith the Lord:  and I
@c    will bring you back from the place to which I caused you to be carried
@c    away captive.

@c    29:15. Because you have said:  The Lord hath raised us up prophets in
@c    Babylon:

@c    29:16. For thus saith the Lord to the king that sitteth upon the throne
@c    of David, and to all the people that dwell in this city, to your
@c    brethren that are not gone forth with you into captivity.

@c    29:17. Thus saith the Lord of hosts:  Behold I will send upon them the
@c    sword, and the famine, and the pestilence:  and I will make them like
@c    bad figs that cannot be eaten, because they are very bad.

@c    29:18. And I will persecute them with the sword, and with famine, and
@c    with the pestilence:  and I will give them up unto affliction to all the
@c    kingdoms of the earth:  to be a curse, and an astonishment, and a
@c    hissing, and a reproach to all the nations to which I have driven them
@c    out:

@c    29:19. Because they have not hearkened to my words, saith the Lord:
@c    which I sent to them by my servants the prophets, rising by night, and
@c    sending:  and you have not heard, saith the Lord.

@c    29:20. Hear ye therefore the word of the Lord, all ye of the captivity,
@c    whom I have sent out from Jerusalem to Babylon.

@c    29:21. Thus saith the Lord of hosts the God of Israel, to Achab the son
@c    of Colias, and to Sedecias the son of Maasias, who prophesy unto you in
@c    my name falsely:  Behold I will deliver them up into the hands of
@c    Nabuchodonosor the king of Babylon:  and he shall kill them before your
@c    eyes.

@c    29:22. And of them shall be taken up a curse by all the captivity of
@c    Juda, that are in Babylon, saying:  The Lord make thee like Sedecias,
@c    and like Achab, whom the king of Babylon fried in the fire:

@c    29:23. Because they have acted folly in Israel, and have committed
@c    adultery with the wives of their friends, and have spoken lying words
@c    in my name, which I commanded them not:  I am the judge and the witness,
@c    saith the Lord.

@c    29:24. And to Semeias the Nehelamite thou shalt say:

@c    29:25. Thus saith the Lord of hosts the God of Israel:  Because thou
@c    hast sent letters in thy name to all the people that are in Jerusalem,
@c    and to Sophonias the son of Maasias the priest, and to all the priests,
@c    saying:

@c    29:26. The Lord hath made thee priest instead of Joiada the priest,
@c    that thou shouldst be ruler in the house of the Lord, over every man
@c    that raveth and prophesieth, to put him in the stocks, and into prison.

@c    29:27. And now why hast thou not rebuked Jeremias the Anathothite, who
@c    prophesieth to you?

@c    29:28. For he hath also sent to us in Babylon, saying:  It is a long
@c    time:  build ye houses, and dwell in them:  and plant gardens, and eat
@c    the fruits of them.

@c    29:29. So Sophonias the priest read this letter, in the hearing of
@c    Jeremias the prophet.

@c    29:30. And the word of the Lord came to Jeremias, saying:

@c    29:31. Send to all them of the captivity, saying:  Thus saith the Lord
@c    to Semeias the Nehelamite:  Because Semeias hath prophesied to you, and
@c    I sent him not:  and hath caused you to trust in a lie:

@c    29:32. Therefore thus saith the Lord:  behold I will visit upon Semeias
@c    the Nehelamite, and upon his seed:  he shall not have a man to sit in
@c    the midst of this people, and he shall not see the good that I will do
@c    to my people, saith the Lord:  because he hath spoken treason against
@c    the Lord.



@c    Jeremias Chapter 30


@c    God will deliver his people from their captivity:  Christ shall be their
@c    king:  and his church shall be glorious for ever.

@c    30:1. This is the word that came to Jeremias from the Lord, saying:

@c    30:2. Thus saith the Lord, the God of Israel, saying:  Write thee all
@c    the words that I have spoken to thee, in a book.

@c    30:3. For behold the days come, saith the Lord, and I will bring again
@c    the captivity of my people Israel and Juda, saith the Lord:  and I will
@c    cause them to return to the land which I gave to their fathers, and
@c    they shall possess it.

@c    30:4. And these are the words that the Lord hath spoken to Israel and
@c    to Juda:

@c    30:5. For thus saith the Lord:  We have heard a voice of terror:  there
@c    is fear and no peace.

@c    30:6. Ask ye, and see if a man bear children?  why then have I seen
@c    every man with his hands on his loins, like a woman in labour, and all
@c    faces are turned yellow?

@c    30:7. Alas, for that day is great, neither is there the like to it; and
@c    it is the time of tribulation to Jacob, but he shall be saved out of
@c    it.

@c    30:8. And it shall come to pass in that day, saith the Lord of hosts,
@c    that I will break his yoke from off thy neck, and will burst his bands:
@c    and strangers shall no more rule over him:

@c    30:9. But they shall serve the Lord their God, and David their king,
@c    whom I will raise up to them.

@c    David. . .That is, Christ of the house of David.

@c    30:10. Therefore fear thou not, my servant Jacob, saith the Lord,
@c    neither be dismayed, O Israel:  for behold, I will save thee from a
@c    country afar off, and thy seed from the land of their captivity:  and
@c    Jacob shall return, and be at rest, and abound with all good things,
@c    and there shall be none whom he may fear:

@c    30:11. For I am with thee, saith the Lord, to save thee:  for I will
@c    utterly consume all the nations, among which I have scattered thee:  but
@c    I will not utterly consume thee:  but I will chastise thee in judgment,
@c    that thou mayst not seem to thyself innocent.

@c    30:12. For thus saith the Lord:  Thy bruise is incurable, thy wound is
@c    very grievous.

@c    30:13. There is none to judge thy judgment to bind it up:  thou hast no
@c    healing medicines.

@c    30:14. All thy lovers have forgotten thee, and will not seek after
@c    thee:  for I have wounded thee with the wound of an enemy, with cruel
@c    chastisement:  by reason of the multitude of thy iniquities, thy sins
@c    are hardened.

@c    30:15. Why criest thou for thy affliction?  thy sorrow is incurable:  for
@c    the multitude of thy iniquity, and for thy hardened sins I have done
@c    these things to thee.

@c    30:16. Therefore all they that devour thee, shall be devoured:  and all
@c    thy enemies shall be carried into captivity:  and they that waste thee
@c    shall be wasted, and all that prey upon thee will I give for a prey.

@c    30:17. For I will close up thy scar, and will heal thee of thy wounds,
@c    saith the Lord.  Because they have called thee, O Sion, an outcast:  This
@c    is she that hath none to seek after her.

@c    30:18. Thus saith the Lord:  Behold I will bring back the captivity of
@c    the pavilions of Jacob, and will have pity on his houses, and the city
@c    shall be built in her high place, and the temple shall be founded
@c    according to the order thereof.

@c    30:19. And out of them shall come forth praise, and the voice of them
@c    that play:  and I will multiply them, and they shall not be made few:
@c    and I will glorify them, and they shall not be lessened.

@c    30:20. And their children shall be as from the beginning, and their
@c    assembly shall be permanent before me:  and I will visit against all
@c    that afflict them.

@c    30:21. And their leader shall be of themselves:  and their prince shall
@c    come forth from the midst of them:  and I will bring him near, and he
@c    shall come to me:  for who is this that setteth his heart to approach to
@c    me, saith the Lord?

@c    30:22. And you shall be my people:  and I will be your God.

@c    30:23. Behold the whirlwind of the Lord, his fury going forth, a
@c    violent storm, it shall rest upon the head of the wicked.

@c    30:24. The Lord will not turn away the wrath of his indignation, till
@c    he have executed and performed the thought of his heart:  in the latter
@c    days you shall understand these things.



@c    Jeremias Chapter 31


@c    The restoration of Israel.  Rachel shall cease from morning.  The new
@c    covenant.  The church shall never fail.

@c    31:1. At that time, saith the Lord, I will be the God of all the
@c    families of Israel, and they shall be my people.

@c    31:2. Thus saith the Lord:  The people that were left and escaped from
@c    the sword, found grace in the desert:  Israel shall go to his rest.

@c    31:3. The Lord hath appeared from afar to me.  Yea I have loved thee
@c    with an everlasting love, therefore have I drawn thee, taking pity on
@c    thee.

@c    31:4. And I will build thee again, and thou shalt be built, O virgin of
@c    Israel:  thou shalt again be adorned with thy timbrels, and shalt go
@c    forth in the dances of them that make merry.

@c    31:5. Thou shalt yet plant vineyards in the mountains of Samaria:  the
@c    planters shall plant, and they shall not gather the vintage before the
@c    time.

@c    31:6. For there shall be a day, in which the watchmen on mount Ephraim,
@c    shall cry:  Arise, and let us go up to Sion to the Lord our God.

@c    31:7. For thus saith the Lord:  Rejoice ye in the joy of Jacob, and
@c    neigh before the head of the Gentiles:  shout ye, and sing, and say:
@c    Save, O Lord, thy people, the remnant of Israel.

@c    31:8. Behold I will bring them from the north country, and will gather
@c    them from the ends of the earth and among them shall be the blind, and
@c    the lame, the woman with child, and she that is bringing forth,
@c    together, a great company of them returning hither.

@c    31:9. They shall come with weeping:  and I will bring them back in
@c    mercy:  and I will bring them through the torrents of waters in a right
@c    way, and they shall not stumble in it:  for I am a father to Israel, and
@c    Ephraim is my firstborn.

@c    31:10. Hear the word of the Lord, O ye nations, and declare it in the
@c    islands that are afar off, and say:  He that scattered Israel will
@c    gather him:  and he will keep him as the shepherd doth his flock.

@c    31:11. For the Lord hath redeemed Jacob, and delivered him out of the
@c    hand of one that was mightier than he.

@c    31:12. And they shall come, and shall give praise in mount Sion:  and
@c    they shall flow together to the good things of the Lord, for the corn,
@c    and wine, and oil, and the increase of cattle and herds, and their soul
@c    shall be as a watered garden, and they shall be hungry no more.

@c    31:13. Then shall the virgin rejoice in the dance, the young men and
@c    old men together:  and I will turn their mourning into joy, and will
@c    comfort them, and make them joyful after their sorrow.

@c    31:14. And I will fill the soul of the priests with fatness:  and my
@c    people shall be filled with my good things, saith the Lord.

@c    31:15. Thus saith the Lord:  A voice was heard on high of lamentation,
@c    of mourning, and weeping, of Rachel weeping for her children and
@c    refusing to be comforted for them, because they are not.

@c    31:16. Thus saith the Lord:  Let thy voice cease from weeping, and thy
@c    eyes tears:  for there is a reward for thy work, saith the Lord:  and
@c    they shall return out of the land of the enemy.

@c    31:17. And there is hope for thy last end, saith the Lord:  and the
@c    children shall return to their own borders.

@c    31:18. Hearing I heard Ephraim when he went into captivity:  thou hast
@c    chastised me, and I was instructed, as a young bullock unaccustomed to
@c    the yoke.  Convert me, and I shall be converted, for thou art the Lord
@c    my God.

@c    31:19. For after thou didst convert me, I did penance:  and after thou
@c    didst shew unto me, I struck my thigh:  I am confounded and ashamed,
@c    because I have borne the reproach of my youth.

@c    31:20. Surely Ephraim is an honourable son to me, surely he is a tender
@c    child:  for since I spoke of him, I will still remember him.  Therefore
@c    are my bowels troubled for him:  pitying I will pity him, saith the
@c    Lord.

@c    31:21. Set thee up a watchtower, make to thee bitterness:  direct thy
@c    heart into the right way, wherein thou hast walked:  return, O virgin of
@c    Israel, return to these thy cities.

@c    31:22. How long wilt thou be dissolute in deliciousness, O wandering
@c    daughter?  for the Lord hath created a new thing upon the earth:  A WOMAN
@c    SHALL COMPASS A MAN.

@c    31:23. Thus saith the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel:  As yet shall
@c    they say this word in the land of Juda, and in the cities thereof, when
@c    I shall bring back their captivity:  The Lord bless thee, the beauty of
@c    justice, the holy mountain.

@c    31:24. And Juda and all his cities shall dwell therein together:  the
@c    husbandman and they that drive the flocks.

@c    31:25. For I have inebriated the weary soul:  and I have filled every
@c    hungry soul.

@c    31:26. Upon this I was as it were awaked out of a sleep, and I saw, and
@c    my sleep was sweet to me.

@c    31:27. Behold the days come, saith the Lord:  and I will sow the house
@c    of Israel and the house of Juda with the seed of men, and with the seed
@c    of beasts.

@c    31:28. And as I have watched over them, to pluck up, and to throw down,
@c    and to scatter, and destroy, and afflict:  so will I watch over them, to
@c    build up, and to plant them, saith the Lord.

@c    31:29. In those days they shall say no more:  The fathers have eaten a
@c    sour grape, and the teeth of the children are set on edge.

@c    31:30. But every one shall die for his own iniquity:  every man that
@c    shall eat the sour grape, his teeth shall be set on edge.

@c    31:31. Behold the days shall come, saith the Lord, and I will make a
@c    new covenant with the house of Israel, and with the house of Juda:

@c    31:32. Not according to the covenant which I made with their fathers,
@c    in the day that I took them by the hand to bring them out of the land
@c    of Egypt, the covenant which they made void, and I had dominion over
@c    them, saith the Lord.

@c    31:33. But this shall be the covenant that I will make with the house
@c    of Israel, after those days, saith the Lord:  I will give my law in
@c    their bowels, and I will write it in their heart:  and I will be their
@c    God, and they shall be my people.

@c    31:34. And they shall teach no more every man his neighbour, and every
@c    man his brother, saying:  Know the Lord:  for all shall know me from the
@c    least of them even to the greatest, saith the Lord:  for I will forgive
@c    their iniquity, and I will remember their sin no more.

@c    31:35. Thus saith the Lord, who giveth the sun for the light of the
@c    day, the order of the moon and of the stars, for the light of the
@c    night:  who stirreth up the sea, and the waves thereof roar, the Lord of
@c    hosts is his name.

@c    31:36. If these ordinances shall fail before me, saith the Lord:  then
@c    also the seed of Israel shall fail, so as not to be a nation before me
@c    for ever.

@c    31:37. Thus saith the Lord:  If the heavens above can be measured, and
@c    the foundations of the earth searched out beneath, I also will cast
@c    away all the seed of Israel, for all that they have done, saith the
@c    Lord.

@c    31:38. Behold the days come, saith the Lord, that the city shall be
@c    built to the Lord from the tower of Hanameel even to the gate of the
@c    corner.

@c    31:39. And the measuring line shall go out farther in his sight upon
@c    the hill Gareb:  and it shall compass Goatha,

@c    31:40. And the whole valley of dead bodies, and of ashes, and all the
@c    country of death, even to the torrent Cedron, and to the corner of the
@c    horse gate towards the east, the Holy of the Lord:  it shall not be
@c    plucked up, and it shall not be destroyed any more for ever.



@c    Jeremias Chapter 32


@c    Jeremias by God's commandment purchases a field of his kinsman:  and
@c    prophesies the return of the people out of captivity:  and the
@c    everlasting covenant God will make with his church.

@c    32:1. The word that came to Jeremias from the Lord in the tenth year of
@c    Sedecias king of Juda:  the same is the eighteenth year of
@c    Nabuchodonosor.

@c    32:2. At that time the army of the king of Babylon besieged Jerusalem:
@c    and Jeremias the prophet was shut up in the court of the prison, which
@c    was in the house of the king of Juda.

@c    32:3. For Sedecias king of Juda had shut him up, saying:  Why dost thou
@c    prophesy, saying:  Thus saith the Lord:  Behold I will give this city
@c    into the hand of the king of Babylon, and he shall take it?

@c    32:4. And Sedecias king of Juda shall not escape out of the hand of the
@c    Chaldeans:  but he shall be delivered into the hands of the king of
@c    Babylon:  and he shall speak to him mouth to mouth, and his eyes shall
@c    see his eyes.

@c    32:5. And he shall lead Sedecias to Babylon:  and he shall be there till
@c    I visit him, saith the Lord.  But if you will fight against the
@c    Chaldeans, you shall have no success.

@c    32:6. And Jeremias said:  The word of the Lord came to me, saying:

@c    32:7. Behold, Hanameel the son of Sellum thy cousin shall come to thee,
@c    saying:  Buy thee my field, which is in Anathoth, for it is thy right to
@c    buy it, being next akin.

@c    32:8. And Hanameel my uncle's son came to me, according to the word of
@c    the Lord, to the entry of the prison, and said to me:  Buy my field,
@c    which is in Anathoth in the land of Benjamin:  for the right of
@c    inheritance is thine, and thou art next of kin to possess it.  And I
@c    understood that this was the word of the Lord.

@c    32:9. And I bought the field of Hanameel my uncle's son, that is in
@c    Anathoth:  and I weighed him the money, seven staters, and ten pieces of
@c    silver.

@c    32:10. And I wrote it in a book and sealed it, and took witnesses:  and
@c    I weighed him the money in the balances.

@c    32:11. And I took the deed of the purchase that was sealed, and the
@c    stipulations, and the ratifications with the seals that were on the
@c    outside.

@c    32:12. And I gave the deed of the purchase to Baruch the son of Neri
@c    the son of Maasias in the sight of Hanameel my uncle's son, in the
@c    presence of the witnesses that subscribed the book of the purchase, and
@c    before all the Jews that sat in the court of the prison.

@c    32:13. And I charged Baruch before them, saying:

@c    32:14. Thus saith the Lord of hosts the God of Israel:  Take these
@c    writings, this deed of the purchase that is sealed up, and this deed
@c    that is open:  and put them in an earthen vessel, that they may continue
@c    many days.

@c    32:15. For thus saith the Lord of hosts the God of Israel:  Houses, and
@c    fields, and vineyards shall be possessed again in this land.

@c    32:16. And after I had delivered the deed of purchase to Baruch the son
@c    of Neri, I prayed to the Lord, saying:

@c    32:17. Alas, alas, alas, O Lord God, behold thou hast made heaven and
@c    earth by thy great power, and thy stretched out arm:  no word shall be
@c    hard to thee:

@c    32:18. Thou shewest mercy unto thousands, and returnest the iniquity of
@c    the fathers into the bosom of their children after them:  O most mighty,
@c    great, and powerful, the Lord of hosts is thy name.

@c    32:19. Great in counsel, and incomprehensible in thought:  whose eyes
@c    are open upon all the ways of the children of Adam, to render unto
@c    every one according to his ways, and according to the fruit of his
@c    devices.

@c    32:20. Who hast set signs and wonders in the land of Egypt even until
@c    this day, and in Israel, and amongst men, and hast made thee a name as
@c    at this day.

@c    32:21. And hast brought forth thy people Israel, out of the land of
@c    Egypt with signs, and with wonders, and with a strong hand, and a
@c    stretched out arm, and with great terror.

@c    32:22. And hast given them this land which thou didst swear to their
@c    fathers, to give them a land flowing with milk and honey.

@c    32:23. And they came in, and possessed it:  but they obeyed not thy
@c    voice, and they walked not in thy law:  and they did not any of those
@c    things that thou didst command them to do, and all these evils are come
@c    upon them.

@c    32:24. Behold works are built up against the city to take it:  and the
@c    city is given into the hands of the Chaldeans, who fight against it, by
@c    the sword, and the famine, and the pestilence:  and what thou hast
@c    spoken, is all come to pass, as thou thyself seest.

@c    32:25. And sayest thou to me, O Lord God:  Buy a field for money, and
@c    take witnesses, whereas the city is given into the hands of the
@c    Chaldeans?

@c    32:26. And the word of the Lord came to Jeremias, saying:

@c    32:27. Behold I am the Lord the God of all flesh:  shall any thing be
@c    hard for me?

@c    32:28. Therefore thus saith the Lord:  Behold I will deliver this city
@c    into the hands of the Chaldeans, and into the hands of the king of
@c    Babylon, and they shall take it.

@c    32:29. And the Chaldeans that fight against this city, shall come and
@c    set it on fire, and burn it, with the houses upon whose roofs they
@c    offered sacrifice to Baal, and poured out drink offerings to strange
@c    gods, to provoke me to wrath.

@c    32:30. For the children of Israel, and the children of Juda, have
@c    continually done evil in my eyes from their youth:  the children of
@c    Israel who even till now provoke me with the work of their hands, saith
@c    the Lord.

@c    32:31. For this city hath been to me a provocation and indignation from
@c    the day that they built it, until this day, in which it shall be taken
@c    out of my sight.

@c    32:32. Because of all the evil of the children of Israel, and of the
@c    children of Juda, which they have done, provoking me to wrath, they and
@c    their kings, their princes, and their priests, and their prophets, the
@c    men of Juda, and the inhabitants of Jerusalem.

@c    32:33. And they have turned their backs to me, and not their faces:
@c    when I taught them early in the morning, and instructed them, and they
@c    would not hearken to receive instruction.

@c    32:34. And they have set their idols in the house, in which my name is
@c    called upon, to defile it.

@c    32:35. And they have built the high places of Baal, which are in the
@c    valley of the son of Ennom, to consecrate their sons and their
@c    daughters to Moloch:  which I commanded them not, neither entered it
@c    into my heart, that they should do this abomination, and cause Juda to
@c    sin.

@c    32:36. And now, therefore, thus saith the Lord the God of Israel to
@c    this city, whereof you say that it shall be delivered into the hands of
@c    the king of Babylon by the sword, and by famine, and by pestilence:

@c    32:37. Behold I will gather them together out of all the lands to which
@c    I have cast them out in my anger, and in my wrath, and in my great
@c    indignation:  and I will bring them again into this place, and will
@c    cause them to dwell securely.

@c    32:38. And they shall be my people, and I will be their God.

@c    32:39. And I will give them one heart, and one way, that they may fear
@c    me all days:  and that it may be well with them, and with their children
@c    after them.

@c    32:40. And I will make an everlasting covenant with them, and will not
@c    cease to do them good:  and I will give my fear in their heart, that
@c    they may not revolt from me.

@c    32:41. And I will rejoice over them, when I shall do them good:  and I
@c    will plant them in this land in truth, with my whole heart, and with
@c    all my soul.

@c    32:42. For thus saith the Lord:  As I have brought upon this people all
@c    this great evil:  so will I bring upon them all the good that I now
@c    speak to them.

@c    32:43. And fields shall be purchased in this land:  whereof you say that
@c    it is desolate, because there remaineth neither man nor beast, and it
@c    is given into the hands of the Chaldeans.

@c    32:44. Fields shall be bought for money, and deeds shall be written,
@c    and sealed, and witnesses shall be taken, in the land of Benjamin, and
@c    round about Jerusalem, in the cities of Juda, and in the cities on the
@c    mountains, and in the cities of the plains, and in the cities that are
@c    towards the south:  for I will bring back their captivity, saith the
@c    Lord.



@c    Jeremias Chapter 33


@c    God promises reduction from captivity, and other blessings:  especially
@c    the coming of Christ, whose reign in his church shall be glorious and
@c    perpetual.

@c    33:1. And the word of the Lord came to Jeremias the second time, while
@c    he was yet shut up in the court of the prison, saying:

@c    33:2. Thus saith the Lord, who will do, and will form it, and prepare
@c    it, the Lord is his name.

@c    33:3. Cry to me and I will hear thee:  and I will shew thee great
@c    things, and sure things which thou knowest not.

@c    33:4. For thus saith the Lord the God of Israel to the houses of this
@c    city, and to the houses of the king of Juda, which are destroyed, and
@c    to the bulwarks, and to the sword.

@c    33:5. Of them that come to fight with the Chaldeans, and to fill them
@c    with the dead bodies of the men whom I have slain in my wrath, and in
@c    my indignation, hiding my face from this city because of all their
@c    wickedness.

@c    33:6. Behold I will close their wounds and give them health, and I will
@c    cure them:  and I will reveal to them the prayer of peace and truth.

@c    The prayer of peace. . .That is, the peace and welfare which they pray
@c    for.

@c    33:7. And I will bring back the captivity of Juda, and the captivity of
@c    Jerusalem:  and I will build them as from the beginning.

@c    33:8. And I will cleanse them from all their iniquity, whereby they
@c    have sinned against me:  and I will forgive all their iniquities,
@c    whereby they have sinned against me, and despised me.

@c    33:9. And it shall be to me a name, and a joy, and a praise, and a
@c    gladness before all the nations of the earth, that shall hear of all
@c    the good things which I will do to them:  and they shall fear and be
@c    troubled for all the good things, and for all the peace that I will
@c    make for them.

@c    33:10. Thus saith the Lord:  There shall be heard again in this place
@c    (which you say is desolate, because there is neither man nor beast:  in
@c    the cities of Juda, and without Jerusalem, which are desolate without
@c    man, and without inhabitant, and without beast)

@c    33:11. The voice of joy and the voice of gladness, the voice of the
@c    bridegroom and the voice of the bride, the voice of them that shall
@c    say:  Give ye glory to the Lord of hosts, for the Lord is good, for his
@c    mercy endureth for ever:  and of them that shall bring their vows into
@c    the house of the Lord:  for I will bring back the captivity of the land
@c    as at the first, saith the Lord.

@c    33:12. Thus saith the Lord of hosts:  There shall be again in this place
@c    that is desolate without man, and without beast, and in all the cities
@c    thereof, an habitation of shepherds causing their flocks to lie down.

@c    33:13. And in the cities on the mountains, and in the cities of the
@c    plains, and in the cities that are towards the south:  and in the land
@c    of Benjamin, and round about Jerusalem, and in the cities of Juda shall
@c    the flocks pass again under the hand of him that numbereth them, saith
@c    the Lord.

@c    33:14. Behold the days come, saith the Lord, that I will perform the
@c    good word that I have spoken to the house of Israel, and to the house
@c    of Juda.

@c    33:15. In those days, and at that time, I will make the bud of justice
@c    to spring forth unto David, and he shall do judgment and justice in the
@c    earth.

@c    33:16. In those days shall Juda be saved, and Jerusalem shall dwell
@c    securely:  and this is the name that they shall call him, The Lord our
@c    just one.

@c    33:17. For thus saith the Lord:  There shall not be cut off from David a
@c    man to sit upon the throne of the house of Israel.

@c    There shall not be cut off from David, etc. . .This was verified in
@c    Christ, who is of the house of David; and whose kingdom in his church
@c    shall have no end.

@c    33:18. Neither shall there be cut off from the priests and Levites a
@c    man before my face to offer holocausts, and to burn sacrifices, and to
@c    kill victims continually.

@c    Neither shall there be cut off from the priests, etc. . .This promise
@c    relates to the Christian priesthood; which shall also continue for
@c    ever:  the functions of which (more especially the great sacrifice of
@c    the altar) are here expressed by the name of holocausts, and other
@c    offerings of the law, which were so many figures of the Christian
@c    sacrifice.

@c    33:19. And the word of the Lord came to Jeremias, saying:

@c    33:20. Thus saith the Lord:  if my covenant, with the day can be made
@c    void, and my covenant with the night, that there should not be day and
@c    night in their season:

@c    33:21. Also my covenant with David my servant may be made void, that he
@c    should not have a son to reign upon his throne, and with the Levites
@c    and priests my ministers.

@c    33:22. As the stars of heaven cannot be numbered, nor the sand of the
@c    sea be measured:  so will I multiply the seed of David my servant, and
@c    the Levites my ministers.

@c    33:23. And the word of the Lord came to Jeremias, saying:

@c    33:24. Hast thou not seen what this people hath spoken, saying:  The two
@c    families which the Lord had chosen, are cast off:  and they have
@c    despised my people, so that it is no more a nation before them?

@c    Two families, etc. . .Viz., the families of the kings and priests.

@c    33:25. Thus saith the Lord.  If I have not set my covenant between day
@c    and night, and laws to heaven and earth:

@c    33:26. Surely I will also cast off the seed of Jacob, and of David my
@c    servant, so as not to take any of his seed to be rulers of the seed of
@c    Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob:  for I will bring back their captivity, and
@c    will have mercy on them.



@c    Jeremias Chapter 34


@c    The prophet foretells that Sedecias shall fall into the hands of
@c    Nabuchodonosor:  God's sentence upon the princes and people that had
@c    broken his covenant.

@c    34:1. The word that came to Jeremias from the Lord, when Nabuchodonosor
@c    king of Babylon, and all his army, and all the kingdoms of the earth,
@c    that were under the power of his hand, and all the people fought
@c    against Jerusalem and against all the cities thereof, saying:

@c    34:2. Thus saith the Lord, the God of Israel:  Go, and speak to Sedecias
@c    king of Juda, and say to him:  Thus saith the Lord:  Behold I will
@c    deliver this city into the hands of the king of Babylon, and he shall
@c    burn it with fire.

@c    34:3. And thou shalt not escape out of his hand:  but thou shalt surely
@c    be taken, and thou shalt be delivered into his hand:  and thy eyes shall
@c    see the eyes of the king of Babylon, and his mouth shall speak with thy
@c    mouth, and thou shalt go to Babylon.

@c    34:4. Yet hear the word of the Lord, O Sedecias king of Juda:  Thus
@c    saith the Lord to thee:  Thou shalt not die by the sword.

@c    34:5. But thou shalt die in peace, and according to the burnings of thy
@c    fathers, the former kings that were before thee, so shall they burn
@c    thee:  and they shall mourn for thee, saying:  Alas, Lord:  for I have
@c    spoken the word, saith the Lord.

@c    Die in peace. . .That is, by a natural death.

@c    34:6. And Jeremias the prophet spoke all these words to Sedecias the
@c    king of Juda in Jerusalem.

@c    34:7. And the army of the king of Babylon fought against Jerusalem, and
@c    against all the cities of Juda that were left, against Lachis, and
@c    against Azecha:  for these remained of the cities of Juda, fenced
@c    cities.

@c    34:8. The word that came to Jeremias from the Lord, after that king
@c    Sedecias had made a covenant with all the people in Jerusalem making a
@c    proclamation:

@c    34:9. That every man should let his manservant, and every man his
@c    maidservant, being Hebrew man or a Hebrew woman, go free:  and that they
@c    should not lord it over them, to wit, over the Jews their brethren.

@c    34:10. And all the princes, and all the people who entered into the
@c    covenant, heard that every man should let his manservant, and every man
@c    his maidservant go free, and should no more have dominion over them:
@c    and they obeyed, and let them go free.

@c    34:11. But afterwards they turned:  and brought back again their
@c    servants and their handmaids, whom they had let go free, and brought
@c    them into subjection as menservants and maidservants.

@c    34:12. And the word of the Lord came to Jeremias from the Lord, saying:

@c    34:13. Thus saith the Lord the God of Israel:  I made a covenant with
@c    your fathers in the day that I brought them out of the land of Egypt,
@c    out of the house of bondage, saying:

@c    34:14. At the end of seven years, let ye go every man his brother being
@c    a Hebrew, who hath been sold to thee, so he shall serve thee six years:
@c    and thou shalt let him go free from thee:  and your fathers did not
@c    hearken to me, nor did they incline their ear.

@c    34:15. And you turned to day, and did that which was right in my eyes,
@c    in proclaiming liberty every one to his brother:  and you made a
@c    covenant in my sight, in the house upon which my name is invocated.

@c    34:16. And you are fallen back, and have defiled my name:  and you have
@c    brought back again every man his manservant, and every man his
@c    maidservant, whom you had let go free, and set at liberty:  and you have
@c    brought them into subjection to be your servants and handmaids.

@c    34:17. Therefore thus saith the Lord:  You have not hearkened to me, in
@c    proclaiming liberty every man to his brother and every man to his
@c    friend:  behold I proclaim a liberty for you, saith the Lord, to the
@c    sword, to the pestilence, and to the famine:  and I will cause you to be
@c    removed to all the kingdoms of the earth.

@c    34:18. And I will give the men that have transgressed my covenant, and
@c    have not performed the words of the covenant which they agreed to in my
@c    presence, when they cut the calf in two and passed between the parts
@c    thereof:

@c    34:19. The princes of Juda, and the princes of Jerusalem, the eunuchs,
@c    and the priests, and all the people of the land that passed between the
@c    parts of the calf:

@c    34:20. And I will give them into the hands of their enemies, and into
@c    the hands of them that seek their life:  and their dead bodies shall be
@c    for meat to the fowls of the air, and to the beasts of the earth.

@c    34:21. And Sedecias the king of Juda, and his princes, I will give into
@c    the hands of their enemies, and into the hands of them that seek their
@c    lives, and into the hands of the armies of the king of Babylon, which
@c    are gone from you.

@c    34:22. Behold I will command, saith the Lord, and I will bring them
@c    again to this city, and they shall fight against it, and take it, and
@c    burn it with fire:  and I will make the cities of Juda a desolation,
@c    without an inhabitant.



@c    Jeremias Chapter 35


@c    The obedience of the Rechabites condemns the disobedience of the Jews.
@c    The reward of the Rechabites.

@c    35:1. The word that came to Jeremias from the Lord in the days of
@c    Joakim the son of Josias king of Juda, saying:

@c    35:2. Go to the house of the Rechabites:  and speak to them, and bring
@c    them into the house of the Lord, into one of the chambers of the
@c    treasures, and thou shalt give them wine to drink.

@c    Rechabites. . .These were of the race of Jethro, father in law to Moses.

@c    35:3. And I took Jezonias the son of Jeremias the son of Habsanias, and
@c    his brethren, and all his sons, and the whole house of the Rechabites.

@c    35:4. And I brought them into the house of the Lord, to the treasure
@c    house of the sons of Hanan, the son of Jegedelias the man of God, which
@c    was by the treasure house of the princes, above the treasure of Maasias
@c    the son of Sellum, who was keeper of the entry.

@c    35:5. And I set before the sons of the house of the Rechabites pots
@c    full of wine, and cups:  and I said to them:  Drink ye wine.

@c    35:6. And they answered :  We will not drink wine:  because Jonadab the
@c    son of Rechab, our father, commanded us, saying:  You shall drink no
@c    wine, neither you, nor your children, for ever:

@c    35:7. Neither shall ye build houses, nor sow reed, nor plant vineyards,
@c    nor have any:  but you shall dwell in tents all your days, that you may
@c    live many days upon the face of the earth, in which you are strangers.

@c    35:8. Therefore we have obeyed the voice of Jonadab the son of Rechab,
@c    our father, in all things that he commanded us:  so as to drink no wine
@c    all our days:  neither we, nor our wives, nor our sons, nor our
@c    daughters:

@c    35:9. Nor to build houses to dwell in, nor to have vineyard, or field,
@c    or seed:

@c    35:10. But we have dwelt in tents, and have been obedient according to
@c    all that Jonadab our father commanded us.

@c    35:11. But when Nabuchodonosor king of Babylon came up to our land, we
@c    said:  Come, let us go into Jerusalem from the face of the army of the
@c    Chaldeans, and from the face of the army of Syria:  and we have remained
@c    in Jerusalem.

@c    35:12. And the word of the Lord came to Jeremias, saying:

@c    35:13. Thus saith the Lord of hosts the God of Israel:  Go, and say to
@c    the men of Juda, and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem:  Will you not
@c    receive instruction, to obey my words, saith the Lord?

@c    35:14. The words of Jonadab the son of Rechab, by which he commanded
@c    his sons not to drink wine, have prevailed:  and they have drunk none to
@c    this day, because they have obeyed the commandment of their father:  but
@c    I have spoken to you, rising early and speaking, and you have not
@c    obeyed me.

@c    35:15. And I have sent to you all my servants the prophets, rising
@c    early, and sending and saying:  Return ye every man from his wicked way,
@c    and make your ways good:  and follow not strange gods, nor worship them,
@c    and you shall dwell in the land, which I gave you and your fathers:  and
@c    you have not inclined your ear, nor hearkened to me.

@c    35:16. So the sons of Jonadab the son of Rechab have constantly kept
@c    the commandment of their father, which he commanded them:  but this
@c    people hath not obeyed me.

@c    35:17. Therefore thus saith the Lord of hosts the God of Israel:  Behold
@c    I will bring upon Juda, and upon all the inhabitants of Jerusalem all
@c    the evil that I have pronounced against them, because I have spoken to
@c    them, and they have not heard:  I have called to them, and they have not
@c    answered me.

@c    35:18. And Jeremias said to the house of the Rechabites:  Thus saith the
@c    Lord of hosts the God of Israel:  Because you have obeyed the
@c    commandment of Jonadab your father, and have kept all his precepts, and
@c    have done all that he commanded you:

@c    35:19. Therefore thus saith the Lord of hosts the God of Israel:  There
@c    shall not be wanting a man of the race of Jonadab the son of Rechab,
@c    standing before me for ever.



@c    Jeremias Chapter 36


@c    Jeremias sends Baruch to read his prophecies in the temple; the book is
@c    brought to king Joakim, who burns it.  The prophet denounces his
@c    judgment, and causes Baruch to write a new copy.

@c    36:1. And it came to pass in the fourth year of Joakim the son of
@c    Josias king of Juda, that this word came to Jeremias by the Lord,
@c    saying:

@c    36:2. Take thee a roll of a book, and thou shalt write in it all the
@c    words that I have spoken to thee against Israel and Juda, and against
@c    all the nations from the day that I spoke to thee, from the days of
@c    Josias even to this day.

@c    36:3. If so be, when the house of Juda shall hear all the evils that I
@c    purpose to do unto them, that they may return every man from his wicked
@c    way:  and I will forgive their iniquity, and their sin.

@c    36:4. So Jeremias called Baruch the son of Nerias:  and Baruch wrote
@c    from the mouth of Jeremias all the words of the Lord, which he spoke to
@c    him, upon the roll of a book.

@c    36:5. And Jeremias commanded Baruch, saying:  I am shut up, and cannot
@c    go into the house of the Lord.

@c    Shut up. . .Not that the prophet was now in prison; for the contrary
@c    appears from ver. 19, but that he kept himself shut up, by reason of
@c    the persecutions he had lately met with.  See chap. 26.

@c    36:6. Go thou in therefore, and read out of the volume, which thou hast
@c    written from my mouth, the words of the Lord, in the hearing of all the
@c    people in the house of the Lord on the fasting day:  and also thou shalt
@c    read them in the hearing of all Juda that come out of their cities:

@c    36:7. If so be they may present their supplication before the Lord, and
@c    may return every one from his wicked way:  for great is the wrath and
@c    indignation which the Lord hath pronounced against this people.

@c    36:8. And Baruch the son of Nerias did according to all that Jeremias
@c    the prophet ,had commanded him, reading out of the volume the words of
@c    the Lord in the house of the Lord.

@c    36:9. And it came to pass in the fifth year of Joakim the son of Josias
@c    king of Juda, in the ninth month, that they proclaimed a fast before
@c    the Lord to all the people in Jerusalem, and to all the people that
@c    were come together out of the cities of Juda to Jerusalem.

@c    36:10. And Baruch read out of the volume the words of Jeremias in the
@c    house of the Lord, in the treasury of Gamarias the son of Saphan the
@c    scribe, in the upper court, in the entry of the new gate of the house
@c    of the Lord, in the hearing of all the people.

@c    36:11. And when Micheas the son of Gamarias the son of Saphan had heard
@c    out of the book all the words of the Lord,

@c    36:12. He went down into the king's house to the secretary's chamber:
@c    and behold all the princes sat there, Elisama the scribe, and Dalaias
@c    the son of Semeias, and Elnathan the son of Achobor, and Gamarias the
@c    son of Saphan, and Sedecias the son of Hananias, and all the princes.

@c    36:13. And Micheas told them all the words that he had heard when
@c    Baruch read out of the volume in the hearing of the people.

@c    36:14. Therefore all the princes sent Judi the son of Nathanias, the
@c    son of Selemias, the son of Chusi, to Baruch, saying:  Take in thy hand
@c    the volume in which thou hast read in the hearing of the people, and
@c    come.  So Baruch the son of Nerias took the volume in his hand, and came
@c    to them.

@c    36:15. And they said to him:  Sit down and read these things in our
@c    hearing.  And Baruch read in their hearing.

@c    36:16. And when they had heard all the words, they looked upon one
@c    another with astonishment, and they said to Baruch:  We must tell the
@c    king all these words.

@c    36:17. And they asked him, saying:  Tell us how didst thou write all
@c    these words from his mouth.

@c    36:18. And Baruch said to them:  With his mouth he pronounced all these
@c    words as if he were reading to me:  and I wrote in a volume with ink.

@c    36:19. And the princes said to Baruch:  Go, and hide thee, both thou and
@c    Jeremias, and let no man know where you are.

@c    36:20. And they went in to the king into the court:  but they laid up
@c    the volume in the chamber of Elisama the scribe:  and they told all the
@c    words in the hearing of the king.

@c    36:21. And the king sent Judi that he should take the volume:  who
@c    bringing it out of the chamber of Elisama the scribe, read it in the
@c    hearing of the king, and of all the princes that stood about the king.

@c    36:22. Now the king sat in the winter house, in the ninth month:  and
@c    there was a hearth before him full of burning coals.

@c    36:23. And when Judi had read three or four pages, he cut it with the
@c    penknife, and he cast it into the fire, that was upon the hearth, till
@c    all the volume was consumed with the fire that was on the hearth.

@c    36:24. And the king and all his servants that heard all these words
@c    were not afraid, nor did they rend their garments.

@c    36:25. But yet Elnathan, and Dalaias, and Gamarias spoke to the king,
@c    not to burn the book:  and he heard them not.

@c    36:26. And the king commanded Jeremiel the son of Amelech, and Saraias
@c    the son of Ezriel, and Selemias the son of Abdeel, to take up Baruch
@c    the scribe, and Jeremias the prophet:  but the Lord hid them.

@c    36:27. And the word of the Lord came to Jeremias the prophet, after
@c    that the king had burnt the volume, and the words that Baruch had
@c    written from the mouth of Jeremias, saying:

@c    36:28. Take thee again another volume:  and write in it all the former
@c    words that were in the first volume which Joakim the king of Juda both
@c    burnt.

@c    36:29. And thou shalt say to Joakim the king of Juda:  Thus saith the
@c    Lord:  Thou hast burnt that volume, saying:  Why hast thou written
@c    therein, and said:  The king of Babylon shall come speedily, and shall
@c    lay waste this land:  and shall cause to cease from thence man and
@c    beast?

@c    36:30. Therefore thus saith the Lord against Joakim the king of Juda:
@c    He shall have none to sit upon the throne of David:  and his dead body
@c    shall be cast out to the heat by day, and to the frost by night.

@c    He shall have none, etc. . .Because his son Joachin or Jechonias, within
@c    three months after the death of his father, was carried away to
@c    Babylon, so that his reign is not worthy of notice.

@c    36:31. And I will punish him, and his seed and his servants, for their
@c    iniquities, and I will bring upon them, and upon the inhabitants of
@c    Jerusalem, and upon the men of Juda all the evil that I have pronounced
@c    against them, but they have not heard.

@c    36:32. And Jeremias took another volume, and gave it to Baruch the son
@c    of Nerias the scribe:  who wrote in it from the mouth of Jeremias all
@c    the words of the book which Joakim the king of Juda had burnt with
@c    fire:  and there were added besides many more words than had been
@c    before.



@c    Jeremias Chapter 37


@c    Jeremias prophesies that the Chaldeans, who had departed from
@c    Jerusalem, would return and burn the city.  He is cast into prison.  His
@c    conference with Sedecias.

@c    37:1. Now king Sedecias the son of Josias reigned instead of Jechonias
@c    the son of Joakim:  whom Nabuchodonosor king of Babylon made king in the
@c    land of Juda.

@c    37:2. But neither he, nor his servants, nor the people of the land did
@c    obey the words of the Lord, that he spoke in the hand of Jeremias the
@c    prophet.

@c    37:3. And king Sedecias sent Juchal the son of Selemias, and Sophonias
@c    the son of Maasias the priest to Jeremias the prophet, saying:  Pray to
@c    the Lord our God for us.

@c    37:4. Now Jeremias walked freely in the midst of the people:  for they
@c    had not as yet cast him into prison.  And the army of Pharao was come
@c    out of Egypt:  and the Chaldeans that besieged Jerusalem, hearing these
@c    tidings, departed from Jerusalem.

@c    37:5. And the word of the Lord came to Jeremias the prophet, saying:

@c    37:6. Thus saith the Lord the God of Israel:  Thus shall you say to the
@c    king of Juda, who sent you to inquire of me:  Behold the army of Pharao,
@c    which is come forth to help you, shall return into their own land, into
@c    Egypt.

@c    37:7. And the Chaldeans shall come again, and fight against this city,
@c    and take it, and burn it with fire.

@c    37:8. Thus saith the Lord:  Deceive not your souls, saying:  The
@c    Chaldeans shall surely depart and go away from us:  for they shall not
@c    go away.

@c    37:9. But if you should even beat all the army of the Chaldeans that
@c    fight against you, and there should be left of them some wounded men:
@c    they shall rise up, every man from his heart, and burn this city with
@c    fire.

@c    37:10. Now when the army of the Chaldeans was gone away from Jerusalem,
@c    because of Pharao's army,

@c    37:11. Jeremias went forth out of Jerusalem to go into the land of
@c    Benjamin:  and to divide a possession there in the presence of the
@c    citizens,

@c    37:12. And when he was come to the gate of Benjamin, the captain of the
@c    gate, who was there in his turn, was one named Jerias, the son of
@c    Selemias, the son of Hananias:  and he took hold of Jeremias the
@c    prophet, saying:  Thou art fleeing to the Chaldeans.

@c    37:13. And Jeremias answered:  It is not so, I am not fleeing to the
@c    Chaldeans.  But he hearkened not to him:  so Jerias took Jeremias and
@c    brought him to the princes.

@c    37:14. Wherefore the princes were angry with Jeremias, and they beat
@c    him, and cast him into the prison that was in the house of Jonathan the
@c    scribe:  for he was chief over the prison.

@c    37:15. So Jeremias went into the house of the prison, and into the
@c    dungeon:  and Jeremias remained there many days.

@c    37:16. Then Sedecias the king, sending, took him:  and asked him
@c    secretly in his house, and said:  Is there, thinkest thou, any word from
@c    the Lord?  And Jeremias said.  There is.  And he said:  Thou shalt be
@c    delivered into the hands of the king of Babylon.

@c    37:17. And Jeremias said to king Sedecias:  In what have I offended
@c    against thee, or thy servants, or thy people, that thou hast cast me
@c    into prison?

@c    37:18. Where are your prophets that prophesied to you, and said:  The
@c    king of Babylon shall not come against you, and against this land?

@c    37:19. Now therefore hear, I beseech thee, my lord the king:  let my
@c    petition be accepted in thy sight:  and send me not back into the house
@c    of Jonathan the scribe, lest I die there.

@c    37:20. Then king Sedecias commanded that Jeremias should be committed
@c    into the entry of the prison:  and that they should give him daily a
@c    piece of bread, beside broth, till all the bread in the city were
@c    spent:  and Jeremias remained in the entry of the prison.



@c    Jeremias Chapter 38


@c    The prophet at the instance of the great men is cast into a filthy
@c    dungeon:  he is drawn out by Abdemelech, and has another conference with
@c    the king.

@c    38:1. Now Saphatias the son of Mathan, and Gedelias the son of Phassur,
@c    and Juchal the son of Selemias, and Phassur the son of Melchias heard
@c    the words that Jeremias spoke to all the people, saying:

@c    38:2. Thus saith the Lord:  Whosoever shall remain in this city, shall
@c    die by the sword, and by famine, and by pestilence:  but he that shall
@c    go forth to the Chaldeans, shall live, and his life shall be safe, and
@c    he shall live.

@c    38:3. Thus saith the Lord:  This city shall surely be delivered into the
@c    hand of the army of the king of Babylon, and he shall take it.

@c    38:4. And the princes said to the king.  We beseech thee that this man
@c    may be put to death:  for on purpose he weakeneth the hands of the men
@c    of war, that remain in this city, and the hands of the people, speaking
@c    to them according to these words:  for this man seeketh not peace to
@c    this people, but evil.

@c    38:5. And king Sedecias said:  Behold he is in your hands:  for it is not
@c    lawful for the king to deny you any thing.

@c    38:6. Then they took Jeremias and cast him into the dungeon of Melchias
@c    the son of Amelech, which was in the entry of the prison:  and they let
@c    down Jeremias by ropes into the dungeon, wherein there was no water,
@c    but mire.  And Jeremias sunk into the mire.

@c    38:7. Now Abdemelech the Ethiopian, an eunuch that was in the king's
@c    house, heard that they had put Jeremias in the dungeon:  but the king
@c    was sitting in the gate of Benjamin.

@c    38:8. And Abdemelech went out of the king's house, and spoke to the
@c    king, saying:

@c    38:9. My lord the king, these men have done evil in all that they have
@c    done against Jeremias the prophet, casting him into the dungeon to die
@c    there with hunger, for there is no more bread in the city.

@c    38:10. Then the king commanded Abdemelech the Ethiopian, saying:  Take
@c    from hence thirty men with thee, and draw up Jeremias the prophet out
@c    of the dungeon, before he die.

@c    38:11. So Abdemelech taking the men with him, went into the king's
@c    house that was under the storehouse:  and he took from thence old rags,
@c    and old rotten things, and he let them down by cords to Jeremias into
@c    the dungeon.

@c    38:12. And Abdemelech the Ethiopian said to Jeremias:  Put these old
@c    rags and these rent and rotten things under thy arms, and upon the
@c    cords:  and Jeremias did so.

@c    38:13. And they drew up Jeremias with the cords, and brought him forth
@c    out of the dungeon.  And Jeremias remained in the entry of the prison.

@c    38:14. And king Sedecias sent, and took Jeremias the prophet to him to
@c    the third gate, that was in the house of the Lord:  and the king said to
@c    Jeremias:  I will ask thee a thing, hide nothing from me.

@c    38:15. Then Jeremias said to Sedecias:  If I shall declare it to thee,
@c    wilt thou not put me to death?  and if I give thee counsel, thou wilt
@c    not hearken to me.

@c    38:16. Then king Sedecias swore to Jeremias, in private, saying:  As the
@c    Lord liveth, that, made us this soul, I will not put thee to death, nor
@c    will I deliver thee into the hands of these men that seek thy life.

@c    38:17. And Jeremias said to Sedecias:  Thus saith the Lord of hosts the
@c    God of Israel:  If thou wilt take a resolution and go out to the princes
@c    of the king of Babylon, thy soul shall live, and this city shall not be
@c    burnt with fire:  and thou shalt be safe, and thy house.

@c    38:18. But if thou wilt not go out to the princes of the king of
@c    Babylon, this city shall be delivered into the hands of the Chaldeans,
@c    and they shall burn it with fire:  and thou shalt not escape out of
@c    their hand.

@c    38:19. And king Sedecias said to Jeremias:  I am afraid because of the
@c    Jews that are fled over to the Chaldeans:  lest I should be delivered
@c    into their hands, and they should abuse me.

@c    38:20. But Jeremias answered:  They shall not deliver thee:  hearken, I
@c    beseech thee, to the word of the Lord, which I speak to the, and it
@c    shall be well with thee, and thy soul shall live.

@c    38:21. But if thou wilt not go forth, this is the word which the Lord
@c    hath shewn me:

@c    38:22. Behold all the women that are left in the house of the king of
@c    Juda, shall be brought out to the princes of the king of Babylon:  and
@c    they shall say:  Thy men of peace have deceived thee, and have prevailed
@c    against thee, they have plunged thy feet in the mire, and in a slippery
@c    place and they have departed from thee.

@c    Thy men of peace. . .Viri pacifici tui.  That is thy false friends
@c    promising thee peace and happiness, and by their evil counsels
@c    involving thee in misery.

@c    38:23. And all thy wives, and thy children shall be brought out to the
@c    Chaldeans, and thou shalt not escape their hands, but thou shalt be
@c    taken by the hand of the king of Babylon:  and he shall burn this city
@c    with fire.

@c    38:24. Then Sedecias said to Jeremias:  Let no man know these words, and
@c    thou shalt not die.

@c    38:25. But if the princes shall hear that I have spoken with thee, and
@c    shall come to thee, and say to thee:  Tell us what thou hast said to the
@c    king, hide it not from us, and we will not kill thee:  and also what the
@c    king said to thee:

@c    38:26. Thou shalt say to them:  I presented my supplication before the
@c    king, that he would not command me to be carried back into the house of
@c    Jonathan, to die there.

@c    38:27. So all the princes came to Jeremias, and asked him:  and he spoke
@c    to them according to all the words that the king had commanded him:  and
@c    they left him:  for nothing had been heard.

@c    38:28. But Jeremias remained in the entry of the prison, until the day
@c    that Jerusalem was taken:  and it came to pass that Jerusalem was taken.



@c    Jeremias Chapter 39


@c    After two years' siege Jerusalem is taken.  Sedecias is carried before
@c    Nabuchodonosor, who kills his sons in his sight, and then puts out his
@c    eyes.  Jeremias is set at liberty.

@c    39:1. In the ninth year of Sedecias king of Juda, in the tenth month,
@c    came Nabuchodonosor king of Babylon, and all his army to Jerusalem, and
@c    they besieged it.

@c    39:2. And in the eleventh year of Sedecias, in the fourth month, the
@c    fifth day of the month, the city was opened.

@c    39:3. And all the princes of the king of Babylon came in, and sat in
@c    the middle gate:  Neregel, Sereser, Semegarnabu, Sarsachim, Rabsares,
@c    Neregel, Serezer, Rebmag, and all the rest of the princes of the king
@c    of Babylon.

@c    39:4. And when Sedecias the king of Juda and all the men of war saw
@c    them, they fled:  and they went forth in the night out of the city by
@c    the way of the king's garden, and by the gate that was between the two
@c    walls, and they went out to the way of the desert.

@c    39:5. But the army of the Chaldeans pursued after them:  and they took
@c    Sedecias in the plain of the desert of Jericho, and when they had taken
@c    him, they brought him to Nabuchodonosor king of Babylon to Reblatha,
@c    which is in the land of Emath:  and he gave judgment upon him.

@c    39:6. And the king of Babylon slew the sons of Sedecias, in Reblatha,
@c    before his eyes:  and the king of Babylon slew all the nobles of Juda.

@c    39:7. He also put out the eyes of Sedecias:  and bound him with fetters,
@c    to be carried to Babylon.

@c    39:8. And the Chaldeans burnt the king's house, and the houses of the
@c    people with fire, and they threw down the wall of Jerusalem.

@c    39:9. And Nabuzardan the general of the army carried away captive to
@c    Babylon the remnant of the people that remained in the city, and the
@c    fugitives that had gone over to him, and the rest of the people that
@c    remained.

@c    39:10. But Nabuzardan the general left some of the poor people that had
@c    nothing at all, in the land of Juda, and he gave them vineyards, and
@c    cisterns at that time.

@c    39:11. Now Nabuchodonosor king of Babylon had given charge to
@c    Nabuzardan the general concerning Jeremias, saying:

@c    39:12. Take him, and set thy eyes upon him, and do him no harm:  but as
@c    he hath a mind, so do with him.

@c    39:13. Therefore Nabuzardan the general sent, and Nabuzardan, and
@c    Rabsares, and Neregel, and Sereser, and Rebmag, and all the nobles of
@c    the king of Babylon,

@c    39:14. Sent and took Jeremias out of the court of the prison, and
@c    committed him to Godolias the son of Ahicam the son of Saphan, that he
@c    might go home, and dwell among the people.

@c    39:15. But the word of the Lord came to Jeremias, when he was yet shut
@c    up in the court of the prison, saying:  Go, and tell Abdemelech the
@c    Ethiopian, saying:

@c    39:16. Thus saith the Lord of hosts the God of Israel:  Behold I will
@c    bring my words upon this city unto evil, and not unto good:  and they
@c    shall be accomplished in thy sight in that day.

@c    39:17. And I will deliver thee in that day, saith the Lord:  and thou
@c    shalt not be given into the hands of the men whom thou fearest:

@c    39:18. But delivering, I will deliver thee, and thou shalt not fall by
@c    the sword:  but thy life shall be saved for thee, because thou hast put
@c    thy trust in me, saith the Lord.



@c    Jeremias Chapter 40


@c    Jeremias remains with Godolias the governor; who receives all the Jews
@c    that resort to him.

@c    40:1. The word that came to Jeremias from the Lord, after that
@c    Nabuzardan the general had let him go from Rama, when he had taken him,
@c    being bound with chains, among all them that were carried away from
@c    Jerusalem and Juda, and were carried to Babylon.

@c    40:2. And the general of the army taking Jeremias, said to him:  The
@c    Lord thy God hath pronounced this evil upon this place,

@c    40:3. And he hath brought it:  and the Lord hath done as he hath said:
@c    because you have sinned against the Lord, and have not hearkened to his
@c    voice, and this word is come upon you.

@c    40:4. Now then behold I have loosed thee this day from the chains which
@c    were upon thy hands:  if it please thee to come with me to Babylon,
@c    come:  and I will set my eyes upon thee:  but if it do not please thee to
@c    come with me to Babylon, stay here:  behold all the land is before thee,
@c    as thou shalt choose, and whither it shall please thee to go, thither
@c    go.

@c    40:5. And come not with me:  but dwell with Godolias the son of Ahicam
@c    the son of Saphan, whom the king of Babylon hath made governor over the
@c    cities of Juda:  dwell therefore with him in the midst of the people:  or
@c    whithersoever it shall please thee to go, go.  And the general of the
@c    army gave him victuals and presents, and let him go.

@c    40:6. And Jeremias went to Godolias the son of Ahicam to Masphath:  and
@c    dwelt with him in the midst of the people that were left in the land.

@c    40:7. And when all the captains of the army that were scattered through
@c    the countries, they and their companions, had heard that the king of
@c    Babylon had made Godolias the son of Ahicam governor of the country,
@c    and that he had committed unto him men and women, and children, and of
@c    the poor of the land, them that had not been carried away captive to
@c    Babylon:

@c    40:8. They came to Godolias to Masphath:  and Ismahel the son of
@c    Nathanias, and Johanan, and Jonathan, the sons of Caree, and Sareas the
@c    son of Thanehumeth, and the children of Ophi, that were of Netophathi,
@c    and Jezonias the son of Maachati, they and their men.

@c    40:9. And Godolias the son of Ahicam the son of Saphan swore to them
@c    and to their companions, saying:  Fear not to serve the Chaldeans:  dwell
@c    in the land, and serve the king of Babylon, and it shall be well with
@c    you.

@c    40:10. Behold I dwell in Masphath, that I may answer the commandment of
@c    the Chaldeans that are sent to us:  but as for you, gather ye the
@c    vintage, and the harvest, and the oil, and lay it up in your vessels,
@c    and abide in your cities which you hold.

@c    40:11. Moreover all the Jews that were in Moab, and among the children
@c    of Ammon, and in Edom, and in all the countries, when they heard that
@c    the king of Babylon had left a remnant in Judea, and that he had made
@c    Godolias the son of Ahicam the son of Saphan ruler over them:

@c    40:12. All the Jews, I say, returned out of all the places to which
@c    they had fled, and they came into the land of Juda to Godolias to
@c    Masphath:  and they gathered wine, and a very great harvest.

@c    40:13. Then Johanan the son of Caree, and all the captains of the army,
@c    that had been scattered about in the countries, came to Godolias to
@c    Masphath.

@c    40:14. And they said to him:  Know that Baalis the king of the children
@c    of Ammon hath sent Ismahel the son of Nathanias to kill thee.  And
@c    Godolias the son of Ahicam believed them not.

@c    40:15. But Johanan the son of Caree, spoke to Godolias privately in
@c    Masphath, saying:  I will go, and I will kill Ismahel the son of
@c    Nathanias, and no man shall know it, lest he kill thee, and all the
@c    Jews be scattered, that are gathered unto thee, and the remnant of Juda
@c    perish.

@c    40:16. And Godolias the son of Ahicam said to Johanan the son of Caree:
@c    Do not this thing:  for what thou sayst of Ismahel is false.



@c    Jeremias Chapter 41


@c    Godolias is slain:  the Jews that were with him are apprehensive of the
@c    Chaldeans.

@c    41:1. And it came to pass in the seventh month, that Ismahel the son of
@c    Nathanias, the son of Elisama of the royal blood, and the nobles of the
@c    king, and ten men with him, came to Godolias the son of Ahicam into
@c    Masphath:  and they ate bread there together in Masphath.

@c    41:2. And Ismahel the son of Nathanias arose, and the ten men that were
@c    with him, and they struck Godolias the son of Ahicam, the son of Saphan
@c    with the sword, and slew him whom the king of Babylon had made governor
@c    over the land.

@c    41:3. Ismahel slew also all the Jews that were with Godolias in
@c    Masphath, and the Chaldeans that were found there, and the soldiers.

@c    41:4. And on the second day after he had killed Godolias, no man yet
@c    knowing it,

@c    41:5. There came some from Sichem, and from Silo, and from Samaria,
@c    fourscore men, with their beards shaven, and their clothes rent, and
@c    mourning:  and they had offerings and incense in their hand, to offer in
@c    the house of the Lord.

@c    41:6. And Ismahel the son of Nathanias went forth from Masphath to meet
@c    them, weeping all along as he went:  and when he had met them, he said
@c    to them:  Come to Godolias, the son of Ahicam.

@c    41:7. And when they were come to the midst of the city, Ismahel the son
@c    of Nathanias, slew them, and cast them into the midst of the pit, he
@c    and the men that were with him.

@c    41:8. But ten men were found among them, that said to Ismahel:  Kill us
@c    not:  for we have stores in the field, of wheat, and barley, and oil,
@c    and honey.  And he forbore, and slew them not with their brethren.

@c    41:9. And the pit into which Ismahel cast all the dead bodies of the
@c    men whom he slew because of Godolias, is the same that king Asa made,
@c    for fear of Baasa the king of Israel:  the same did Ismahel the son of
@c    Nathanias fill with them that were slain.

@c    41:10. Then Ismahel carried away captive all the remnant of the people
@c    that were in Masphath:  the king's daughters, and all the people that
@c    remained in Masphath:  whom Nabuzardan the general of the army had
@c    committed to Godolias the son of Ahicam.  And Ismahel the son of
@c    Nathanias took them, and he departed, to go over to the children of
@c    Ammon.

@c    41:11. But Johanan the son of Caree, and all the captains of the
@c    fighting men that were with him, heard of the evil that Ismahel the son
@c    of Nathanias had done.

@c    41:12. And taking all the men, they went out to fight against Ismahel
@c    the son of Nathanias, and they found him by the great waters that are
@c    in Gabaon.

@c    41:13. And when all the people that were with Ismahel, had seen Johanan
@c    the son of Caree, and all the captains of the fighting men that were
@c    with him, they rejoiced.

@c    41:14. And all the people whom Ismahel had taken, went back to
@c    Masphath:  and they returned and went to Johanan the son of Caree.

@c    41:15. But Ismahel the son of Nathanias fled with eight men, from the
@c    face of Johanan, and went to the children of Ammon.

@c    41:16. Then Johanan the son of Caree, and all the captains of the
@c    soldiers that were with him, took all the remnant of the people whom
@c    they had recovered from Ismahel the son of Nathanias, from Masphath,
@c    after that he had slain Godolias the son of Ahicam:  valiant men for
@c    war, and the women, and the children, and the eunuchs whom he had
@c    brought back from Gabaon.

@c    41:17. And they departed, and sat as sojourners in Chamaam, which is
@c    near Bethlehem:  in order to go forward, and enter into Egypt,

@c    41:18. From the face of the Chaldeans:  for they were afraid of them,
@c    because Ismahel the son of Nathanias had slain Godolias the son of
@c    Ahicam, whom the king of Babylon had made governor in the land of Juda.



@c    Jeremias Chapter 42


@c    Jeremias assures the remnant of the people, that if they will stay in
@c    Juda, they shall be safe; but if they go down into Egypt, they shall
@c    perish.

@c    42:1. Then all the captains of the warriors, and Johanan the son of
@c    Caree, and Jezonias, the son of Osaias, and the rest of the people from
@c    the least to the greatest came near:

@c    42:2. And they said to Jeremias the prophet:  Let our supplication fall
@c    before thee:  and pray thou for us to the Lord thy God for all this
@c    remnant, for we are left but a few of many, as thy eyes do behold us.

@c    42:3. And let the Lord thy God shew us the way by which we may walk,
@c    and the thing that we must do.

@c    42:4. And Jeremias the prophet said to them:  I have heard you:  behold I
@c    will pray to the Lord your God according to your words:  and whatsoever
@c    thing he shall answer me, I will declare it to you:  and I will hide
@c    nothing from you.

@c    42:5. And they said to Jeremias:  The Lord be witness between us of
@c    truth and faithfulness, if we do not according to every thing for which
@c    the Lord thy God shall send thee to us.

@c    42:6. Whether it be good or evil, we will obey the voice of the Lord
@c    our God, to whom we send thee:  that it may be well with us when we
@c    shall hearken to the voice of the Lord our God.

@c    Good or evil. . .That is, agreeable or disagreeable.

@c    42:7. Now after ten days, the word of the Lord came to Jeremias.

@c    42:8. And he called Johanan the son of Caree, and all the captains of
@c    the fighting men that were with him, and all the people from the least
@c    to the greatest.

@c    42:9. And he said to them:  Thus saith the Lord the God of Israel, to
@c    whom you sent me, to present your supplications before him:

@c    42:10. If you will be quiet and remain in this land, I will build you
@c    up, and not pull you down:  I will plant you, and not pluck you up:  for
@c    now I am appeased for the evil that I have done to you.

@c    I am appeased for the evil that I have done to you. . .That is, I am
@c    appeased, as I have sufficiently punished you, and now I am reconciled
@c    with you.

@c    42:11. Fear not because of the king of Babylon, of whom you are greatly
@c    afraid:  fear him not, saith the Lord:  for I am with you, to save you,
@c    and to deliver you from his hand.

@c    42:12. And I will shew mercies to you, and will take pity on you, and
@c    will cause you to dwell in your own land.

@c    42:13. But if you say:  We will not dwell in this land, neither will we
@c    hearken to the voice of the Lord our God,

@c    42:14. Saying:  No, but we will go into the land of Egypt:  where we
@c    shall see no war, nor hear the sound of the trumpet, nor suffer hunger:
@c    and there we will dwell.

@c    42:15. For this now hear the word of the Lord, ye remnant of Juda:  Thus
@c    saith the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel:  If you set your faces to go
@c    into Egypt, and enter in to dwell there:

@c    42:16. The sword which you fear, shall overtake you there in the land
@c    of Egypt:  and the famine, whereof you are afraid, shall cleave to you
@c    in Egypt, and there you shall die.

@c    42:17. And all the men that set their faces to go into Egypt, to dwell
@c    there, shall die by the sword, and by famine, and by pestilence:  none
@c    of them shall remain, nor escape from the face of the evil that I will
@c    bring upon them.

@c    42:18. For thus saith the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel:  As my anger
@c    and my indignation hath been kindled against the inhabitants of
@c    Jerusalem:  so shall my indignation be kindled against you, when you
@c    shall enter into Egypt, and you shall be an execration, and an
@c    astonishment, and a curse, and a reproach:  and you shall see this place
@c    no more.

@c    42:19. This is the word of the Lord concerning you, O ye remnant of
@c    Juda:  Go ye not into Egypt:  know certainly that I have adjured you this
@c    day.

@c    42:20. For you have deceived your own souls:  for you sent me to the
@c    Lord our God, saying:  Pray for us to the Lord our God, and according to
@c    all that the Lord our God shall say to thee, so declare unto us, and we
@c    will do it.

@c    42:21. And now I have declared it to you this day, and you have not
@c    obeyed the voice of the Lord your God, with regard to all the things
@c    for which he hath sent me to you.

@c    42:22. Now therefore know certainly that you shall die by the sword,
@c    and by famine, and by pestilence in the place to which you desire to go
@c    to dwell there.



@c    Jeremias Chapter 43


@c    The Jews, contrary to the orders of God by the prophet, go into Egypt,
@c    carrying Jeremias with them.  He foretells the devastation of that land
@c    by the king of Babylon.

@c    43:1. And it came to pass, that when Jeremias had made an end of
@c    speaking to the people all the words of the Lord their God, for which
@c    the Lord their God had sent him to them, all these words:

@c    43:2. Azarias the son of Osaias, and Johanan the son of Caree, and all
@c    the proud men, made answer, saying to Jeremias:  Thou tellest a lie:  the
@c    Lord our God hath not sent thee, saying:  Go not into Egypt, to dwell
@c    there.

@c    43:3. But Baruch the son of Nerias setteth thee on against us, to
@c    deliver us into the hands of the Chaldeans, to kill us, and to cause us
@c    to be carried away captives to Babylon.

@c    43:4. So Johanan the son of Caree, and all the captains of the
@c    soldiers, and all the people, obeyed not the voice of the Lord, to
@c    remain in the land of Juda.

@c    43:5. But Johanan the son of Caree, and all the captains of the
@c    soldiers took all the remnant of Juda, that were returned out of all
@c    nations, to which they had before been scattered, to dwell in the land
@c    of Juda:

@c    43:6. Men, and women, and children, and the king's daughters, and every
@c    soul, which Nabuzardan the general had left with Godolias the son of
@c    Ahicam the son of Saphan, and Jeremias the prophet, and Baruch the son
@c    of Nerias.

@c    43:7. And they went into the land of Egypt, for they obeyed not the
@c    voice of the Lord:  and they came as far as Taphnis.

@c    43:8. And the word of the Lord came to Jeremias in Taphnis, saying:

@c    43:9. Take great stones in thy hand, and thou shalt hide them in the
@c    vault that is under the brick wall at the gate of Pharao's house in
@c    Taphnis:  in the sight of the men of Juda.

@c    43:10. And thou shalt say to them:  Thus saith the Lord of hosts the God
@c    of Israel:  Behold I will send, and take Nabuchodonosor the king of
@c    Babylon my servant:  and I will set his throne over these stones which I
@c    have hid, and he shall set his throne over them.

@c    43:11. And he shall come and strike the land of Egypt:  such as are for
@c    death, to death:  and such as are for captivity, to captivity:  and such
@c    as are for the sword, to the sword.

@c    43:12. And he shall kindle a fire in the temples of the gods of Egypt,
@c    and he shall burn them, and he shall carry them away captives:  and he
@c    shall array himself with the land of Egypt, as a shepherd putteth on
@c    his garment:  and he shall go forth from thence in peace.

@c    43:13. And he shall break the statues of the house of the sun, that are
@c    in the land of Egypt; and the temples of the gods of Egypt he shall
@c    burn with fire.



@c    Jeremias Chapter 44


@c    The prophet's admonition to the Jews in Egypt against idolatry is not
@c    regarded:  he denounces to them their destruction.

@c    44:1. The word that came to Jeremias, concerning all the Jews that
@c    dwelt in the land of Egypt, dwelling in Magdal, and in Taphnis, and in
@c    Memphis, and in the land of Phatures, saying:

@c    44:2. Thus saith the Lord of hosts the God of Israel:  You have seen all
@c    this evil that I have brought upon Jerusalem, and upon all the cities
@c    of Juda:  and behold they are desolate this day, and there is not an
@c    inhabitant in them:

@c    44:3. Because of the wickedness which they have committed, to provoke
@c    me to wrath, and to go and offer sacrifice, and worship other gods,
@c    which neither they, nor you, nor your fathers knew.

@c    44:4. And I sent to you all my servants the prophets, rising early, and
@c    sending, and saying:  Do not commit this abominable thing, which I hate.

@c    44:5. But they heard not, nor inclined their ear to turn from their
@c    evil ways, and not to sacrifice to strange gods.

@c    44:6. Wherefore my indignation and my fury was poured forth, and was
@c    kindled in the cities of Juda, and in the streets of Jerusalem:  and
@c    they are turned to desolation and waste, as at this day.

@c    44:7. And now thus saith the Lord of hosts the God of Israel:  Why do
@c    you commit this great evil against your own souls, that there should
@c    die of you man and woman, child and suckling out of the midst of Juda,
@c    and no remnant should be left you:

@c    44:8. In that you provoke me to wrath with the works of your hands, by
@c    sacrificing to other gods in the land of Egypt, into which you are come
@c    to dwell there:  and that you should perish, and be a curse, and a
@c    reproach to all the nations of the earth?

@c    44:9. Have you forgotten the evils of your fathers, and the evils of
@c    the kings of Juda, and the evils of their wives, and your evils, and
@c    the evils of your wives, that they have done in the land of Juda, and
@c    in the streets of Jerusalem?

@c    44:10. They are not cleansed even to this day:  neither have they
@c    feared, nor walked in the law of the Lord, nor in my commandments,
@c    which I set before you and your fathers.

@c    44:11. Therefore thus saith the Lord of hosts the God of Israel:  Behold
@c    I will set my face upon you for evil:  and I will destroy all Juda.

@c    44:12. And I will take the remnant of Juda that have set their faces to
@c    go into the land of Egypt, and to dwell there; and they shall be all
@c    consumed in the land of Egypt:  they shall fall by the sword, and by the
@c    famine:  and they shall be consumed from the least even to the greatest,
@c    by the sword, and by the famine shall they die:  and they shall be for
@c    an execration, and for a wonder, and for a curse, and for a reproach.

@c    44:13. And I will visit them that dwell in the land of Egypt, as I have
@c    visited Jerusalem by the sword, and by famine and by pestilence.

@c    44:14. And there shall be none that shall escape, and remain of the
@c    remnant of the Jews that are gone to sojourn in the land of Egypt:  and
@c    that shall return into the land of Juda, to which they have a desire to
@c    return to dwell there:  there shall none return but they that shall
@c    flee.

@c    44:15. Then all the men that knew that their wives sacrificed to other
@c    gods:  and all the women of whom there stood by a great multitude, and
@c    all the people of them that dwelt in the land of Egypt in Phatures,
@c    answered Jeremias, saying:

@c    44:16. As for the word which thou hast spoken to us in the name of the
@c    Lord, we will not hearken to thee:

@c    44:17. But we will certainly do every word that shall proceed out of
@c    our own mouth, to sacrifice to the queen of heaven, and to pour out
@c    drink offerings to her, as we and our fathers have done, our kings, and
@c    our princes in the cities of Juda, and in the streets of Jerusalem:  and
@c    we were filled with bread, and it was well with us, and we saw no evil.

@c    The queen of heaven. . .The moon, which they worshipped under this name.

@c    44:18. But since we left off to offer sacrifice to the queen of heaven,
@c    and to pour out frank offerings to her, we have wanted all things, and
@c    have been consumed by the sword, and by famine.

@c    44:19. And if we offer sacrifice to the queen of heaven, and pour out
@c    drink offerings to her:  did we make cakes to worship her, to pour out
@c    drink offerings to her, without our husbands?

@c    44:20. And Jeremias spoke to all the people, to the men, and to the
@c    women, and to all the people which had given him that answer, saying:

@c    44:21. Was it not the sacrifice that you offered in the cities of Juda,
@c    and in the streets of Jerusalem, you and your fathers, your kings, and
@c    your princes, and the people of the land, which the Lord hath
@c    remembered, and hath it not entered into his heart?

@c    44:22. So that the Lord could no longer bear, because of the evil of
@c    your doings, and because of the abominations which you have committed:
@c    therefore your land is become a desolation, and an astonishment, and a
@c    curse, without an inhabitant, as at this day.

@c    44:23. Because you have sacrificed to idols, and have sinned against
@c    the Lord:  and have not obeyed the voice of the Lord, and have not
@c    walked in his law, and in his commandments, and in his testimonies:
@c    therefore are these evils come upon you, as at this day.

@c    44:24. And Jeremias said to all the people and to all the women:  Hear
@c    ye the word of the Lord, all Juda, you that dwell in the land of Egypt:

@c    44:25. Thus saith the Lord of hosts the God of Israel, saying:  You and
@c    your wives have spoken with your mouth, and fulfilled with your hands,
@c    saying:  Let us perform our vows which we have made, to offer sacrifice
@c    to the queen of heaven, and to pour out drink offerings to her:  you
@c    have fulfilled your vows, and have performed them indeed.

@c    44:26. Therefore hear ye the word of the Lord, all Juda, you that dwell
@c    in the land of Egypt:  Behold I have sworn by my great name, saith the
@c    Lord:  that my name shall no more be named in the mouth of any man of
@c    Juda, in the land of Egypt, saying:  The Lord God liveth.

@c    44:27. Behold I will watch over them for evil, and not for good:  and
@c    all the men of Juda that are in the land of Egypt, shall be consumed,
@c    by the sword, and by famine, till there be an end of them.

@c    44:28. And a few men that shall flee from the sword, shall return out
@c    of the land of Egypt into the land of Juda:  and all the remnant of Juda
@c    that are gone into the land of Egypt to dwell there, shall know whose
@c    word shall stand, mine, or theirs.

@c    44:29. And this shall be a sign to you, saith the Lord, that I will
@c    punish you in this place:  that you may know that my words shall be
@c    accomplished indeed against you for evil.

@c    44:30. Thus saith the Lord:  Behold I will deliver Pharao Nechao king of
@c    Egypt into the hand of his enemies, and into the hand of them that seek
@c    his life:  as I delivered Sedecias king of Juda into the land of
@c    Nabuchodonosor the king of Babylon his enemy, and that sought his life.



@c    Jeremias Chapter 45


@c    The prophet comforts Baruch in his affliction.

@c    45:1. The word that Jeremias the prophet spoke to Baruch the son of
@c    Nerias, when he had written these words in a book, out of the mouth of
@c    Jeremias, in the fourth year of Joakim the son of Josias king of Juda,
@c    saying:

@c    45:2. Thus saith the Lord the God of Israel to thee, Baruch:

@c    45:3. Thou hast said:  Woe is me, wretch that I am, for the Lord hath
@c    added sorrow to my sorrow:  I am wearied with my groans, and I find no
@c    rest.

@c    45:4. Thus saith the Lord:  Thus shalt thou say to him:  Behold, them
@c    whom I have built, I do destroy:  and them whom I have planted, I do
@c    pluck up, and all this land.

@c    45:5. And dost thou seek great things for thyself?  Seek not:  for behold
@c    I will bring evil upon all flesh, saith the Lord! but I will give thee
@c    thy life, and save thee in all places whithersoever thou shalt go.



@c    Jeremias Chapter 46


@c    A prophecy against Egypt.  The Jews shall return from captivity.

@c    46:1. The word of the Lord that came to Jeremias the prophet against
@c    the Gentiles,

@c    46:2. Against Egypt, against the army of Pharao Nechao king of Egypt,
@c    which was by the river Euphrates in Charcamis, whom Nabuchodonosor the
@c    king of Babylon defeated, in the fourth year of Joakim the son of
@c    Josias king of Juda.

@c    46:3. Prepare ye the shield and buckler, and go forth to battle.

@c    46:4. Harness the horses, and get up, ye horsemen:  stand forth with
@c    helmets, furbish the spears, put on coats of mail.

@c    46:5. What then?  I have seen them dismayed, and turning their backs,
@c    their valiant ones slain:  they fled apace, and they looked not back:
@c    terror was round about, saith the Lord.

@c    46:6. Let not the swift flee away, nor the strong think to escape:  they
@c    are overthrown, and fallen down, towards the north by the river
@c    Euphrates.

@c    46:7. Who is this that cometh up as a flood:  and his streams swell like
@c    those of rivers?

@c    46:8. Egypt riseth up like a flood, and the waves thereof shall be
@c    moved as rivers, and he shall say:  I will go up and will cover the
@c    earth:  I will destroy the city, and its inhabitants.

@c    46:9. Get ye up on horses, and glory in chariots, and let the valiant
@c    men come forth, the Ethiopians, and the Libyans that hold the shield,
@c    and the Lydians that take, and shoot arrows.

@c    46:10. For this is the day of the Lord the God of hosts, a day of
@c    vengeance, that he may revenge himself of his enemies:  the sword shall
@c    devour, and shall be filled, and shall be drunk with their blood:  for
@c    there is a sacrifice of the Lord God of hosts in the north country, by
@c    the river Euphrates.

@c    46:11. Go up into Galaad, and take balm, O virgin daughter of Egypt:  in
@c    vain dost thou multiply medicines, there shall be no cure for thee.

@c    46:12. The nations have heard of thy disgrace, and thy howling hath
@c    filled the land:  for the strong hath stumbled against the strong, and
@c    both are fallen together.

@c    46:13. The word that the Lord spoke to Jeremias the prophet, how
@c    Nabuchodonosor king of Babylon should come and strike the land of
@c    Egypt:

@c    46:14. Declare ye to Egypt, and publish it in Magdal, and let it be
@c    known in Memphis, and in Taphnis:  say ye:  Stand up, and prepare
@c    thyself:  for the sword shall devour all round about thee.

@c    46:15. Why are thy valiant men come to nothing?  they stood not:  because
@c    the Lord hath overthrown them.

@c    46:16. He hath multiplied them that fall, and one hath fallen upon
@c    another, and they shall say:  Arise, and let us return to our own
@c    people, and to the land of our nativity, from the sword of the dove.

@c    The dove. . .See the annotation on chap. 25., ver. 38.

@c    46:17. Call ye the name of Pharao king of Egypt, a tumult time hath
@c    brought.

@c    46:18. As I live, saith the King, (whose name is the Lord of hosts,) as
@c    Thabor is among the mountains, and as Carmel by the sea, so shall he
@c    come.

@c    46:19. Furnish thyself to go into captivity, thou daughter inhabitant
@c    of Egypt:  for Memphis shall be made desolate, and shall be forsaken and
@c    uninhabited.

@c    46:20. Egypt is like a fair and beautiful heifer:  there shall come from
@c    the north one that shall goad her.

@c    46:21. Her hirelings also that lived in the midst of her, like fatted
@c    calves are turned back, and are fled away together, and they could not
@c    stand, for the day of their slaughter is come upon them, the time of
@c    their visitation.

@c    46:22. Her voice shall sound like brass, for they shall hasten with an
@c    army, and with axes they shall come against her, as hewers of wood.

@c    46:23. They have cut down her forest, saith the Lord, which cannot be
@c    counted:  they are multiplied above locusts, and are without number.

@c    46:24. The daughter of Egypt is confounded, and delivered into the hand
@c    of the people of the north.

@c    46:25. The Lord of hosts the God of Israel hath said:  Behold I will
@c    visit upon the tumult of Alexandria, and upon Pharao, and upon Egypt,
@c    and upon her gods, and upon her kings, and upon Pharao, and upon them
@c    that trust in him.

@c    Visit upon. . .That is, punish.--Ibid.  Alexandria. . .In the Hebrew, No,
@c    which was the ancient name of the city, to which Alexander gave
@c    afterwards the name of Alexandria.

@c    46:26. And I will deliver them into the hand of them that seek their
@c    lives, and into the hand of Nabuchodonosor king of Babylon, and into
@c    the hand of his servants:  and afterwards it shall be inhabited, as in
@c    the days of old, saith the Lord.

@c    46:27. And thou my servant Jacob, fear not and be not thou dismayed, O
@c    Israel:  for behold I will save thee from afar off, and thy seed out of
@c    the land of thy captivity:  and Jacob shall return and be at rest, and
@c    prosper:  and there shall be none to terrify him.

@c    46:28. And thou, my servant Jacob, fear not, saith the Lord:  because I
@c    am with thee, for I will consume all the nations to which I have cast
@c    thee out:  but thee I will not consume, but I will correct thee in
@c    judgment, neither will I spare thee as if thou wert innocent.



@c    Jeremias Chapter 47


@c    A prophecy of the desolation of the Philistines, of Tyre, Sidon, Gaza,
@c    and Ascalon.

@c    47:1. The word of the Lord that came to Jeremias the prophet against
@c    the people of Palestine, before Pharao took Gaza.

@c    47:2. Thus saith the Lord:  Behold there come up waters out of the
@c    north, and they shall be as an overflowing torrent, and they shall
@c    cover the land, and all that is therein, the city and the inhabitants
@c    thereof:  then the men shall cry, and all the inhabitants of the land
@c    shall howl,

@c    47:3. At the noise of the marching of arms, and of his soldiers, at the
@c    rushing of his chariots, and the multitude of his wheels.  The fathers
@c    have not looked back to the children, for feebleness of hands,

@c    47:4. Because of the coming of the day, in which all the Philistines
@c    shall be laid waste, and Tyre and Sidon shall be destroyed, with all
@c    the rest of their helpers.  For the Lord hath wasted the Philistines,
@c    the remnant of the isle of Cappadocia.

@c    47:5. Baldness is come upon Gaza:  Ascalon hath held her peace with the
@c    remnant of their valley:  how long shalt thou cut thyself?

@c    47:6. O thou sword of the Lord, how long wilt thou not be quiet?  Go
@c    into thy scabbard, rest, and be still.

@c    47:7. How shall it be quiet, when the Lord hath given it a charge
@c    against Ascalon, and against the countries thereof by the sea side, and
@c    there hath made an appointment for it?



@c    Jeremias Chapter 48


@c    A prophecy of the desolation of Moab for their pride:  but their
@c    captivity shall at last be released.

@c    48:1. Against Moab thus saith the Lord of hosts the God of Israel:  Woe
@c    to Nabo, for it is laid waste, and confounded:  Cariathaim is taken:  the
@c    strong city is confounded and hath trembled.

@c    48:2. There is no more rejoicing in Moab over Hesebon:  they have
@c    devised evil.  Come, and let us cut it off from being a nation.
@c    Therefore shalt thou in silence hold thy peace, and the sword shall
@c    follow thee.

@c    48:3. A voice of crying from Oronaim:  waste, and great destruction.

@c    48:4. Moab is destroyed:  proclaim a cry for her little ones.

@c    48:5. For by the ascent of Luith shall the mourner go up with weeping:
@c    for in the descent of Oronaim the enemies have heard a howling of
@c    destruction.

@c    48:6. Flee, save your lives:  and be as heath in the wilderness.

@c    48:7. For because thou hast trusted in thy bulwarks, and in thy
@c    treasures, thou also shalt be taken:  and Chamos shall go into
@c    captivity, his priests, and his princes together.

@c    Chamos. . .The idol of the Moabites.

@c    48:8. And the spoiler shall come upon every city, and no city shall
@c    escape:  and the valleys shall perish, and the plains shall be
@c    destroyed, for the Lord hath spoken:

@c    48:9. Give a flower to Moab, for in its flower it shall go out:  and the
@c    cities thereof shall be desolate, and uninhabited.

@c    48:10. Cursed be he that doth the work of the Lord deceitfully:  and
@c    cursed be he that withholdeth his sword from blood.

@c    Deceitfully. . .In the Greek, negligently.  The work of God here spoken
@c    of, is the punishment of the Moabites.

@c    48:11. Moab hath been fruitful from his youth, and hath rested upon his
@c    lees:  and hath not been poured out from vessel to vessel, nor hath gone
@c    into captivity:  therefore his taste hath remained in him, and his scent
@c    is not changed.

@c    Moab hath been fruitful. . .That is, rich and flourishing.  And hath
@c    rested upon his lees. . .That is, remained in its bad morals; as wine
@c    not decanted has its lees mixed and remains muddy.

@c    48:12. Therefore behold the days come, saith the Lord, and I will send
@c    him men that shall order and overturn his bottles, and they shall cast
@c    him down, and shall empty his vessels, and break their bottles one
@c    against another.

@c    48:13. And Moab shall be ashamed of Chamos, as the house of Israel was
@c    ashamed of Bethel, in which they trusted.

@c    Of Bethel. . .That is, of their golden calf which they worshipped in
@c    Bethel.

@c    48:14. How do you say:  We are valiant and stout men in battle?

@c    48:15. Moab is laid waste, and they have cast down her cities:  and her
@c    choice young men are gone down to the slaughter:  saith the king, whose
@c    name is the Lord of hosts.

@c    48:16. The destruction of Moab is near to come:  the calamity thereof
@c    shall come on exceeding swiftly.

@c    48:17. Comfort him, all you that are round about him, and all you that
@c    know his name, say:  How is the strong staff broken, the beautiful rod?

@c    48:18. Come down from thy glory, and sit in thirst, O dwelling of the
@c    daughter of Dibon:  because the spoiler of Moab is come up to thee, he
@c    hath destroyed thy bulwarks.

@c    48:19. Stand in the way, and look out, O habitation of Aroer:  inquire
@c    of him that fleeth:  and say to him that hath escaped:  What is done?

@c    48:20. Moab is confounded, because he is overthrown:  howl ye, and cry,
@c    tell ye it in Arnon, that Moab is wasted.

@c    48:21. And judgment is come upon the plain country:  upon Helon, and
@c    upon Jasa, and upon Mephaath.

@c    48:22. And upon Dibon, and upon Nabo, and upon the house of Deblathaim,

@c    48:23. And upon Cariathaim, and upon Bethgamul, and upon Bethmaon,

@c    48:24. And upon Carioth, and upon Bosra:  and upon all the cities of the
@c    land of Moab, far or near.

@c    48:25. The horn of Moab is cut off, and his arm is broken, saith the
@c    Lord.

@c    The horn of Moab is cut off. . .That is, the strength of Moab is cut
@c    off.  A metaphor drawn from animals whose strength is in their horns.

@c    48:26. Make him drunk, because he lifted up himself against the Lord:
@c    and Moab shall dash his hand in his own vomit, and he also shall be in
@c    derision.

@c    48:27. For Israel hath been a derision unto them:  as though thou hadst
@c    found him amongst thieves:  for thy words therefore, which thou hast
@c    spoken against him, thou shalt be led away captive.

@c    48:28. Leave the cities, and dwell in the rock, you that dwell in Moab:
@c    and be ye like the dove that maketh her nest in the mouth of the hole
@c    in the highest place.

@c    48:29. We have heard the pride of Moab, he is exceeding proud:  his
@c    haughtiness, and his arrogancy, and his pride, and the loftiness of his
@c    heart.

@c    48:30. I know, saith the Lord, his boasting, and that the strength
@c    thereof is not according to it, neither hath it endeavoured to do
@c    according as it was able.

@c    48:31. Therefore will I lament for Moab, and I will cry out to all
@c    Moab, for the men of the brick wall that mourn.

@c    48:32. O vineyard of Sabama, I will weep for thee, with the mourning of
@c    Jazer:  thy branches are gone over the sea, they are come even to the
@c    sea of Jazer:  the robber hath rushed in upon thy harvest and thy
@c    vintage.

@c    48:33. Joy and gladness is taken away from Carmel, and from the land of
@c    Moab, and I have taken away the wine out of the presses:  the treader of
@c    the grapes shall not sing the accustomed cheerful tune.

@c    48:34. From the cry of Hesebon even to Eleale, and to Jasa, they have
@c    uttered their voice:  from Segor to Oronaim, as a heifer of three years
@c    old:  the waters also of Nemrim shall be very bad.

@c    48:35. And I will take away from Moab, saith the Lord, him that
@c    offereth in the high places, and that sacrificeth to his gods.

@c    48:36. Therefore my heart shall sound for Moab like pipes and my heart
@c    shall sound like pipes for the men of the brick wall:  because he hath
@c    done more than he could, therefore they have perished.

@c    48:37. For every head shall be bald, and every beard shall be shaven:
@c    all hands shall be tied together, and upon every back there shall be
@c    haircloth.

@c    48:38. Upon all the housetops of Moab, and in the streets thereof
@c    general mourning:  because I have broken Moab as an useless vessel,
@c    saith the Lord.

@c    48:39. How is it overthrown, and they have howled!  How hath Moab bowed
@c    down the neck, and is confounded!  And Moab shall be a derision, and an
@c    example to all round about him.

@c    48:40. Thus saith the Lord:  Behold he shall fly as an eagle, and shall
@c    stretch forth his wings to Moab.

@c    48:41. Carioth is taken, and the strongholds are won:  and the heart of
@c    the valiant men of Moab in that day shall be as the heart of a woman in
@c    labour.

@c    48:42. And Moab shall cease to be a people:  because he hath gloried
@c    against the Lord.

@c    48:43. Fear, and the pit, and the snare come upon thee, O inhabitant of
@c    Moab, saith the Lord.

@c    Fear. . .That is, the sword of the enemy.  The pit. . .That is,
@c    unforeseen calamities.  The snare. . .That is, the ambushes laid by the
@c    enemy.

@c    48:44. He that shall flee from the fear, shall fall into the pit:  and
@c    he that shall get up out of the pit, shall be taken in the snare:  for I
@c    will bring upon Moab the year of their visitation, saith the Lord.

@c    48:45. They that fled from the snare stood in the shadow of Hesebon:
@c    but there came a fire out of Hesebon, and a flame out of the midst of
@c    Seon, and it shall devour part of Moab, and the crown of the head of
@c    the children of tumult.

@c    48:46. Woe to thee, Moab, thou hast persisted, O people of Chamos:  for
@c    thy sons, and thy daughters are taken captives.

@c    48:47. And I will bring back the captivity of Moab in the last days,
@c    saith the Lord.  Hitherto the judgments of Moab.



@c    Jeremias Chapter 49


@c    The like desolation of Ammon, of Idumea, of the Syrians, of the
@c    Agarenes, and of the Elamites.

@c    49:1. Against the children of Ammon.  Thus saith the Lord:  Hath Israel
@c    no sons?  or hath he no heir?  Why then hath Melchom inherited Gad:  and
@c    his people dwelt in his cities?

@c    Melchom. . .The idol of the Ammonites.

@c    49:2. Therefore behold the days come, saith the Lord, and I will cause
@c    the noise of war to be heard in Rabbath of the children of Ammon, and
@c    it shall be destroyed into a heap, and her daughters shall be burnt
@c    with fire, and Israel shall possess them that have possessed him, saith
@c    the Lord.

@c    49:3. Howl, O Hesebon, for Hai is wasted.  Cry, ye daughters of Rabbath,
@c    gird yourselves with haircloth:  mourn and go about by the hedges:  for
@c    Melchom shall be carried into captivity, his priests, and his princes
@c    together.

@c    49:4. Why gloriest thou in the valleys?  thy valley hath flowed away, O
@c    delicate daughter, that hast trusted in thy treasures, and hast said:
@c    Who shall come to me?

@c    49:5. Behold I will bring a fear upon thee, saith the Lord God of
@c    hosts, from all that are round about thee:  and you shall be scattered
@c    every one out of one another's sight, neither shall there be any to
@c    gather together them that flee.

@c    49:6. And afterwards I will cause the captives of the children of Ammon
@c    to return, saith the Lord.

@c    49:7. Against Edom.  Thus saith the Lord of hosts:  Is wisdom no more in
@c    Theman?  counsel is perished from her children:  their wisdom is become
@c    unprofitable.

@c    49:8. Flee and turn your backs, go down into the deep hole, ye
@c    inhabitants of Dedan:  for I have brought the destruction of Esau upon
@c    him, the time of his visitation.

@c    49:9. If grapegatherers had come to thee, would they not have left a
@c    bunch?  if thieves in the night, they would have taken what was enough
@c    for them.

@c    49:10. But I have made Esau bare, I have revealed his secrets, and he
@c    cannot be hid:  his seed is laid waste, and his brethren, and his
@c    neighbours, and he shall not be.

@c    49:11. Leave thy fatherless children:  I will make them live:  and thy
@c    widows shall hope in me.

@c    49:12. For thus saith the Lord:  Behold they whose judgment was not to
@c    drink of the cup, shall certainly drink:  and shalt thou come off as
@c    innocent?  thou shalt not come off as innocent, but drinking thou shalt
@c    drink.

@c    49:13. For I have sworn by myself, saith the Lord, that Bosra shall
@c    become a desolation, and a reproach, and a desert, and a curse:  and all
@c    her cities shall be everlasting wastes.

@c    49:14. I have heard a rumour from the Lord, and an ambassador is sent
@c    to the nations:  Gather yourselves together, and come against her, and
@c    let us rise up to battle.

@c    49:15. For behold I have made thee a little one among the nations,
@c    despicable among men.

@c    49:16. Thy arrogancy hath deceived thee, and the pride of thy heart:  O
@c    thou that dwellest in the clefts of the rock, and endeavourest to lay
@c    hold on the height of the hill:  but though thou shouldst make thy nest
@c    as high as an eagle, I will bring thee down from thence, saith the
@c    Lord.

@c    49:17. And Edom shall be desolate:  every one that shall pass by it,
@c    shall be astonished, and shall hiss at all its plagues.

@c    49:18. As Sodom was overthrown and Gomorrha, and the neighbours
@c    thereof, saith the Lord:  there shall not a man dwell there, and there
@c    shall no son of man inhabit it.

@c    49:19. Behold one shall come up as a lion from the swelling of the
@c    Jordan, against the strong and beautiful:  for I will make him run
@c    suddenly upon her:  and who shall be the chosen one whom I may appoint
@c    over her?  for who is like to me?  and who shall abide me?  and who is
@c    that shepherd that can withstand my countenance?

@c    49:20. Therefore hear ye the counsel of the Lord, which he hath taken
@c    concerning Edom:  and his thoughts which he hath thought concerning the
@c    inhabitants of Theman:  surely the little ones of the flock shall cast
@c    them down, of a truth they shall destroy them with their habitation.

@c    49:21. The earth is moved at the noise of their fall:  the cry of their
@c    voice is heard in the Red Sea.

@c    49:22. Behold he shall come up as an eagle, and fly:  and he shall
@c    spread his wings over Bosra:  and in that day the heart of the valiant
@c    ones of Edom shall be as the heart of a woman in labour.

@c    49:23. Against Damascus.  Emath is confounded and Arphad:  for they have
@c    heard very bad tidings, they are troubled as in the sea:  through care
@c    they could not rest.

@c    49:24. Damascus is undone, she is put to flight, trembling hath seized
@c    on her:  anguish and sorrows have taken her as a woman in labour.

@c    49:25. How have they forsaken the city of renown, the city of joy!

@c    49:26. Therefore her young men shall fall in her streets:  and all the
@c    men of war shall be silent in that day, saith the Lord of hosts.

@c    49:27. And I will kindle a fire in the wall of Damascus, and it shall
@c    devour the strong holds of Benadad.

@c    49:28. Against Cedar and against the kingdoms of Asor, which
@c    Nabuchodonosor king of Babylon destroyed.  Thus saith the Lord:  Arise,
@c    and go ye up to Cedar, and waste the children of the east.

@c    Cedar and Asor. . .Were parts of Arabia; which with Moab, Ammon, Edom,
@c    etc., were all brought under the yoke of Nabuchodonosor.

@c    49:29. They shall take their tents, and their flocks:  and shall carry
@c    off for themselves their curtains, and all their vessels, and their
@c    camels:  and they shall call fear upon them round about.

@c    49:30. Flee ye, get away speedily, sit in deep holes, you that inhabit
@c    Asor, saith the Lord:  for Nabuchodonosor king of Babylon hath taken
@c    counsel against you, and hath conceived designs against you.

@c    49:31. Arise, and go up to a nation that is at ease, and that dwelleth
@c    securely, saith the Lord:  they have neither gates, nor bars:  they dwell
@c    alone.

@c    49:32. And their camels shall be for a spoil and the multitude of their
@c    cattle for a booty, and I will scatter into every wind them that have
@c    their hair cut round, and I will bring destruction upon them from all
@c    their confines, saith the Lord.

@c    49:33. And Asor shall be a habitation for dragons, desolate for ever:
@c    no man shall abide there, nor son of man inhabit it.

@c    49:34. The word of the Lord that came to Jeremias the prophet against
@c    Elam, in the beginning of the reign of Sedecias king of Juda, saying:

@c    Elam. . .A part of Persia.

@c    49:35. Thus saith the Lord of hosts:  Behold I will break the bow of
@c    Elam, and their chief strength.

@c    49:36. And I will bring upon Elam the four winds from the four quarters
@c    of heaven:  and I will scatter them into all these winds:  and there
@c    shall be no nation, to which the fugitives of Elam shall not come.

@c    49:37. And I will cause Elam to be afraid before their enemies, and in
@c    the sight of them that seek their life:  and I will bring evil upon
@c    them, my fierce wrath, saith the Lord:  and I will send the sword after
@c    them, till I consume them.

@c    49:38. And I will set my throne in Elam, and destroy kings and princes
@c    from thence, saith the Lord.

@c    49:39. But in the latter days I will cause the captives of Elam, to
@c    return, saith the Lord.



@c    Jeremias Chapter 50


@c    Babylon, which hath afflicted the Israelites, after their restoration,
@c    shall be utterly destroyed.

@c    50:1. The word that the Lord hath spoken against Babylon, and against
@c    the land of the Chaldeans in the hand of Jeremias the prophet.

@c    50:2. Declare ye among the nations, and publish it, lift up a standard:
@c    proclaim, and conceal it not:  say:  Babylon is taken, Bel is confounded,
@c    Merodach is overthrown, their graven things are confounded, their idols
@c    are overthrown.

@c    Bel, etc. . .Bel and Merodach were worshipped for gods by the men of
@c    Babylon.

@c    50:3. For a nation is come up against her out of the north, which shall
@c    make her land desolate:  and there shall be none to dwell therein, from
@c    man even to beast:  yea they are removed, and gone away.

@c    A nation, etc. . .Viz., the Medes.

@c    50:4. In those days, and at that time, saith the Lord, the children of
@c    Israel shall come, they and the children of Juda together:  going and
@c    weeping they shall make haste, and shall seek the Lord their God.

@c    50:5. They shall ask the way to Sion, their faces are hitherward.  They
@c    shall come, and shall be joined to the Lord by an everlasting covenant,
@c    which shall never be forgotten.

@c    50:6. My people have been a lost flock, their shepherds have caused
@c    them to go astray, and have made them wander in the mountains:  they
@c    have gone from mountain to hill, they have forgotten their resting
@c    place.

@c    50:7. All that found them, have devoured them:  and their enemies said:
@c    We have not sinned in so doing:  because they have sinned against the
@c    Lord the beauty of justice, and against the Lord the hope of their
@c    fathers.

@c    50:8. Remove out of the midst of Babylon, and go forth out of the land
@c    of the Chaldeans:  and be ye as kids at the head of the flock.

@c    50:9. For behold I raise up, and will bring against Babylon an assembly
@c    of great nations from the land of the north:  and they shall be prepared
@c    against her, and from thence she shall be taken:  their arrows, like
@c    those of a mighty man, a destroyer, shall not return in vain.

@c    50:10. And Chaldea shall be made a prey:  all that waste her shall be
@c    filled, saith the Lord.

@c    50:11. Because you rejoice, and speak great things, pillaging my
@c    inheritance:  because you are spread abroad as calves upon the grass,
@c    and have bellowed as bulls.

@c    50:12. Your mother is confounded exceedingly, and she that bore you is
@c    made even with the dust:  behold she shall be the last among the
@c    nations, a wilderness unpassable, and dry.

@c    50:13. Because of the wrath of the Lord it shall not be inhabited, but
@c    shall be wholly desolate:  every one that shall pass by Babylon, shall
@c    be astonished, and shall hiss at all her plagues.

@c    50:14. Prepare yourselves against Babylon round about, all you that
@c    bend the bow:  fight against her, spare not arrows:  because she hath
@c    sinned against the Lord.

@c    50:15. Shout against her, she hath every where given her hand, her
@c    foundations are fallen, her walls are thrown down, for it is the
@c    vengeance of the Lord.  Take vengeance upon her:  as she hath done, so do
@c    to her.

@c    50:16. Destroy the sower out of Babylon, and him that holdeth the
@c    sickle in the time of harvest:  for fear of the sword of the dove every
@c    man shall return to his people, and every one shall flee to his own
@c    land.

@c    The dove. . .Or the destroyer; for the Hebrew word signifies either the
@c    one or the other.

@c    50:17. Israel is a scattered flock, the lions have driven him away:
@c    first the king of Assyria devoured him:  and last this Nabuchodonosor
@c    king of Babylon hath broken his bones.

@c    50:18. Therefore thus saith the Lord of hosts the God of Israel:  Behold
@c    I will visit the king of Babylon and his land, as I have visited the
@c    king of Assyria.

@c    50:19. And I will bring Israel again to his habitation:  and he shall
@c    feed on Carmel, and Bason, and his soul shall be satisfied in mount
@c    Ephraim, and Galaad.

@c    50:20. In those days, and at that time, saith the Lord, the iniquity of
@c    Israel shall be sought for, and there shall be none:  and the sin of
@c    Juda, and there shall none be found:  for I will be merciful to them,
@c    whom I shall leave.

@c    50:21. Go up against the land of the rulers, and punish the inhabitants
@c    thereof, waste, and destroy all behind them, saith the Lord:  and do
@c    according to all that I have commanded thee.

@c    50:22. A noise of war in the land, and a great destruction.

@c    50:23. How is the hammer of the whole earth broken, and destroyed! how
@c    is Babylon turned into a desert among the nations!

@c    50:24. I have caused thee to fall into a snare, and thou art taken, O
@c    Babylon, and thou wast not aware of it:  thou art found and caught,
@c    because thou hast provoked the Lord.

@c    50:25. The Lord hath opened his armoury, and hath brought forth the
@c    weapons of his wrath:  for the Lord the God of hosts hath a work to be
@c    done in the land of the Chaldeans.

@c    50:26. Come ye against her from the uttermost borders:  open that they
@c    may go forth that shall tread her down:  take the stones out of the way,
@c    and make heaps, and destroy her:  and let nothing of her be left.

@c    50:27. Destroy all her valiant men, let them go down to the slaughter:
@c    woe to them, for their day is come, the time of their visitation.

@c    50:28. The voice of them that flee, and of them that have escaped out
@c    of the land of Babylon:  to declare in Sion the revenge of the Lord our
@c    God, the revenge of his temple.

@c    50:29. Declare to many against Babylon, to all that bend the bow:  stand
@c    together against her round about, and let none escape; pay her
@c    according to her work:  according to all that she hath done, do ye to
@c    her:  for she hath lifted up herself against the Lord, against the Holy
@c    One of Israel.

@c    50:30. Therefore shall her young men fall in her streets:  and all her
@c    men of war shall hold their peace in that day, saith the Lord.

@c    50:31. Behold I come against thee, O proud one, saith the Lord the God
@c    of hosts:  for thy day is come, the time of thy visitation.

@c    50:32. And the proud one shall fall, he shall fall down, and there
@c    shall be none to lift him up:  and I will kindle a fire in his cities,
@c    and it shall devour all round about him.

@c    50:33. Thus saith the Lord of hosts:  The children of Israel, and the
@c    children of Juda are oppressed together:  all that have taken them
@c    captives, hold them fast, they will not let them go.

@c    50:34. Their redeemer is strong, the Lord of hosts is his name:  he will
@c    defend their cause in judgment, to terrify the land, and to disquiet
@c    the inhabitants of Babylon.

@c    50:35. A sword is upon the Chaldeans, saith the Lord, and upon the
@c    inhabitants of Babylon, and upon her princes, and upon her wise men.

@c    50:36. A sword upon her diviners, and they shall be foolish:  a sword
@c    upon her valiant ones, and they shall be dismayed.

@c    50:37. A sword upon their horses, and upon their chariots, and upon all
@c    the people that are in the midst of her:  and they shall become as
@c    women:  a sword upon her treasures, and they shall be made a spoil.

@c    50:38. A drought upon her waters, and they shall be dried up:  because
@c    it is a land of idols, and they glory in monstrous things.

@c    50:39. Therefore shall dragons dwell there with the fig fauns:  and
@c    ostriches shall dwell therein, and it shall be no more inhabited for
@c    ever, neither shall it be built up from generation to generation.

@c    Fig fauns. . .Monsters of the desert, or demons in monstrous shapes:
@c    such as the ancients called fauns and satyrs; and as they imagined them
@c    to live upon wild figs, they called them fauni ficarii or fig fauns.

@c    50:40. As the Lord overthrew Sodom and Gomorrha, and their neighbour
@c    cities, saith the Lord:  no man shall dwell there, neither shall the son
@c    of man inhabit it.

@c    50:41. Behold a people cometh from the north, and a great nation, and
@c    many kings shall rise from the ends of the earth.

@c    50:42. They shall take the bow and the shield:  they are cruel and
@c    unmerciful:  their voice shall roar like the sea, and they shall ride
@c    upon horses:  like a man prepared for battle against thee, O daughter of
@c    Babylon.

@c    50:43. The king of Babylon hath heard the report of them, and his hands
@c    are grown feeble:  anguish hath taken hold of him, pangs as a woman in
@c    labour.

@c    50:44. Behold he shall come up like a lion from the swelling of the
@c    Jordan to the strong and beautiful:  for I will make him run suddenly
@c    upon her:  and who shall be the chosen one whom I may appoint over her?
@c    for who is like to me?  and who shall bear up against me?  and who is
@c    that shepherd that can withstand my countenance?

@c    50:45. Therefore hear ye the counsel of the Lord, which he hath taken
@c    against Babylon:  and his thoughts which he hath thought against the
@c    land of the Chaldeans:  surely the little ones of the flocks shall pull
@c    them down, of a truth their habitation shall be destroyed with them.

@c    50:46. At the noise of the taking of Babylon the earth is moved, and
@c    the cry is heard amongst the nations.



@c    Jeremias Chapter 51


@c    The miseries that shall fall upon Babylon from the Medes:  the
@c    destruction of her idols.

@c    51:1. Thus saith the Lord:  Behold I will raise up as it were a
@c    pestilential wind against Babylon and against the inhabitants thereof,
@c    who have lifted up their heart against me.

@c    51:2. And I will send to Babylon fanners, and they shall fan her, and
@c    shall destroy her land:  for they are come upon her on every side in the
@c    day of her affliction.

@c    51:3. Let not him that bendeth, bend his bow, and let not him go up
@c    that is armed with a coat of mail:  spare not her young men, destroy all
@c    her army.

@c    51:4. And the slain shall fall in the land of the Chaldeans, and the
@c    wounded in the regions thereof.

@c    51:5. For Israel and Juda have not been forsaken by their God the Lord
@c    of hosts:  but their land hath been filled with sin against the Holy One
@c    of Israel.

@c    51:6. Flee ye from the midst of Babylon, and let every one save his own
@c    life:  be not silent upon her iniquity:  for it is the time of revenge
@c    from the Lord, he will render unto her what she hath deserved.

@c    51:7. Babylon hath been a golden cup in the hand of the Lord, that made
@c    all the earth drunk:  the nations have drunk of her wine, and therefore
@c    they have staggered.

@c    51:8. Babylon is suddenly fallen, and destroyed:  howl for her, take
@c    balm for her pain, if so she may be healed.

@c    51:9. We would have cured Babylon, but she is not healed:  let us
@c    forsake her, and let us go every man to his own land:  because her
@c    judgment hath reached even to the heavens, and is lifted up to the
@c    clouds.

@c    51:10. The Lord hath brought forth our justices:  Come, and let us
@c    declare in Sion the work of the Lord our God.

@c    51:11. Sharpen the arrows, fill the quivers, the Lord hath raised up
@c    the spirit of the kings of the Medes:  and his mind is against Babylon
@c    to destroy it, because it is the vengeance of the Lord, the vengeance
@c    of his temple.

@c    51:12. Upon the walls of Babylon set up the standard, strengthen the
@c    watch:  set up the watchmen, prepare the ambushes:  for the Lord hath
@c    both purposed, and done all that he spoke against the inhabitants of
@c    Babylon.

@c    51:13. O thou that dwellest upon many waters, rich in treasures, thy
@c    end is come for thy entire destruction.

@c    51:14. The Lord of hosts hath sworn by himself, saying:  I will fill
@c    thee with men as with locusts, and they shall lift up a joyful shout
@c    against thee.

@c    51:15. He that made the earth by his power, that hath prepared the
@c    world by his wisdom, and stretched out the heavens by his
@c    understanding.

@c    51:16. When he uttereth his voice the waters are multiplied in heaven:
@c    he lifteth up the clouds from the ends of the earth, he hath turned
@c    lightning into rain:  and hath brought forth the wind out of his
@c    treasures.

@c    51:17. Every man is become foolish by his knowledge:  every founder is
@c    confounded by his idol, for what he hath cast is a lie, and there is no
@c    breath in them.

@c    51:18. They are vain works, and worthy to be laughed at, in the time of
@c    their visitation they shall perish.

@c    51:19. The portion of Jacob is not like them:  for he that made all
@c    things he it is, and Israel is the sceptre of his inheritance:  the Lord
@c    of hosts is his name.

@c    51:20. Thou dashest together for me the weapons of war, and with thee I
@c    will dash nations together, and with thee I will destroy kingdoms:

@c    51:21. And with thee I will break in pieces the horse, and his rider,
@c    and with thee I will break in pieces the chariot, and him that getteth
@c    up into it:

@c    51:22. And with thee I will break in pieces man and woman, and with
@c    thee I will break in pieces the old man and the child, and with thee I
@c    will break in pieces the young man and the virgin:

@c    51:23. And with thee I will break in pieces the shepherd and his flock,
@c    and with thee I will break in pieces the husbandman and his yoke of
@c    oxen, and with thee I will break in pieces captains and rulers.

@c    51:24. And I will render to Babylon, and to all the inhabitants of
@c    Chaldea all their evil, that they have done in Sion, before your eyes,
@c    saith the Lord.

@c    51:25. Behold I come against thee, thou destroying mountain, saith the
@c    Lord, which corruptest the whole earth:  and I will stretch out my hand
@c    upon thee, and will roll thee down from the rocks, and will make thee a
@c    burnt mountain.

@c    51:26. And they shall not take of thee a stone for the corner, nor a
@c    stone for foundations, but thou shalt be destroyed for ever, saith the
@c    Lord.

@c    51:27. Set ye up a standard in the land:  sound with the trumpet among
@c    the nations:  prepare the nations against her:  call together against her
@c    the kings of Ararat, Menni, and Ascenez:  number Taphsar against her,
@c    bring the horse as the stinging locust.

@c    51:28. Prepare the nations against her, the kings of Media, their
@c    captains, and all their rulers, and all the land of their dominion.

@c    51:29. And the land shall be in a commotion, and shall be troubled:  for
@c    the design of the Lord against Babylon shall awake, to make the land of
@c    Babylon desert and uninhabitable.

@c    51:30. The valiant men of Babylon have forborne to fight, they have
@c    dwelt in holds:  their strength hath failed, and they are become as
@c    women:  her dwelling places are burnt, her bars are broken.

@c    51:31. One running post shall meet another, and messenger shall meet
@c    messenger:  to tell the king of Babylon that his city is taken from one
@c    end to the other:

@c    51:32. And that the fords are taken, and the marshes are burnt with
@c    fire, and the men of war are affrighted.

@c    51:33. For thus saith the Lord of hosts the God of Israel:  The daughter
@c    of Babylon is like a thrashingfloor, this is the time of her thrashing:
@c    yet a little while, and the time of her harvest shall come.

@c    51:34. Nabuchodonosor king of Babylon hath eaten me up, he hath
@c    devoured me:  he hath made me as an empty vessel:  he hath swallowed me
@c    up like a dragon, he hath filled his belly with my delicate meats, and
@c    he hath cast me out.

@c    51:35. The wrong done to me, and my flesh be upon Babylon, saith the
@c    habitation of Sion:  and my blood upon the inhabitants of Chaldea, saith
@c    Jerusalem.

@c    51:36. Therefore thus saith the Lord:  Behold I will judge thy cause,
@c    and will take vengeance for thee, and I will make her sea desolate, I
@c    and will dry up her spring.

@c    51:37. And Babylon shall be reduced to heaps, a dwelling place for
@c    dragons, an astonishment and a hissing, because there is no inhabitant.

@c    51:38. They shall roar together like lions, they shall shake their
@c    manes like young lions.

@c    51:39. In their heat I will set them drink:  and I will make them drunk,
@c    that they may slumber, and sleep an everlasting sleep, and awake no
@c    more, saith the Lord.

@c    51:40. I will bring them down like lambs to the slaughter, and like
@c    rams with kids.

@c    51:41. How is Sesach taken, and the renowned one of all the earth
@c    surprised?  How is Babylon become an astonishment among the nations?

@c    51:42. The sea is come up over Babylon :  she is covered with the
@c    multitude of the waves thereof.

@c    51:43. Her cities are become an astonishment, a land uninhabited and
@c    desolate, a land wherein none can dwell, nor son of man pass through
@c    it.

@c    51:44. And I will visit against Bel in Babylon, and I will bring forth
@c    out of his mouth that which he had swallowed down:  and the nations
@c    shall no more flow together to him, for the wall also of Babylon shall
@c    fall.

@c    51:45. Go out of the midst of her, my people:  that every man may save
@c    his life from the fierce wrath of the Lord.

@c    51:46. And lest your hearts faint, and ye fear for the rumour that
@c    shall be heard in the land:  and a rumour shall come in one year, and
@c    after this year another rumour:  and iniquity in the land, and ruler
@c    upon ruler.

@c    51:47. Therefore behold the days come, and I will visit the idols of
@c    Babylon:  and her whole land shall be confounded, and all her slain
@c    shall fall in the midst of her.

@c    51:48. And the heavens and the earth, and all things that are in them
@c    shall give praise for Babylon:  for spoilers shall come to her from the
@c    north, saith the Lord.

@c    51:49. And as Babylon caused that there should fall slain in Israel:  so
@c    of Babylon there shall fall slain in all the earth.

@c    51:50. You that have escaped the sword, come away, stand not still:
@c    remember the Lord afar off, and let Jerusalem come into your mind.

@c    51:51. We are confounded, because we have heard reproach:  shame hath
@c    covered our faces:  because strangers are come upon the sanctuaries of
@c    the house of the Lord.

@c    51:52. Therefore behold the days come, saith the Lord, and I will visit
@c    her graven things, and in all her land the wounded shall groan:

@c    51:53. If Babylon should mount up to heaven, and establish her strength
@c    on high:  from me there should come spoilers upon her, saith the Lord.

@c    51:54. The noise of a cry from Babylon, and great destruction from the
@c    land of the Chaldeans:

@c    51:55. Because the Lord hath laid Babylon waste, and destroyed out of
@c    her the great voice:  and their wave shall roar like many waters:  their
@c    voice hath made a noise:

@c    51:56. Because the spoiler is come upon her, that is, upon Babylon, and
@c    her valiant men are taken, and their bow is weakened, because the Lord,
@c    who is a strong revenger, will surely repay.

@c    51:57. And I will make her princes drunk, and her wise men, and her
@c    captains, and her rulers, and her valiant men:  and they shall sleep an
@c    everlasting sleep, and shall awake no more, saith the king whose name
@c    is Lord of hosts.

@c    51:58. Thus saith the Lord of hosts:  That broad wall of Babylon shall
@c    be utterly broken down, and her high gates shall be burnt with fire,
@c    and the labours of the people shall come to nothing, and of the nations
@c    shall go to the fire, and shall perish.

@c    51:59. The word that Jeremias the prophet commanded Saraias the son of
@c    Nerias, the son of Maasias, when he went with king Sedecias to Babylon,
@c    in the fourth year of his reign:  now Saraias was chief over the
@c    prophecy.

@c    51:60. And Jeremias wrote in one book all the evil that was to come
@c    upon Babylon:  all these words that are written against Babylon.

@c    51:61. And Jeremias said to Saraias:  When thou shalt come into Babylon,
@c    and shalt see, and shalt read all these words,

@c    51:62. Thou shalt say:  O Lord, thou hast spoken against this place to
@c    destroy it:  so that there should be neither man nor beast to dwell
@c    therein, and that it should be desolate for ever.

@c    51:63. And when thou shalt have made an end of reading this book, thou
@c    shalt tie a stone to it, and shalt throw it into the midst of the
@c    Euphrates:

@c    51:64. And thou shalt say:  Thus shall Babylon sink, and she shall not
@c    rise up from the affliction that I will bring upon her, and she shall
@c    be utterly destroyed.  Thus far are the words of Jeremias.



@c    Jeremias Chapter 52


@c    A recapitulation of the reign of Sedecias, and the destruction of
@c    Jerusalem.  The number of the captives.

@c    52:1. Sedecias was one and twenty years old when he began to reign:  and
@c    he reigned eleven years in Jerusalem:  and the name of his mother was
@c    Amital, the daughter of Jeremias of Lobna.

@c    52:2. And he did that which was evil in the eyes of the Lord, according
@c    to all that Joakim had done.

@c    52:3. For the wrath of the Lord was against Jerusalem, and against
@c    Juda, till he cast them out from his presence:  and Sedecias revolted
@c    from the king of Babylon.

@c    52:4. And it came to pass in the ninth year of his reign, in the tenth
@c    month, the tenth day of the month, that Nabuchodonosor the king of
@c    Babylon came, he and all his army, against Jerusalem, and they besieged
@c    it, and built forts against it round about.

@c    52:5. And the city was besieged until the eleventh year of king
@c    Sedecias.

@c    52:6. And in the fourth month, the ninth day of the month, a famine
@c    overpowered the city:  and there was no food for the people of the land.

@c    52:7. And the city was broken up, and the men of war fled, and went out
@c    of the city in the night by the way of the gate that is between the two
@c    walls, and leadeth to the king's garden, (the Chaldeans besieging the
@c    city round about,) and they went by the way that leadeth to the
@c    wilderness.

@c    52:8. But the army of the Chaldeans pursued after the king:  and they
@c    overtook Sedecias in the desert which is near Jericho:  and all his
@c    companions were scattered from him.

@c    52:9. And when they had taken the king, they carried him to the king of
@c    Babylon to Reblatha, which is in the land of Emath:  and he gave
@c    judgment upon him.

@c    52:10. And the king of Babylon slew the sons of Sedecias before his
@c    eyes:  and he slew all the princes of Juda in Reblatha.

@c    52:11. And he put out the eyes of Sedecias, and bound him with fetters,
@c    and the king of Babylon brought him into Babylon, and he put him in
@c    prison till the day of his death.

@c    52:12. And in the fifth month, the tenth day of the month, the same is
@c    the nineteenth year of Nabuchodonosor, king of Babylon, came Nabuzardan
@c    the general of the army, who stood before the king of Babylon in
@c    Jerusalem.

@c    52:13. And he burnt the house of the Lord, and the king's house, and
@c    all the houses of Jerusalem, and every great house he burnt with fire.

@c    52:14. And all the army of the Chaldeans that were with the general
@c    broke down all the wall of Jerusalem round about.

@c    52:15. But Nabuzardan the general carried away captives some of the
@c    poor people, and of the rest of the common sort who remained in the
@c    city, and of the fugitives that were fled over to the king of Babylon,
@c    and the rest of the multitude.

@c    52:16. But of the poor of the land, Nabuzardan the general left some
@c    for vinedressers, and for husbandmen.

@c    52:17. The Chaldeans also broke in pieces the brazen pillars that were
@c    in the house of the Lord, and the bases, and the sea of brass that was
@c    in the house of the Lord:  and they carried all the brass of them to
@c    Babylon.

@c    52:18. And they took the caldrons, and the fleshhooks, and the
@c    psalteries, and the bowls, and the little mortars, and all the brazen
@c    vessels that had been used in the ministry:  and

@c    52:19. The general took away the pitchers, and the censers, and the
@c    pots, and the basins, and the candlesticks, and the mortars, and the
@c    cups:  as many as were of gold, in gold:  and as many as were of silver,
@c    in silver:

@c    52:20. And the two pillars, and one sea, and twelve oxen of brass that
@c    were under the bases, which king Solomon had made in the house of the
@c    Lord:  there was no weight of the brass of all these vessels.

@c    52:21. And concerning the pillars, one pillar was eighteen cubits high:
@c    and a cord of twelve cubits compassed it about:  but the thickness
@c    thereof was four fingers, and it was hollow within.

@c    52:22. And chapiters of brass were upon both:  and the height of one
@c    chapiter was five cubits:  and network, and pomegranates were upon the
@c    chapiters round about, all of brass.  The same of the second pillar, and
@c    the pomegranates.

@c    52:23. And there were ninety-six pomegranates hanging down:  and the
@c    pomegranates being a hundred in all, were compassed with network.

@c    52:24. And the general took Saraias the chief priest, and Sophonias the
@c    second priest, and the three keepers of the entry.

@c    52:25. He also took out of the city one eunuch that was chief over the
@c    men of war:  and seven men of them that were near the king's person,
@c    that were found in the city:  and a scribe, an officer of the army who
@c    exercised the young soldiers:  and threescore men of the people of the
@c    land, that were found in the midst of the city.

@c    52:26. And Nabuzardan the general took them, and brought them to the
@c    king of Babylon, to Reblatha.

@c    52:27. And the king of Babylon struck them, and put them to death in
@c    Reblatha, in the land of Emath:  and Juda was carried away captive out
@c    of his land.

@c    52:28. This is the people whom Nabuchodonosor carried away captive:  in
@c    the seventh year, three thousand and twenty-three Jews.

@c    52:29. In the eighteenth year of Nabuchodonosor, eight hundred and
@c    thirty-two souls from Jerusalem.

@c    52:30. In the three and twentieth year of Nabuchodonosor, Nabuzardan
@c    the general carried away of the Jews seven hundred and forty-five
@c    souls.  So all the souls were four thousand six hundred.

@c    52:31. And it came to pass in the seven and thirtieth year of the
@c    captivity of Joachin king of Juda, in the twelfth month, the five and
@c    twentieth day of the month, that Evilmerodach king of Babylon, in the
@c    first year of his reign, lifted up the head of Joachin king of Juda,
@c    and brought him forth out of prison.

@c    52:32. And he spoke kindly to him, and he set his throne above the
@c    thrones of the kings that were with him in Babylon.

@c    52:33. And he changed his prison garments, and he ate bread before him
@c    always all the days of his life.

@c    52:34. And for his diet a continual provision was allowed him by the
@c    king of Babylon, every day a portion, until the day of his death, all
@c    the days of his life.
