@c    THE PROPHECY OF JONAS



@c    JONAS prophesied in the reign of JEREBOAM the second:  as we learn from
@c    4 Kings 14.25. To whom also he foretold his success in restoring all
@c    the borders of Israel.  He was of GETH OPHER in the tribe of ZABULON,
@c    and consequently of GALILEE:  which confutes that assertion of the
@c    Pharisees, John 7.52, that no prophet ever rose out of GALILEE.  He
@c    prophesied and prefigured in his own person the death and resurrection
@c    of CHRIST:  and was the only one among the prophets that was sent to
@c    preach to the Gentiles.



@c    Jonas Chapter 1


@c    Jonas being sent to preach in Ninive, fleeth away by sea:  a tempest
@c    riseth:  of which he being found, by lot, to be the cause, is cast into
@c    the sea, which thereupon is calmed.

@c    1:1. Now the word of the Lord came to Jonas, the son of Amathi, saying:

@c    1:2. Arise and go to Ninive, the great city, and preach in it:  For the
@c    wickedness thereof is come up before me.

@c    Nineve. . .The capital city of the Assyrian empire.

@c    1:3. And Jonas rose up to flee into Tharsis from the face of the Lord,
@c    and he went down to Joppe, and found a ship going to Tharsis:  and he
@c    paid the fare thereof, and went down into it, to go with them to
@c    Tharsis from the face of the Lord,

@c    Tharsis. . .Which some take to be Tharsus of Cilicia, others to be
@c    Tartessus of Spain, others to be Carthage.

@c    1:4. But the Lord sent a great wind to the sea:  and a great tempest was
@c    raised in the sea, and the ship was in danger to be broken.

@c    1:5. And the mariners were afraid, and the men cried to their god:  and
@c    they cast forth the wares that were in the ship, into the sea, to
@c    lighten it of them:  and Jonas went down into the inner part of the
@c    ship, and fell into a deep sleep.

@c    A deep sleep. . .This is a lively image of the insensibility of sinners,
@c    fleeing from God, and threatened on every side with his judgments:  and
@c    yet sleeping as if they were secure.

@c    1:6. And the ship master came to him and said to him:  Why art thou fast
@c    asleep?  rise up call upon thy God, if so be that God will think of us
@c    that we may not perish.

@c    1:7. And they said every one to his fellow:  Come and let us cast lots,
@c    that we may know why this evil is upon us.  And they cast lots, and the
@c    lot fell upon Jonas.

@c    1:8. And they said to him:  Tell us for what cause this evil is upon us,
@c    what is thy business?  of what country art thou?  and whither goest thou?
@c    or of what people art thou?

@c    1:9. And he said to them:  I am a Hebrew, and I fear the Lord, and the
@c    God of heaven, who made both the sea and the dry land.

@c    1:10. And the men were greatly afraid, and they said to him:  Why hast
@c    thou done this?  (For the men knew that he fled from the face of the
@c    Lord:  because he had told them.)

@c    1:11. And they said to him:  What shall we do with thee, that the sea
@c    may be calm to us?  for the sea flowed and swelled.

@c    1:12. And he said to them:  take me up, and cast me into the sea, and
@c    the sea shall be calm to you:  for I know for my sake this great tempest
@c    is upon you.

@c    1:13. And the men rowed hard to return the land, but they were not
@c    able:  because the sea tossed and swelled upon them.

@c    1:14. And they cried to the Lord, and said:  We beseech thee, O Lord let
@c    us not perish for this man's life, and lay not upon us innocent blood:
@c    for thou, oh Lord, hast done as it pleased thee.

@c    1:15. And they took Jonas, and cast him into the sea, and the sea
@c    ceased from raging.

@c    1:16. And the men feared the Lord exceedingly, and sacrificed victims
@c    to the Lord, and made vows.



@c    Jonas Chapter 2


@c    Jonas is swallowed up by a great fish:  he prayeth with confidence in
@c    God; and the fish casteth him out on the dry land.

@c    2:1. Now the Lord prepared a great fish to swallow up Jonas:  and Jonas
@c    was in the belly of a fish for three days and three nights.

@c    2:2. And Jonas prayed to the Lord, his God, out of the belly of the
@c    fish.

@c    2:3. And he said:  I cried out of my affliction to the Lord, and he
@c    heard me:  I cried out of the belly of hell, and thou hast heard my
@c    voice.

@c    2:4. And thou hast cast me forth into the deep, in the heart of the
@c    sea, and a flood hast compassed me:  all thy billows, and thy waves have
@c    passed over me.

@c    2:5. And I said:  I am cast away out of the sight of thy eyes:  but yet I
@c    shall see the holy temple again.

@c    2:6. The waters compassed me about even to the soul:  the deep hath
@c    closed me round about, the sea hath covered my head.

@c    2:7. I went down to the lowest parts of the mountains:  the bars of the
@c    earth have shut me up for ever:  and thou wilt bring up my life from
@c    corruption, O Lord, my God.

@c    2:8. When my soul was in distress within me, I remembered the Lord:
@c    that my prayer may come to thee, unto the holy temple.

@c    2:9. They that in vain observe vanities, forsake their own mercy.

@c    2:10. But I with the voice of praise will sacrifice to thee:  I will pay
@c    whatsoever I have vowed for my salvation to the Lord.

@c    2:11. And the Lord spoke to the fish:  and it vomited out Jonas upon the
@c    dry land.

@c    Spoke to the fish. . .God's speaking to the fish, was nothing else but
@c    his will, which all things obey.



@c    Jonas Chapter 3


@c    Jonas is sent again to preach in Ninive.  Upon their fasting and
@c    repentance, God recalleth the sentence by which they were to be
@c    destroyed.

@c    3:1. And the word of the Lord came to Jonas the second time saying:

@c    3:2. Arise, and go to Ninive, the great city:  and preach in it the
@c    preaching that I bid thee.

@c    3:3. And Jonas arose, and went to Ninive, according to the word of the
@c    Lord:  now Ninive was a great city of three days' journey.

@c    Of three days' journey. . .By the computation of some ancient
@c    historians, Ninive was about fifty miles round:  so that to go through
@c    all the chief streets and public places was three days' journey.

@c    3:4. And Jonas began to enter into the city one day's journey:  and he
@c    cried and said:  Yet forty days and Ninive shall be destroyed.

@c    3:5. And the men of Ninive believed in God:  and they proclaimed a fast,
@c    and put on sackcloth from the greatest to the least.

@c    3:6. And the word came to the king of Ninive:  and he rose up out of his
@c    throne, and cast away his robe from him, and was clothed in sackcloth,
@c    and sat in ashes.

@c    3:7. And he caused it to be proclaimed and published in Ninive, from
@c    the mouth of the king and of his princes, saying:  Let neither men nor
@c    beasts, oxen, nor sheep taste anything:  let them not feed, nor drink
@c    water.

@c    3:8. And let men and beasts be covered with sackcloth, and cry to the
@c    Lord with all their strength, and let them turn every one from his evil
@c    way, and from the iniquity that is in their hands.

@c    3:9. Who can tell if God will turn, and forgive:  and will turn away
@c    from his fierce anger, and we shall not perish?

@c    3:10. And God saw their works, that they were turned from their evil
@c    way:  and God had mercy with regard to the evil which he had said that
@c    he would do to them, and he did it not.



@c    Jonas Chapter 4


@c    4:1. And Jonas was exceedingly troubled, and was angry:

@c    Was exceedingly troubled, etc. . .His concern was lest he should pass
@c    for a false prophet; or rather, lest God's word, by this occasion,
@c    might come to be slighted and disbelieved.

@c    4:2. And he prayed to the Lord, and said:  I beseech thee, O Lord, is
@c    not this what I said, when I was yet in my own country?  therefore I
@c    went before to flee into Tharsis:  for I know that thou art a gracious
@c    and merciful God, patient, and of much compassion, and easy to forgive
@c    evil.

@c    4:3. And now, O Lord, I beseech thee take my life from me:  for it is
@c    better for me to die than to live.

@c    4:4. And the Lord said:  Dost thou think thou hast reason to be angry?

@c    4:5. Then Jonas went out of the city, and sat toward the east side of
@c    the city:  and he made himself a booth there, and he sat under it in the
@c    shadow, till he might see what would befall the city.

@c    4:6. And the Lord God prepared an ivy, and it came up over the head of
@c    Jonas, to be a shadow over his head, and to cover him (for he was
@c    fatigued):  and Jonas was exceeding glad of the ivy.

@c    The Lord God prepared an ivy. . .Hederam.  In the Hebrew it is Kikajon,
@c    which some render a gourd:  others a palmerist, or palma Christi.

@c    4:7. But God prepared a worm, when the morning arose on the following
@c    day:  and it struck the ivy and it withered.

@c    4:8. And when the sun was risen, the Lord commanded a hot and burning
@c    wind:  and the sun beat upon the head of Jonas, and he broiled with the
@c    heat:  and he desired for his soul that he might die, and said:  It is
@c    better for me to die than to live.

@c    4:9. And the Lord said to Jonas:  Dost thou think thou hast reason to be
@c    angry, for the ivy?  And he said:  I am angry with reason even unto
@c    death.

@c    4:10. And the Lord said:  Thou art grieved for the ivy, for which thou
@c    hast not laboured, nor made it to grow, which in one night came up, and
@c    in one night perished.

@c    4:11. And shall I not spare Ninive, that great city, in which there are
@c    more than a hundred and twenty thousand persons, that know how to
@c    distinguish between their right hand and their left, and many beasts?
