@c    THE BOOK OF JOSUE



@c    This Book is called JOSUE, because it contains the history of what
@c    passed under him, and according to the common opinion was written by
@c    him.  The Greeks call him Jesus:  for Josue and Jesus in the Hebrew, are
@c    the same name, and have the same signification, viz., A SAVIOUR.  And it
@c    was not without a mystery that he who was to bring the people into the
@c    land of promise should have his name changed from OSEE (for so he was
@c    called before, Num. 13.17,) to JOSUE or JESUS, to give us to
@c    understand, that Moses by his law could only bring the people within
@c    sight of the promised inheritance, but that our Saviour JESUS was to
@c    bring us into it.



@c    Josue Chapter 1


@c    Josue, encouraged by the Lord, admonisheth the people to prepare
@c    themselves to pass over the Jordan.

@c    1:1. Now it came to pass after the death of Moses, the servant of the
@c    Lord, that the Lord spoke to Josue, the son of Nun, the minister of
@c    Moses, and said to him:

@c    1:2. Moses my servant is dead:  arise, and pass over this Jordan, thou
@c    and thy people with thee, into the land which I will give to the
@c    children of Israel.

@c    1:3. I will deliver to you every place that the sole of your foot shall
@c    tread upon, as I have said to Moses.

@c    1:4. From the desert, and from Libanus unto the great river Euphrates,
@c    all the land of the Hethites, unto the great sea toward the going down
@c    of the sun, shall be your border.

@c    1:5. No man shall be able to resist you all the days of thy life:  as I
@c    have been with Moses, so will I be with thee:  I will not leave thee,
@c    nor forsake thee.

@c    1:6. Take courage, and be strong:  for thou shalt divide by lot to this
@c    people the land for which I swore to their fathers, that I would
@c    deliver it to them.

@c    1:7. Take courage therefore, and be very valiant:  that thou mayst
@c    observe and do all the law, which Moses my servant hath commanded thee:
@c    turn not from it to the right hand or to the left, that thou mayst
@c    understand all things which thou dost.

@c    1:8. Let not the book of this law depart from thy mouth:  but thou shalt
@c    meditate on it day and night, that thou mayst observe and do all things
@c    that are written in it:  then shalt thou direct thy way, and understand
@c    it.

@c    1:9. Behold I command thee, take courage, and be strong.  Fear not, and
@c    be not dismayed:  because the Lord thy God is with thee in all things
@c    whatsoever thou shalt go to.

@c    1:10. And Josue commanded the princes of the people, saying:  Pass
@c    through the midst of the camp, and command the people, and say:

@c    1:11. Prepare your victuals:  for after the third day you shall pass
@c    over the Jordan, and shall go in to possess the land, which the Lord
@c    your God will give you.

@c    1:12. And he said to the Rubenites, and the Gadites, and the half tribe
@c    of Manasses:

@c    1:13. Remember the word, which Moses the servant of the Lord commanded
@c    you, saying:  The Lord your God hath given you rest, and all this land.

@c    1:14. Your wives, and children; and cattle, shall remain in the land
@c    which Moses gave you on this side of the Jordan:  but pass you over
@c    armed before your brethren all of you that are strong of hand, and
@c    fight for them,

@c    1:15. Until the Lord give rest to your brethren, as he hath given you,
@c    and they also possess the land which the Lord your God will give them:
@c    and so you shall return into the land of your possession, and you shall
@c    dwell in it, which Moses the servant of the Lord gave you beyond the
@c    Jordan, toward the rising of the sun.

@c    1:16. And they made answer to Josue, and said:  All that thou hast
@c    commanded us, we will do:  and whither soever thou shalt send us, we
@c    will go.

@c    1:17. As we obeyed Moses in all things, so will we obey thee also:  only
@c    be the Lord thy God with thee, as he was with Moses.

@c    1:18. He that shall gainsay thy mouth, and not obey all thy words, that
@c    thou shalt command him, let him die:  only take thou courage, and do
@c    manfully.



@c    Josue Chapter 2


@c    Two spies are sent to Jericho, who are received and concealed by Rahab.

@c    2:1. And Josue, the son of Nun, sent from Setim two men, to spy
@c    secretly:  and said to them:  Go, and view the land, and the city of
@c    Jericho.  They went, and entered into the house of a woman that was a
@c    harlot, named Rahab, and lodged with her.

@c    2:2. And it was told the king of Jericho, and was said:  Behold there
@c    are men come in hither, by night, of the children of Israel, to spy the
@c    land.

@c    2:3. And the king of Jericho sent to Rahab, saying:  Bring forth the men
@c    that came to thee, and are entered into thy house:  for they are spies,
@c    and are come to view all the land.

@c    2:4. And the woman taking the men, hid them, and said:  I confess they
@c    came to me, but I knew not whence they were:

@c    2:5. And at the time of shutting the gate in the dark, they also went
@c    out together.  I know not whither they are gone:  pursue after them
@c    quickly, and you will overtake them.

@c    2:6. But she made the men go up to the top of her house, and covered
@c    them with the stalks of flax, which was there.

@c    2:7. Now they that were sent, pursued after them, by the way that
@c    leadeth to the fords of the Jordan:  and as soon as they were gone out,
@c    the gate was presently shut.

@c    2:8. The men that were hid were not yet asleep, when behold the woman
@c    went up to them, and said:

@c    2:9. I know that the Lord hath given this land to you:  for the dread of
@c    you is fallen upon us, and all the inhabitants of the land have lost
@c    all strength.

@c    2:10. We have heard that the Lord dried up the water of the Red Sea, at
@c    your going in, when you came out of Egypt:  and what things you did to
@c    the two kings of the Amorrhites, that were beyond the Jordan, Sehon and
@c    Og whom you slew.

@c    2:11. And at the hearing these things, we were affrighted, and our
@c    heart fainted away, neither did there remain any spirit in us, at your
@c    coming in:  for the Lord your God he is God in heaven above, and in the
@c    earth beneath.

@c    2:12. Now, therefore, swear ye to me by the Lord, that as I have shewed
@c    mercy to you, so you also will shew mercy to my father's house:  and
@c    give me a true token.

@c    2:13. That you will save my father and mother, my brethren and sisters,
@c    and all things that are theirs, and deliver our souls from death.

@c    2:14. They answered her:  Be our lives for you unto death, only if thou
@c    betray us not.  And when the Lord shall have delivered us the land, we
@c    will shew thee mercy and truth.

@c    2:15. Then she let them down with a cord out of a window:  for her house
@c    joined close to the wall.

@c    2:16. And she said to them:  Get ye up to the mountains, lest perhaps
@c    they meet you as they return:  and there lie ye hid three days, till
@c    they come back, and so you shall go on your way.

@c    2:17. And they said to her:  We shall be blameless of this oath, which
@c    thou hast made us swear,

@c    2:18. If, when we come into the land, this scarlet cord be a sign, and
@c    thou tie it in the window, by which thou hast let us down:  and gather
@c    together thy father and mother, and brethren, and all thy kindred into
@c    thy house.

@c    2:19. Whosoever shall go out of the door of thy house, his blood shall
@c    be upon his own head, and we shall be quit.  But the blood of all that
@c    shall be with thee in the house, shall light upon our head, if any man
@c    touch them.

@c    2:20. But if thou wilt betray us, and utter this word abroad, we shall
@c    be quit of this oath, which thou hast made us swear.

@c    2:21. And she answered:  As you have spoken, so be it done:  and sending
@c    them on their way, she hung the scarlet cord in the window.

@c    2:22. But they went and came to the mountains, and stayed there three
@c    days, till they that pursued them were returned.  For having sought them
@c    through all the way, they found them not.

@c    2:23. And when they were gone back into the city, the spies returned,
@c    and came down from the mountain:  and passing over the Jordan, they came
@c    to Josue, the son of Nun, and told him all that befel them,

@c    2:24. And said:  the Lord hath delivered all this land into our hands,
@c    and all the inhabitants thereof are overthrown with fear.



@c    Josue Chapter 3


@c    The river Jordan is miraculously dried up for the passage of the
@c    children of Israel.

@c    3:1. And Josue rose before daylight, and removed the camp:  and they
@c    departed from Setim, and came to the Jordan:  he, and all the children
@c    of Israel, and they abode there for three days.

@c    3:2. After which, the heralds went through the midst of the camp,

@c    3:3. And began to proclaim:  When you shall see the ark of the covenant
@c    of the Lord your God, and the priests of the race of Levi carrying it,
@c    rise you up also, and follow them as they go before:

@c    3:4. And let there be between you and the ark the space of two thousand
@c    cubits:  that you may see it afar off, and know which way you must go:
@c    for you have not gone this way before:  and take care you come not near
@c    the ark.

@c    3:5. And Josue said to the people:  Be ye sanctified:  for tomorrow the
@c    Lord will do wonders among you.

@c    3:6. And he said to the priests:  Take up the ark of the covenant, and
@c    go before the people.  And they obeyed his commands, and took it up, and
@c    walked before them.

@c    3:7. And the Lord said to Josue:  This day will I begin to exalt thee
@c    before Israel:  that they may know that as I was with Moses, so I am
@c    with thee also.

@c    3:8. And do thou command the priests, that carry the ark of the
@c    covenant, and say to them:  When you shall have entered into part of the
@c    water of the Jordan, stand in it.

@c    3:9. And Josue said to the children of Israel:  Come hither, and hear
@c    the word of the Lord your God.

@c    3:10. And again he said:  By this you shall know, that the Lord, the
@c    living God, is in the midst of you, and that he shall destroy, before
@c    your sight, the Chanaanite and the Hethite, the Hevite and the
@c    Pherezite, the Gergesite also, and the Jebusite, and the Amorrhite.

@c    3:11. Behold, the ark of the covenant of the Lord of all the earth
@c    shall go before you into the Jordan.

@c    3:12. Prepare ye twelve men of the tribes of Israel, one of every
@c    tribe.

@c    3:13. And when the priests, that carry the ark of the Lord the God of
@c    the whole earth, shall set the soles of their feet in the waters of the
@c    Jordan, the waters that are beneath shall run down and go off:  and
@c    those that come from above, shall stand together upon a heap.

@c    3:14. So the people went out of their tents, to pass over the Jordan:
@c    and the priests that carried the ark of the covenant, went on before
@c    them.

@c    3:15. And as soon as they came into the Jordan, and their feet were
@c    dipped in part of the water, (now the Jordan, it being harvest time,
@c    had filled the banks of its channel,)

@c    3:16. The waters that came down from above stood in one place, and
@c    swelling up like a mountain, were seen afar off, from the city that is
@c    called Adom, to the place of Sarthan:  but those that were beneath, ran
@c    down into the sea of the wilderness, (which now is called the Dead Sea)
@c    until they wholly failed.

@c    3:17. And the people marched over against Jericho:  and the priests that
@c    carried the ark of the covenant of the Lord, stood girded upon the dry
@c    ground in the midst of the Jordan, and all the people passed over,
@c    through the channel that was dried up.



@c    Josue Chapter 4


@c    Twelve stones are taken out of the river to be set up for a monument of
@c    the miracle; and other twelve are placed in the midst of the river.

@c    4:1. And when they were passed over, the Lord said to Josue:

@c    4:2. Choose twelve men, one of every tribe:

@c    4:3. And command them to take out of the midst of the Jordan, where the
@c    feet of the priests stood, twelve very hard stones, which you shall set
@c    in the place of the camp, where you shall pitch your tents this night.

@c    4:4. And Josue called twelve men, whom he had chosen out of the
@c    children of Israel, one out of every tribe,

@c    4:5. And he said to them:  Go before the ark of the Lord your God to the
@c    midst of the Jordan, and carry from thence every man a stone on your
@c    shoulders, according to the number of the children of Israel,

@c    4:6. That it may be a sign among you:  and when your children shall ask
@c    you tomorrow, saying:  What means these stones?

@c    4:7. You shall answer them:  The waters of the Jordan ran off before the
@c    ark of the covenant of the Lord when it passed over the same:  therefore
@c    were these stones set for a monument of the children of Israel forever.

@c    4:8. The children of Israel therefore did as Josue commanded them,
@c    carrying out of the channel of the Jordan twelve stones, as the Lord
@c    had commanded him according to the number of the children of Israel
@c    unto the place wherein they camped, and there they set them.

@c    4:9. And Josue put other twelve stones in the midst of the channel of
@c    the Jordan, where the priests stood that carried the ark of the
@c    covenant:  and they are there until this present day.

@c    4:10. Now the priests that carried the ark, stood in the midst of the
@c    Jordan, till all things were accomplished, which the Lord had commanded
@c    Josue to speak to the people, and Moses had said to him.  And the people
@c    made haste, and passed over.

@c    4:11. And when they had all passed over, the ark also of the Lord
@c    passed over, and the priests went before the people.

@c    4:12. The children of Ruben also, and Gad, and half the tribe of
@c    Manasses, went armed before the children of Israel, as Moses had
@c    commanded them.

@c    4:13. And forty thousand fighting men by their troops and bands,
@c    marched through the plains and fields of the city of Jericho.

@c    4:14. In that day the Lord magnified Josue in the sight of all Israel,
@c    that they should fear him, as they had feared Moses, while he lived.

@c    4:15. And he said to him:

@c    4:16. Command the priests, that carry the ark of the covenant, to come
@c    up out of the Jordan.

@c    4:17. And he commanded them, saying:  Come ye up out of the Jordan.

@c    4:18. And when they that carried the ark of the covenant of the Lord,
@c    were come up, and began to tread on the dry ground, the waters returned
@c    into their channel, and ran as they were wont before.

@c    4:19. And the people came up out of the Jordan, the tenth day of the
@c    first month, and camped in Galgal, over against the east side of the
@c    city of Jericho.

@c    4:20. And the twelve stones, which they had taken out of the channel of
@c    the Jordan, Josue pitched in Galgal,

@c    4:21. And said to the children of Israel:  When your children shall ask
@c    their fathers tomorrow, and shall say to them:  What mean these stones?

@c    4:22. You shall teach them, and say:  Israel passed over this Jordan
@c    through the dry channel,

@c    4:23. The Lord your God drying up the waters thereof in your sight,
@c    until you passed over:

@c    4:24. As he had done before in the Red Sea, which he dried up till we
@c    passed through:

@c    4:25. That all the people of the earth may learn the most mighty hand
@c    of the Lord, that you also may fear the Lord your God for ever.



@c    Josue Chapter 5


@c    The people are circumcised:  they keep the pasch.  The manna ceaseth.  An
@c    angel appeareth to Josue.

@c    5:1. Now when all the kings of the Amorrhites, who dwelt beyond the
@c    Jordan, westward, and all the kings of Chanaan, who possessed the
@c    places near the great sea, had heard that the Lord had dried up the
@c    waters of the Jordan before the children of Israel, till they passed
@c    over, their heart failed them, and there remained no spirit in them,
@c    fearing the coming in of the children of Israel.

@c    5:2. At that time the Lord said to Josue:  Make thee knives of stone,
@c    and circumcise the second time the children of Israel.

@c    The second time. . .Not that such as had been circumcised before were to
@c    be circumcised again; but that they were now to renew, and take up
@c    again the practice of circumcision; which had been omitted during their
@c    forty years' sojourning in the wilderness; by reason of their being
@c    always uncertain when they should be obliged to march.

@c    5:3. He did what the Lord had commanded, and he circumcised the
@c    children of Israel in the hill of the foreskins.

@c    5:4. Now this is the cause of the second circumcision:  All the people
@c    that came out of Egypt that were males, all the men fit for war, died
@c    in the desert, during the time of the long going about in the way:

@c    5:6. Now these were all circumcised.  But the people that were born in
@c    the desert,

@c    5:6. During the forty years of the journey in the wide wilderness, were
@c    uncircumcised:  till all they were consumed that had not heard the voice
@c    of the Lord, and to whom he had sworn before, that he would not shew
@c    them the land flowing with milk and honey.

@c    5:7. The children of these succeeded in the place of their fathers, and
@c    were circumcised by Josue:  for they were uncircumcised even as they
@c    were born, and no one had circumcised them in the way.

@c    5:8. Now after they were all circumcised, they remained in the same
@c    place of the camp, until they were healed.

@c    5:9. And the Lord said to Josue:  This day have I taken away from you
@c    the reproach of Egypt.  And the name of that place was called Galgal,
@c    until this present day.

@c    5:10. And the children of Israel abode in Galgal, and they kept the
@c    phase, on the fourteenth day of the month at evening, in the plains of
@c    Jericho:

@c    5:11. And they ate on the next day unleavened bread of the corn of the
@c    land, and frumenty of the same year.

@c    5:12. And the manna ceased after they ate of the corn of the land,
@c    neither did the children of Israel use that food any more, but they ate
@c    of the corn of the present year of the land of Chanaan.

@c    5:13. And when Josue was in the field of the city of Jericho, he lifted
@c    up his eyes, and saw a man standing over against him, holding a drawn
@c    sword, and he went to him, and said:  Art thou one of ours, or of our
@c    adversaries?

@c    5:14. And he answered:  No:  but I am prince of the host of the Lord, and
@c    now I am come.

@c    Prince of the host of the Lord, etc. . .St. Michael, who is called
@c    prince of the people of Israel, Dan. 10.21.

@c    5:15. Josue fell on his face to the ground.  And worshipping, said:  What
@c    saith my lord to his servant?

@c    Worshipping. . .Not with divine honour, but with a religious veneration
@c    of an inferior kind, suitable to the dignity of his person.

@c    5:16. Loose, saith he, thy shoes from off thy feet:  for the place
@c    whereon thou standest is holy.  And Josue did as was commanded him.



@c    Josue Chapter 6


@c    After seven days' processions, the priests sounding the trumpets, the
@c    walls of Jericho fall down:  and the city is taken and destroyed.

@c    6:1. Now Jericho was close shut up and fenced, for fear of the children
@c    of Israel, and no man durst go out or come in.

@c    6:2. And the Lord said to Josue:  Behold I have given into thy hands
@c    Jericho, and the king thereof, and all the valiant men.

@c    6:3. Go round about the city all ye fighting men once a day:  so shall
@c    ye do for six days.

@c    6:4. And on the seventh day the priests shall take the seven trumpets,
@c    which are used in the jubilee, and shall go before the ark of the
@c    covenant:  and you shall go about the city seven times, and the priests
@c    shall sound the trumpets.

@c    6:5. And when the voice of the trumpet shall give a longer and broken
@c    tune, and shall sound in your ears, all the people shall shout together
@c    with a very great shout, and the walls of the city shall fall to the
@c    ground, and they shall enter in every one at the place against which
@c    they shall stand.

@c    6:6. Then Josue, the son of Nun, called the priests, and said to them:
@c    Take the ark of the covenant:  and let seven other priests take the
@c    seven trumpets of the jubilee, and march before the ark of the Lord.

@c    6:7. And he said to the people:  Go, and compass the city, armed,
@c    marching before the ark of the Lord.

@c    6:8. And when Josue had ended his words, and the seven priests blew the
@c    seven trumpets before the ark of the covenant of the Lord,

@c    6:9. And all the armed men went before, the rest of the common people
@c    followed the ark, and the sound of the trumpets was heard on all sides.

@c    6:10. But Josue had commanded the people, saying:  You shall not shout,
@c    nor shall your voice be heard, nor any word go out of your mouth:  until
@c    the day come wherein I shall say to you:  Cry, and shout.

@c    6:11. So the ark of the Lord went about the city once a day, and
@c    returning into the camp, abode there.

@c    6:12. And Josue rising before day, the priests took the ark of the
@c    Lord,

@c    6:13. And seven of them seven trumpets, which are used in the jubilee:
@c    and they went before the ark of the Lord, walking and sounding the
@c    trumpets:  and the armed men went before them, and the rest of the
@c    common people followed the ark, and they blew the trumpets.

@c    6:14. And they went round about the city the second day once, and
@c    returned into the camp.  So they did six days.

@c    6:15. But the seventh day, rising up early, they went about the city,
@c    as it was ordered, seven times.

@c    6:16. And when in the seventh going about the priests sounded with the
@c    trumpets, Josue said to all Israel:  Shout:  for the Lord hath delivered
@c    the city to you:

@c    6:17. And let this city be an anathema, and all things that are in it,
@c    to the Lord.  Let only Rahab, the harlot, live, with all that are with
@c    her in the house:  for she hid the messengers whom we sent.

@c    6:18. But beware ye lest you touch ought of those things that are
@c    forbidden, and you be guilty of transgression, and all the camp of
@c    Israel be under sin, and be troubled.

@c    6:19. But whatsoever gold or silver there shall be, or vessels of brass
@c    and iron, let it be consecrated to the Lord, laid up in his treasures.

@c    6:20. So all the people making a shout, and the trumpets sounding, when
@c    the voice and the sound thundered in the ears of the multitude, the
@c    walls forthwith fell down:  and every man went up by the place that was
@c    over against him:  and they took the city,

@c    6:21. And killed all that were in it, man and woman, young and old.  The
@c    oxen also, and the sheep, and the asses, they slew with the edge of the
@c    sword.

@c    6:22. But Josue said to the two men that had been sent for spies:  Go
@c    into the harlot's house, and bring her out, and all things that are
@c    hers, as you assured her by oath.

@c    6:23. And the young men went in, and brought out Rahab, and her
@c    parents, her brethren also, and all her goods, and her kindred, and
@c    made them to stay without the camp.

@c    6:24. But they burned the city, and all things that were therein;
@c    except the gold and silver, and vessels of brass and iron, which they
@c    consecrated unto the treasury of the Lord.  _

@c    6:25. But Josue saved Rahab the harlot, and her father's house, and all
@c    she had, and they dwelt in the midst of Israel until this present day:
@c    because she hid the messengers whom he had sent to spy out Jericho.  At
@c    that time, Josue made an imprecation, saying:

@c    6:26. Cursed be the man before the Lord, that shall raise up and build
@c    the city of Jericho.  In his firstborn may he lay the foundation
@c    thereof, and in the last of his children set up its gates.

@c    Cursed, etc. . .Jericho, in the mystical sense, signifies iniquity:  the
@c    sounding of the trumpets by the priests, the preaching of the word of
@c    God; by which the walls of Jericho are thrown down, when sinners are
@c    converted; and a dreadful curse will light on them who build them up
@c    again.

@c    6:27. And the Lord was with Josue, and his name was noised throughout
@c    all the land



@c    Josue Chapter 7


@c    For the sins of Achan, the Israelites are defeated at Hai.  The offender
@c    is found out; and stoned to death, and God's wrath is turned from them.

@c    7:1. But the children of Israel transgressed the commandment, and took
@c    to their own use of that which was accursed.  For Achan, the son of
@c    Charmi, the son of Zabdi, the son of Zare, of the tribe of Juda, took
@c    something of the anathema:  and the Lord was angry against the children
@c    of Israel.

@c    7:2. And when Josue sent men from Jericho against Hai, which is beside
@c    Bethaven, on the east side of the town of Bethel, he said to them:  Go
@c    up, and view the country:  and they fulfilled his command, and viewed
@c    Hai.

@c    7:3. And returning, they said to him:  Let not all the people go up, but
@c    let two or three thousand men go, and destroy the city:  why should all
@c    the people be troubled in vain, against enemies that are very few?

@c    7:4. There went up therefore three thousand fighting men:  who
@c    immediately turned their backs,

@c    7:5. And were defeated by the men of the city of Hai, and there fell of
@c    them six and thirty men:  and the enemies pursued them from the gate as
@c    far as Sabarim, and they slew them as they fled by the descent:  and the
@c    heart of the people was struck with fear, and melted like water.

@c    7:6. But Josue rent his garments, and fell flat on the ground, before
@c    the ark of the Lord, until the evening, both he and all the ancients of
@c    Israel:  and they put dust upon their heads.

@c    7:7. And Josue said:  Alas, O Lord God, why wouldst thou bring this
@c    people over the river Jordan, to deliver us into the hand of the
@c    Amorrhite, and to destroy us?  would God we had stayed beyond the
@c    Jordan, as we began.

@c    7:8. My Lord God, what shall I say, seeing Israel turning their backs
@c    to their enemies?

@c    7:9. The Chanaanites, and all the inhabitants of the land, will hear of
@c    it, and being gathered together will surround us, and cut off our name
@c    from the earth:  and what wilt thou do to thy great name?

@c    7:10. And the Lord said to Josue:  Arise, why liest thou flat on the
@c    ground?

@c    7:11. Israel hath sinned, and transgressed my covenant:  and they have
@c    taken of the anathema, and have stolen and lied, and have hid it among
@c    their goods.

@c    7:12. Neither can Israel stand before his enemies, but he shall flee
@c    from them:  because he is defiled with the anathema.  I will be no more
@c    with you, till you destroy him that is guilty of this wickedness.

@c    7:13. Arise, sanctify the people, and say to them:  Be ye sanctified
@c    against tomorrow:  for thus saith the Lord God of Israel:  The curse is
@c    in the midst of thee, O Israel:  thou canst not stand before thy
@c    enemies, till he be destroyed out of thee, that is defiled with this
@c    wickedness.

@c    7:14. And you shall come in the morning, every one by your tribes:  and
@c    what tribe soever the lot shall find, it shall come by its kindreds,
@c    and the kindred by its houses and tho house by the men.

@c    7:15. And whosoever he be that shall be found guilty of this fact, he
@c    shall be burnt with fire, with all his substance, because he hath
@c    transgressed the covenant of the Lord, and hath done wickedness in
@c    Israel.

@c    7:16. Josue, therefore, when he rose in the morning, made Israel to
@c    come by their tribes, and the tribe of Juda was found.

@c    7:17. Which being brought by in families, it was found to be the family
@c    of Zare.  Bringing that also by the houses, he found it to be Zabdi:

@c    7:18. And bringing his house man by man, he found Achan, the son of
@c    Charmi, the son of Zabdi, the son of Zare, of the tribe of Juda.

@c    7:19. And Josue said to Achan:  My son, give glory to the Lord God of
@c    Israel, and confess, and tell me what thou hast done, hide it not.

@c    7:20. And Achan answered Josue, and said to him:  Indeed I have sinned
@c    against the Lord, the God of Israel, and thus and thus have I done.

@c    7:21. For I saw among the spoils a scarlet garment, exceeding good, and
@c    two hundred sicles of silver, and a golden rule of fifty sicles:  and I
@c    coveted them, and I took them away, and hid them in the ground in the
@c    midst of my tent, and the silver I covered with the earth that I dug
@c    up.

@c    7:22. Josue therefore sent ministers:  who running to his tent, found
@c    all hid in the same place, together with the silver.

@c    7:23. And taking them away out of the tent, they brought them to Josue,
@c    and to all the children of Israel, and threw them down before the Lord.

@c    7:24. Then Josue, and all Israel with him, took Achan, the son of Zare,
@c    and the silver, and the garment, and the golden rule, his sons also,
@c    and his daughters, his oxen, and asses, and sheep, the tent also, and
@c    all the goods:  and brought them to the valley of Achor:

@c    His sons, etc. . .Probably conscious to, or accomplices of, the crime of
@c    their father.

@c    7:25. Where Josue said:  Because thou hast troubled us, the Lord trouble
@c    thee this day.  And all Israel stoned him:  and all things that were his,
@c    were consumed with fire.

@c    7:26. And they gathered together upon him a great heap of stones, which
@c    remaineth until this present day And the wrath of the Lord was turned
@c    away from them.  And the name of that place was called the Valley of
@c    Achor, until this day.

@c    Achor. . .That is, trouble.



@c    Josue Chapter 8


@c    Hai is taken and burnt, and all the inhabitants slain.  An altar is
@c    built, and sacrifices offered.  The law is written on stones, and the
@c    blessings and cursings are read before all the people.

@c    8:1. And the Lord said to Josue:  Fear not, nor be thou dismayed:  take
@c    with thee all the multitude of fighting men, arise, and go up to the
@c    town of Hai:  Behold I have delivered into thy hand the king thereof,
@c    and the people, and the city, and the land.

@c    8:2. And thou shalt do to the city of Hai, and to the king thereof, as
@c    thou hast done to Jericho, and to the king thereof:  but the spoils, and
@c    all the cattle, you shall take for a prey to yourselves:  lay an ambush
@c    for the city behind it.

@c    8:3. And Josue arose, and all the army of the fighting men with him, to
@c    go up against Hai:  and he sent thirty thousand chosen valiant men in
@c    the night,

@c    8:4. And commanded them, saying:  Lay an ambush behind the city:  and go
@c    not very far from it:  and be ye all ready.

@c    8:5. But I, and the rest of the multitude which is with me, will
@c    approach on the contrary side against the city.  And when they shall
@c    come out against us, we will flee, and turn our backs, as we did
@c    before:

@c    8:6. Till they pursuing us be drawn farther from the city:  for they
@c    will think that we flee as before.

@c    8:7. And whilst we are fleeing, and they pursuing, you shall rise out
@c    of the ambush, and shall destroy the city:  and the Lord your God will
@c    deliver it into your hands.

@c    8:8. And when you shall have taken it, set it on fire, and you shall do
@c    all things so as I have commanded.

@c    8:9. And he sent them away, and they went on to the place of the
@c    ambush, and abode between Bethel and Hai, on the west side of the city
@c    of Hai.  But Josue staid that night in the midst of the people,

@c    8:10. And rising early in the morning, he mustered his soldiers, and
@c    went up with the ancients in the front of the army, environed with the
@c    aid of the fighting men.

@c    8:11. And when they were come, and were gone up over against the city,
@c    they stood on the north side of the city, between which and them there
@c    was a valley in the midst.

@c    8:12. And he had chosen five thousand men, and set them to lie in
@c    ambush between Bethel and Hai, on the west side of the same city:

@c    Five thousand. . .These were part of the thirty thousand mentioned
@c    above, ver. 3.

@c    8:13. But all the rest of the army went in battle array on the north
@c    side, so that the last of that multitude reached to the west side of
@c    the city.  So Josue went that night, and stood in the midst of the
@c    valley.

@c    8:14. And when the king of Hai saw this, he made haste in the morning,
@c    and went out with all the army of the city, and set it in battle array,
@c    toward the desert, not knowing that there lay an ambush behind his
@c    back.

@c    8:15. But Josue, and all Israel gave back, making as if they were
@c    afraid, and fleeing by the way of the wilderness.

@c    8:16. But they shouting together, and encouraging one another, pursued
@c    them.  And when they were come from the city,

@c    8:17. And not one remained in the city of Hai and of Bethel, that did
@c    not pursue after Israel, leaving the towns open as they had rushed out,

@c    8:18. The Lord said to Josue:  Lift up the shield that is in thy hand,
@c    towards the city of Hai, for I will deliver it to thee.

@c    8:19. And when he had lifted up his shield towards the city, the
@c    ambush, that lay hid, rose up immediately:  and going to the city, took
@c    it, and set it on fire.

@c    8:20. And the men of the city, that pursued after Josue, looking back,
@c    and seeing the smoke of the city rise up to heaven, had no more power
@c    to flee this way or that way:  especially as they that had counterfeited
@c    flight, and were going toward the wilderness, turned back most
@c    valiantly against them that pursued.

@c    8:21. So Josue, and all Israel, seeing that the city was taken, and
@c    that the smoke of the city rose up, returned, and slew the men of Hai.

@c    8:22. And they also that had taken and set the city on fire, issuing
@c    out of the city to meet their own men, began to cut off the enemies who
@c    were surrounded by them.  So that the enemies being cut off on both
@c    sides, not one of so great a multitude was saved.

@c    8:23. And they took the king of the city of Hai alive and brought him
@c    to Josue.

@c    8:24. So all being slain that had pursued after Israel, in his flight
@c    to the wilderness, and falling by the sword in the same place, the
@c    children of Israel returned and laid waste the city.

@c    8:25. And the number of them that fell that day, both of men and women,
@c    was twelve thousand persons, all of the city of Hai.

@c    8:26. But Josue drew not back his hand, which he had stretched out on
@c    high, holding the shield, till all the inhabitants of Hai were slain.

@c    8:27. And the children of Israel divided among them, the cattle and the
@c    prey of the city, as the Lord had commanded Josue.

@c    8:28. And he burnt the city, and made it a heap forever:

@c    8:29. And he hung the king thereof on a gibbet, until the evening and
@c    the going down of the sun.  Then Josue commanded, and they took down his
@c    carcass from the gibbet:  and threw it in the very entrance of the city,
@c    heaping upon it a great heap of stones, which remaineth until this
@c    present day.

@c    8:30. Then Josue built an altar to the Lord, the God of Israel, in
@c    Mount Hebal,

@c    8:31. As Moses, the servant of the Lord, had commanded the children of
@c    Israel, and it is written in the book of the law of Moses:  an altar of
@c    unhewn stones, which iron had not touched:  and he offered upon it
@c    holocausts to the Lord, and immolated victims of peace offerings.

@c    8:32. And he wrote upon stones, the Deuteronomy of the law of Moses,
@c    which he had ordered before the children of Israel.

@c    8:33. And all the people, and the ancients, and the princes, and
@c    judges, stood on both sides of the ark, before the priests that carried
@c    the ark of the covenant of the Lord, both the stranger and he that was
@c    born among them, half of them by Mount Garizim, and half by Mount
@c    Hebal, as Moses the servant of the Lord, had commanded.  And first he
@c    blessed the people of Israel.

@c    8:34. After this, he read all the words of the blessing and the
@c    cursing, and all things that were written in the book of the law.

@c    8:35. He left out nothing of those things which Moses had commanded,
@c    but he repeated all before all the people of Israel, with the women and
@c    children, and strangers, that dwelt among them.



@c    Josue Chapter 9


@c    Josue is deceived by the Gabaonites:  who being detected are condemned
@c    to be perpetual servants.

@c    9:1. Now when these things were heard of, all the kings beyond the
@c    Jordan, that dwelt in the mountains, and in the plains, in the places
@c    near the sea, and on the coasts of the great sea, they also that dwell
@c    by Libanus, the Hethite, and the Amorrhite, the Chanaanite, the
@c    Pherezite, and the Hevite, and the Jebusite,

@c    9:2. Gathered themselves together, to fight against Josue and Israel
@c    with one mind, and one resolution.

@c    9:3. But they that dwelt in Gabaon, hearing all that Josue had done to
@c    Jericho and Hai:

@c    9:4. Cunningly devising took for themselves provisions, laying old
@c    sacks upon their asses, and wine bottles rent and sewed up again,

@c    9:5. And very old shoes, which for a show of age were clouted with
@c    patches, and old garments upon them:  the loaves also, which they
@c    carried for provisions by the way, were hard, and broken into pieces:

@c    9:6. And they went to Josue, who then abode in the camp at Galgal, and
@c    said to him, and to all Israel with him:  We are come from a far
@c    country, desiring to make peace with you.  And the children of Israel
@c    answered them, and said:

@c    9:7. Perhaps you dwell in the land which falls to our lot; if so, we
@c    can make no league with you.

@c    9:8. But they said to Josue:  We are thy servants.  Josue said to them:
@c    Who are you?  and whence came you?

@c    9:9. They answered:  From a very far country thy servants are come in
@c    the name of the Lord thy God.  For we have heard the fame of his power,
@c    all the things that he did in Egypt.

@c    9:10. And to the two kings of the Amorrhites, that were beyond the
@c    Jordan, Sehon, king of Hesebon, and Og, king of Basan, that was in
@c    Astaroth:

@c    9:11. And our ancients, and all the inhabitants of our country, said to
@c    us:  Take with you victuals for a long way, and go meet them, and say:
@c    We are your servants, make ye a league with us.

@c    9:12. Behold, these loaves we took hot, when we set out from our houses
@c    to come to you, now they are become dry, and broken in pieces by being
@c    exceeding old.

@c    9:13. These bottles of wine when we filled them were new, now they are
@c    rent and burst.  These garments we have on, and the shoes we have on our
@c    feet, by reason of the very long journey, are worn out, and almost
@c    consumed.

@c    9:14. They took therefore of their victuals, and consulted not the
@c    mouth of the Lord.

@c    9:15. And Josue made peace with them, and entering into a league,
@c    promised that they should not be slain:  the princes also of the
@c    multitude swore to them.

@c    9:16. Now three days after the league was made, they heard that they
@c    dwelt nigh, and they should be among them.

@c    9:17. And the children of Israel removed the camp, and came into their
@c    cities on the third day, the names of which are, Gabaon, and Caphira,
@c    and Beroth, and Cariathiarim.

@c    9:18. And they slew them not, because the princes of the multitude had
@c    sworn in the name of the Lord, the God of Israel.  Then all the common
@c    people murmured against the princes.

@c    9:19. And they answered them:  We have sworn to them in the name of the
@c    Lord, the God of Israel, and therefore we may not touch them.

@c    9:20. But this we will do to them:  Let their lives be saved, lest the
@c    wrath of the Lord be stirred up against us, if we should be forsworn:

@c    9:21. But so let them live, as to serve the whole multitude in hewing
@c    wood, and bringing in water.  As they were speaking these things,

@c    9;22. Josue called the Gabaonites, and said to them:  Why would you
@c    impose upon us, saying:  We dwell very far off from you, whereas you are
@c    in the midst of us?

@c    9:23. Therefore you shall be under a curse, and your race shall always
@c    be hewers of wood, and carriers of water, into the house of my God.

@c    9:24. They answered:  It was told us, thy servants, that the Lord thy
@c    God had promised his servant Moses, to give you all the land, and to
@c    destroy all the inhabitants thereof.  Therefore we feared exceedingly
@c    and provided for our lives, compelled by the dread we had of you, and
@c    we took this counsel.

@c    9:25. And now we are in thy hand:  deal with us as it seemeth good and
@c    right unto thee.

@c    9:26. So Josue did as he had said, and delivered them from the hand of
@c    the children of Israel, that they should not be slain.

@c    9:27. And he gave orders in that day, that they should be in the
@c    service of all the people, and of the altar of the Lord, hewing wood,
@c    and carrying water, until this present time, in the place which the
@c    Lord hath chosen.



@c    Josue Chapter 10


@c    Five kings war against Gabaon.  Josue defeateth them:  many are slain
@c    with hailstones.  At the prayer of Josue the sun and moon stand still
@c    the space of one day.  The five kings are hanged.  Divers cities are
@c    taken.

@c    10:1. When Adonisedec, king of Jerusalem, had heard these things, to
@c    wit, that Josue had taken Hai, and had destroyed it, (for as he had
@c    done to Jericho and the king thereof, so did he to Hai and its king)
@c    and that the Gabaonites were gone over to Israel, and were their
@c    confederates,

@c    10:2. He was exceedingly afraid.  For Gabaon was a great city, and one
@c    of the royal cities, and greater than the town of Hai, and all its
@c    fighting men were most valiant.

@c    10:3. Therefore Adonisedec, king of Jerusalem, sent to Oham, king of
@c    Hebron, and to Pharam, king of Jerimoth, and to Japhia, king of Lachis,
@c    and to Dabir, king of Eglon, saying:

@c    10:4. Come up to me, and bring help, that we may take Gabaon, because
@c    it hath gone over to Josue, and to the children of Israel.

@c    10:5. So the five kings of the Amorrhites being assembled together,
@c    went up:  the king of Jerusalem, the king of Hebron, the king of
@c    Jerimoth, the king of Lachis, the king of Eglon, they and their armies,
@c    and camped about Gabaon, laying siege to it.

@c    10:6. But the inhabitants of the city of Gabaon, which was besieged,
@c    sent to Josue, who then abode in the camp at Galgal, and said to him:
@c    Withdraw not thy hands from helping thy servants:  come up quickly, and
@c    save us, and bring us succour:  for all the kings of the Amorrhites, who
@c    dwell in the mountains, are gathered together against us.

@c    10:7. And Josue went up from Galgal, and all the army of the warriors
@c    with him, most valiant men.

@c    10:8. But the Lord said to Josue:  Fear them not:  for I have delivered
@c    them into thy hands:  none of them shall be able to stand against thee.

@c    10:9. So Josue going up from Galgal all the night, came upon them
@c    suddenly.

@c    10:10. And the Lord troubled them, at the sight of Israel:  and he slew
@c    them with a great slaughter, in Gabaon, and pursued them by the way of
@c    the ascent to Bethoron, and cut them off all the way to Azeca and
@c    Maceda.

@c    10:11. And when they were fleeing from the children of Israel, and were
@c    in the descent of Bethoron, the Lord cast down upon them great stones
@c    from heaven, as far as Azeca:  and many more were killed with the
@c    hailstones, than were slain by the swords of the children of Israel,

@c    10:12. Then Josue spoke to the Lord, in the day that he delivered the
@c    Amorrhite in the sight of the children of Israel, and he said before
@c    them:  Move not, O sun, toward Gabaon, nor thou, O moon, toward the
@c    valley of Ajalon.

@c    10:13. And the sun and the moon stood still, till the people revenged
@c    themselves of their enemies.  Is not this written in the book of the
@c    just?  So the sun stood still in the midst of heaven, and hasted not to
@c    go down the space of one day.

@c    The book of the just. . .In Hebrew Jasher:  an ancient book long since
@c    lost.

@c    10:14. There was not before, nor after, so long a day, the Lord obeying
@c    the voice of a man, and fighting for Israel.

@c    10:15. And Josue returned, with all Israel, into the camp of Galgal.

@c    10:16. For the five kings were fled, and had hid themselves in a cave
@c    of the city of Maceda.

@c    10:17. And it was told Josue, that the five kings were found hid in a
@c    cave of the city of Maceda.

@c    10:18. And he commanded them that were with him, saying:  Roll great
@c    stones to the mouth of the cave, and set careful men to keep them shut
@c    up:

@c    10:19. And stay you not, but pursue after the enemies, and kill all the
@c    hindermost of them as they flee, and do not suffer them whom the Lord
@c    God hath delivered into your hands, to shelter themselves in their
@c    cities.

@c    10:20. So the enemies being slain with a great slaughter, and almost
@c    utterly consumed, they that were able to escape from Israel, entered
@c    into fenced cities.

@c    10:21. And all the army returned to Josue, in Maceda, where the camp
@c    then was, in good health, and without the loss of any one:  and no man
@c    durst move his tongue against the children of Israel.

@c    10:22. And Josue gave orders, saying:  Open the mouth of the cave, and
@c    bring forth to me the five kings that lie hid therein.

@c    10:23. And the ministers did as they were commanded:  and they brought
@c    out to him the five kings out of the cave:  the king of Jerusalem, the
@c    king of Hebron, the king of Jerimoth, the king of Lachis, the king of
@c    Eglon.

@c    10:24. And when they were brought out to him, he called all the men of
@c    Israel, and said to the chiefs of the army that were with him:  Go, and
@c    set your feet on the necks of these kings.  And when they had gone, and
@c    put their feet upon the necks of them lying under them,

@c    10:25. He said again to them:  Fear not, neither be ye dismayed, take
@c    courage, and be strong:  for so will the Lord do to all your enemies,
@c    against whom you fight.

@c    10:26. And Josue struck, and slew them, and hanged them upon five
@c    gibbets; and they hung until the evening.

@c    10:27. And when the sun was down, he commanded the soldiers to take
@c    them down from the gibbets.  And after they were taken down, they cast
@c    them into the cave, where they had lain hid, and put great stones at
@c    the mouth thereof, which remain until this day.

@c    10:28. The same day Josue took Maceda, and destroyed it with the edge
@c    of the sword, and killed the king and all the inhabitants thereof:  he
@c    left not in it the least remains.  And he did to the king of Maceda, as
@c    he had done to the king of Jericho.

@c    10:29. And he passed from Maceda with all Israel to Lebna, and fought
@c    against it:

@c    10:30. And the Lord delivered it with the king thereof into the hands
@c    of Israel:  and they destroyed the city with the edge of the sword, and
@c    all the inhabitants thereof.  They left not in it any remains.  And they
@c    did to the king of Lebna, as they had done to the king of Jericho.

@c    10:31. From Lebna he passed unto Lachis, with all Israel:  and investing
@c    it with his army, besieged it.

@c    10:32. And the Lord delivered Lachis into the hands of Israel, and he
@c    took it the following day, and put it to the sword, and every soul that
@c    was in it, as he had done to Lebna.

@c    10:33. At that time Horam, king of Gazer, came up to succour Lachis:
@c    and Josue slew him with all his people so as to leave none alive.

@c    10:34. And he passed from Lachis to Eglon, and surrounded it,

@c    10:35. And took it the same day:  and put to the sword all the souls
@c    that were in it, according to all that he had done to Lachis.

@c    10:36. He went up also with all Israel from Eglon to Hebron, and fought
@c    against it:

@c    10:37. Took it, and destroyed it with the edge of the sword:  the king
@c    also thereof, and all the towns of that country, and all the souls that
@c    dwelt in it:  he left not therein any remains:  as he had done to Eglon,
@c    so did he also to Hebron, putting to the sword all that he found in it.

@c    The king. . .Viz., the new king, who succeeded him that was slain, ver.
@c    26.

@c    10:38. Returning from thence to Dabir,

@c    10:39. He took it, and destroyed it:  the king also thereof, and all the
@c    towns round about, he destroyed with the edge of the sword:  he left not
@c    in it any remains:  as he had done to Hebron and Lebna, and to their
@c    kings, so did he to Dabir, and to the king thereof.

@c    10:40. So Josue conquered all the country of the hills, and of the
@c    south, and of the plain, and of Asedoth, with their kings:  he left not
@c    any remains therein, but slew all that breathed, as the Lord, the God
@c    of Israel, had commanded him.

@c    Any remains therein, but slew, etc. . .God ordered these people to be
@c    utterly destroyed, in punishment of their manifold abomination; and
@c    that they might not draw the Israelites into the like sins.

@c    10:41. From Cadesbarne even to Gaza.  All the land of Gosen even to
@c    Gabaon,

@c    10:42. And all their kings, and their lands he took and wasted at one
@c    onset:  for the Lord the God of Israel fought for him.

@c    10:43. And he returned with all Israel to the place of the camp in
@c    Galgal.



@c    Josue Chapter 11


@c    The kings of the north are overthrown:  the whole country is taken.

@c    11:1. And when Jabin king of Asor had heard these things, he sent to
@c    Jobab king of Madon, and to the king of Semeron, and to the king of
@c    Achsaph:

@c    11:2. And to the kings of the north, that dwelt in the mountains and in
@c    the plains over against the south side of Ceneroth, and in the levels
@c    and the countries of Dor by the sea side:

@c    11:3. To the Chanaanites also on the east and on the west, and the
@c    Amorrhite, and the Hethite, and the Pherezite, and the Jebusite in the
@c    mountains:  to the Hevite also who dwelt at the foot of Hermon in the
@c    land of Maspha.

@c    11:4. And they all came out with their troops, a people exceeding
@c    numerous as the sand that is on the sea shore, their horses also and
@c    chariots a very great multitude,

@c    11:5. And all these kings assembled together at the waters of Merom, to
@c    fight against Israel.

@c    11:6. And the Lord said to Josue:  Fear them not:  for to morrow at this
@c    same hour I will deliver all these to be slain in the sight of Israel:
@c    thou shalt hamstring their horses, and thou shalt burn their chariots
@c    with fire.

@c    Hamstring their horses, and burn their chariots with fire, etc. . .God
@c    so ordained, that his people might not trust in chariots and horses,
@c    but in him.

@c    11:7. And Josue came, and all the army with him, against them to the
@c    waters of Merom on a sudden, and fell upon them.

@c    11:8. And the Lord delivered them into the hands of Israel.  And they
@c    defeated them, and chased them as far as the great Sidon and the waters
@c    of Maserophot, and the field of Masphe, which is on the east thereof.
@c    He slew them all, so as to leave no remains of them:

@c    11:9. And he did as the Lord had commanded him, he hamstringed their
@c    horses and burned their chariots.

@c    11:10. And presently turning back he took Asor:  and slew the king
@c    thereof with the sword.  Now Asor of old was the head of all these
@c    kingdoms.

@c    11:11. And he cut off all the souls that abode there:  he left not in it
@c    any remains, but utterly destroyed all, and burned the city itself with
@c    fire.

@c    11:12. And he took and put to the sword and destroyed all the cities
@c    round about, and their kings, as Moses the servant of God had commanded
@c    him.

@c    11:13. Except the cities that were on hills and high places, the rest
@c    Israel burned:  only Asor that was very strong he consumed with fire.

@c    11:14. And the children of Israel divided among themselves all the
@c    spoil of these cities and the cattle, killing all the men.

@c    11:15. As the Lord had commanded Moses his servant, so did Moses
@c    command Josue, and he accomplished all:  he left not one thing undone of
@c    all the commandments which the Lord had commanded Moses.

@c    11:16. So Josue took all the country of the hills, and of the south,
@c    and the land of Gosen, and the plains and the west country, and the
@c    mountain of Israel, and the plains thereof:

@c    11:17. And part of the mountain that goeth up to Seir as far as
@c    Baalgad, by the plain of Libanus under mount Hermon:  all their kings he
@c    took, smote and slew.

@c    11:18. Josue made war a long time against these kings.

@c    A long time. . .Seven years, as appears from chap. 14.10.

@c    11:19. There was not a city that delivered itself to the children of
@c    Israel, except the Hevite, who dwelt in Gabaon:  for he took all by
@c    fight.

@c    11:20. For it was the sentence of the Lord, that their hearts should be
@c    hardened, and they should fight against Israel, and fall, and should
@c    not deserve any clemency, and should be destroyed as the Lord had
@c    commanded Moses.

@c    Hardened. . .This hardening of their hearts, was their having no thought
@c    of yielding or submitting:  which was a sentence or judgment of God upon
@c    them in punishment of their enormous crimes.

@c    11:21. At that time Josue came and cut off the Enancims from the
@c    mountains, from Hebron, and Dabir, and Anab, and from all the mountain
@c    of Juda and Israel, and destroyed their cities.

@c    11:22. He left not any of the stock of the Enacims, in the land of the
@c    children of Israel:  except the cities of Gaza, and Geth, and Azotus, in
@c    which alone they were left.

@c    11:23. So Josue took all the land, as the Lord spoke to Moses, and
@c    delivered it in possession to the children of Israel, according to
@c    their divisions and tribes.  And the land rested from wars.



@c    Josue Chapter 12


@c    A list of the kings slain by Moses and Josue,

@c    12:1. These are the kings, whom the children of Israel slew and
@c    possessed their land beyond the Jordan towards the rising of the sun,
@c    from the torrent Arnon unto mount Hermon, and all the east country that
@c    looketh towards the wilderness.

@c    12:2. Sehon king of the Amorrhites, who dwelt in Hesebon, and had
@c    dominion from Aroer, which is seated upon the bank of the torrent
@c    Arnon, and of the middle part in the valley, and of half Galaad, as far
@c    as the torrent Jaboc, which is the border of the children of Ammon.

@c    12:3. And from the wilderness, to the sea of Ceneroth towards the east,
@c    and to the sea of the wilderness, which is the most salt sea, on the
@c    east side by the way that leadeth to Bethsimoth:  and on the south side
@c    that lieth under Asedoth, Phasga.

@c    12:4. The border of Og the king of Basan, of the remnant of the
@c    Raphaims who dwelt in Astaroth, and in Edrai, and had dominion in mount
@c    Hermon, and in Salecha, and in all Basan, unto the borders

@c    12:5. Of Gessuri and Machati, and of half Galaad:  the borders of Sehon
@c    the king of Hesebon.

@c    12:6. Moses the servant of the Lord, and the children of Israel slew
@c    them, and Moses delivered their land in possession to the Rubenites,
@c    and Gadites, and the half tribe of Manasses.

@c    12:7. These are the kings of the land, whom Josue and the children of
@c    Israel slew beyond the Jordan on the west side from Baalgad in the
@c    field of Libanus, unto the mount, part of which goeth up into Seir:  and
@c    Josue delivered it in possession to the tribes of Israel, to every one
@c    their divisions,

@c    12:8. As well in the mountains as in the plains and the champaign
@c    countries.  In Asedoth, and in the wilderness, and in the south was the
@c    Hethite and the Amorrhite, the Chanaanite and the Pherezite, the Hevite
@c    and the Jebusite.

@c    12:9. The king of Jericho one:  the king of Hai, which is on the side of
@c    Bethel, one:

@c    12:10. The king of Jerusalem one, the king of Hebron one,

@c    12:11. The king of Jerimoth one, thee king of Lachis one,

@c    12:12. The king of Eglon one, the king of Gazer one,

@c    12:13. The king of Dabir one, the king of Gader one,

@c    12:14. The king of Herma one, the king of Hered one,

@c    12:15. The king of Lebna one, the king of Odullam one,

@c    12:16. The king of Maceda one, the king of Bethel one,

@c    12:17. The king of Taphua one, the king of Opher one,

@c    12:18. The king of Aphec one, the king of Saron one,

@c    12:19. The king of Madon one, the king of Asor one,

@c    12:20. The king of Semeron one, the king of Achsaph one,

@c    12:21. The king of Thenac one, the king of Mageddo one,

@c    12:22. Thee king of Cades one, the king of Jachanan of Carmel one,

@c    12:23. The king of Dor, and of the province of Dor one, the king of the
@c    nations of Galgal one,

@c    12:24. The king of Thersa one:  all the kings thirty and one.



@c    Josue Chapter 13


@c    God commandeth Josue to divide the land:  the possessions of Ruben, Gad,
@c    and half the tribe of Manasses, beyond the Jordan.

@c    13:1. Josue was old, and far advanced in years, and the Lord said to
@c    him:  Thou art grown old, and advanced in age, and there is a very large
@c    country left, which is not yet divided by lot:

@c    Josue was old, and far advanced in years. . .He was then about one
@c    hundred and one years old.--And there is a very large country left,
@c    which is not yet divided by lot. . .Not yet possessed by the children of
@c    Israel.

@c    13:2. To wit, all Galilee, Philistia, and all Gessuri.

@c    13:3. From the troubled river, that watereth Egypt, unto the border of
@c    Accaron northward:  the land of Chanaan, which is divided among the
@c    lords of the Philistines, the Gazites, the Azotians, the Ascalonites,
@c    the Gethites, and the Accronites.

@c    13:4. And on the south side are the Hevites, all the land of Chanaan,
@c    and Maara of the Sidonians as far as Apheca, and the borders of the
@c    Amorrhite,

@c    13:5. And his confines.  The country also of Libanus towards the east
@c    from Baalgad under mount Hermon to the entering into Emath.

@c    13:6. Of all that dwell in the mountains from Libanus, to the waters of
@c    Maserephoth, and all the Sidonians.  I am he that will cut them off from
@c    before the face of the children of Israel.  So let their land come in as
@c    a part of the inheritance of Israel, as I have commanded thee.

@c    13:7. And now divide the land in possession to the nine tribes, and to
@c    the half tribe of Manasses,

@c    13:8. With whom Ruben and Gad have possessed the land, which Moses the
@c    servant of the Lord delivered to them beyond the river Jordan, on the
@c    east side.

@c    With whom. . .That is, with the other half of that same tribe.

@c    13:9. From Aroer, which is upon the bank of the torrent Arnon, and in
@c    the midst of the valley and all the plains of Medaba, as far as Dibon:

@c    13:10. And all the cities of Sehon, king of the Amorrhites, who reigned
@c    in Hesebon, unto the borders of the children of Ammon.

@c    13:11. And Galaad, and the borders of Gessuri and Machati, and all
@c    mount Hermon, and all Basan as far as Salecha,

@c    13:12. All the kingdom of Og in Basan, who reigned in Astaroth and
@c    Edrai, he was of the remains of the Raphaims:  and Moses overthrew and
@c    destroyed them.

@c    13:13. And the children of Israel would not destroy Gessuri and Machati
@c    and they have dwelt in the midst of Israel, until this present day.

@c    13:14. But to the tribe of Levi he gave no possession:  but the
@c    sacrifices and victims of thee Lord God of Israel, are his inheritance,
@c    as he spoke to him.

@c    13:15. And Moses gave a possession to the children of Ruben according
@c    to their kindreds.

@c    13:16. And their border was from Aroer, which is on the bank of the
@c    torrent Arnon, and in the midst of the valley of the same torrent:  all
@c    the plain, that leadeth to Medaba,

@c    13:17. And Hesebon, and all their villages, which are in the plains.
@c    Dibon also, and Bamothbaal, and the town of Baalmaon,

@c    13:18. And Jassa, and Cidimoth, and Mephaath,

@c    13:19. And Cariathaim, and Sabama, and Sarathasar in the mountain of
@c    the valley.

@c    13:20. Bethphogor and Asedoth, Phasga and Bethiesimoth,

@c    13:21. And all the cities of the plain, and all the kingdoms of Sehon
@c    king of the Amorrhites, that reigned in Hesebon, whom Moses slew with
@c    the princes of Madian:  Hevi, and Recem, and Sur and Hur, and Rebe,
@c    dukes of Sehon inhabitants of the land.

@c    The princes of Madian. . .It appears from hence that these were subjects
@c    of king Sehon:  they are said to have been slain with him, that is,
@c    about the same time, but not in the same battle.

@c    13:22. Balaam also the son of Beor the soothsayer, the children of
@c    Israel slew with the sword among the rest that were slain.

@c    13:23. And the river Jordan was the border of the children of Ruben.
@c    This is the possession of the Rubenites, by their kindreds, of cities
@c    and villages.

@c    13:24. And Moses gave to the tribe of Gad and to his children by their
@c    kindreds a possession, of which this is the division.

@c    13:25. The border of Jaser, and all the cities of Galaad, and half the
@c    land of the children of Ammon:  as far as Aroer which is over against
@c    Rabba:

@c    13:26. And from Hesebon unto Ramoth, Masphe and Betonim:  and from
@c    Manaim unto the borders of Dabir.

@c    13:27. And in the valley Betharan and Bethnemra, and Socoth, and Saphon
@c    the other part of the kingdom of Sehon king of Hesebon:  the limit of
@c    this also is the Jordan, as far as the uttermost part of the sea of
@c    Cenereth beyond the Jordan on the east side,

@c    13:28. This is the possession of the children of Gad by their families,
@c    their cities, and villages.

@c    13:29. He gave also to the half tribe of Manasses and his children
@c    possession according to their kindreds,

@c    13:30. The beginning whereof is this:  from Manaim all Basan, and all
@c    the kingdoms of Og king of Basan, and all the villages of Jair, which
@c    are in Basan, threescore towns.

@c    13:31. And half Galaad, and Astaroth, and Edrai, cities of the kingdom
@c    of Og in Basan:  to the children of Machir, the son of Manasses, to one
@c    half of the children of Machir according to their kindreds.

@c    13:32. This possession Moses divided in the plains of Moab, beyond the
@c    Jordan, over against Jericho on the east side,

@c    13:33. But to the tribe of Levi he gave no possession:  because the Lord
@c    the God of Israel himself is their possession, as he spoke to them.



@c    Josue Chapter 14


@c    Caleb's petition; Hebron is given to him and to his seed.

@c    14:1. This is what the children of Israel possessed in the land of
@c    Chanaan, which Eleazar the priest, and Josue the son of Nun, and the
@c    princes of the families by the tribes of Israel gave to them.

@c    14:2. Dividing all by lot, as the Lord had commanded the hand of Moses,
@c    to the nine tribes, and the half tribe.

@c    14:3. For to two tribes and a half Moses had given possession beyond
@c    the Jordan:  besides the Levites, who received no land among their
@c    brethren:

@c    14:4. But in their place succeeded the children of Joseph divided into
@c    two tribes, of Manasses and Ephraim:  neither did the Levites receive
@c    other portion of land, but cities to dwell in, and their suburbs to
@c    feed their beasts and flocks.

@c    Hebron belonged, etc. . .All the country thereabouts, depending on
@c    Hebron, was given to Caleb; but the city itself with the suburbs, was
@c    one of those that were given to the priests to dwell in.

@c    14:5. As the Lord had commanded Moses so did the children of Israel,
@c    and they divided the land.

@c    14:6. Then the children of Juda came to Josue in Galgal, and Caleb the
@c    son of Jephone the Cenezite spoke to him:  Thou knowest what the Lord
@c    spoke to Moses the man of God concerning me and thee in Cadesbarne.

@c    14:7. I was forty years old when Moses the servant of the Lord sent me
@c    from Cadesbarne, to view the land, and I brought him word again as to
@c    me seemed true,

@c    14:8. But my brethren, that had gone up with me, discouraged the heart
@c    of the people:  and I nevertheless followed the Lord my God.

@c    14:9. And Moses swore in that day, saying:  The land which thy foot hath
@c    trodden upon shall be thy possession, and thy children for ever,
@c    because thou hast followed the Lord my God.

@c    14:10. The Lord therefore hath granted me life, as he promised until
@c    this present day, It is forty and five years since the Lord spoke this
@c    word to Moses, when Israel journeyed through the wilderness:  this day I
@c    am eighty-five years old,

@c    14:11. As strong as I was at that time when I was sent to view the
@c    land:  the strength of that time continueth in me until this day, as
@c    well to fight as to march.

@c    14:12. Give me therefore this mountain, which the Lord promised, in thy
@c    hearing also, wherein are the Enacims, and cities great and strong:  if
@c    so be the Lord will be with me, and I shall be able to destroy them, as
@c    he promised me.

@c    14:13. And Josue blessed him, and gave him Hebron in possession.

@c    14:14. And from that time Hebron belonged to Caleb the son of Jephone
@c    the Cenezite, until this present day:  because he followed the Lord the
@c    God of Israel.

@c    14:15. The name of Hebron before was called Cariath-Arbe:  Adam the
@c    greatest among the Enacims was laid there and the land rested from
@c    wars.



@c    Josue Chapter 15


@c    The borders of the lot of Juda.  Caleb's portion and conquest.  The
@c    cities of Juda.

@c    15:1. Now the lot of the children of Juda by their kindreds was this:
@c    From the frontier of Edom, to the desert of Sin southward, and to the
@c    uttermost part of the south coast.

@c    15:2. Its beginning was from the top of the most salt sea, and from the
@c    bay thereof, that looketh to the south.

@c    15:3. And it goeth out towards the ascent of the Scorpion, and passeth
@c    on to Sina:  and ascendeth into Cadesbarne, and reacheth into Esron,
@c    going up to Addar, and compassing Carcaa.

@c    15:4. And from thence passing along into Asemona, and reaching the
@c    torrent of Egypt:  and the bounds thereof shall be the great sea, this
@c    shall be the limit of the south coast.

@c    15:5. But on the east side the beginning shall be the most salt sea
@c    even to the end of the Jordan:  and towards the north from the bay of
@c    the sea unto the same river Jordan.

@c    15:6. And the border goeth up into Beth-Hagla, and passeth by the north
@c    into Beth-Araba:  going up to the stone of Boen the son of Ruben.

@c    15:7. And reaching as far as the borders of Debara from the valley of
@c    Achor, and so northward looking towards Galgal, which is opposite to
@c    the ascent of Adommin, on the south side of the torrent, and the border
@c    passeth the waters that are called the fountain of the sun:  and the
@c    goings out thereof shall be at the fountain Rogel.

@c    15:8. And it goeth up by the valley of the son of Ennom on the side of
@c    the Jebusite towards the south, the same is Jerusalem:  and thence
@c    ascending to the top of the mountain, which is over against Geennom to
@c    the west in the end of the valley of Raphaim, northward.

@c    15:9. And it passeth on from the top of the mountain to the fountain of
@c    the water of Nephtoa:  and reacheth to the towns of mount Ephron:  and it
@c    bendeth towards Baala, which is Cariathiarim, that is to say, the city
@c    of the woods.

@c    15:10. And it compasseth from Baala westward unto mount Seir:  and
@c    passeth by the side of mount Jarim to the north into Cheslon:  and goeth
@c    down into Bethsames, and passeth into Thamna.

@c    15:11. And reacheth northward to a part of Accaron at the side:  and
@c    bendeth to Sechrona, and passeth mount Baala:  and cometh into Jebneel,
@c    and is bounded westward with the great sea.

@c    15:12. These are the borders round about of the children of Juda in
@c    their kindreds.

@c    15:13. But to Caleb the son of Jephone he gave a portion in the midst
@c    of the children of Juda, as the Lord had commanded him:  Cariath-Arbe
@c    the father of Enac, which is Hebron.

@c    15:14. And Caleb destroyed out of it the three sons of Enac, Sesai and
@c    Ahiman, and Tholmai of the race of Enac.

@c    15:15. And going up from thence he came to the inhabitants of Dabir,
@c    which before was called Cariath-Sepher, that is to say, the city of
@c    letters.

@c    15:16. And Caleb said:  He that shall smite Cariath-Sepher, and take it,
@c    I will give him Axa my daughter to wife.

@c    15:17. And Othoniel the son of Cenez, the younger brother of Caleb,
@c    took it:  and he gave him Axa his daughter to wife.

@c    15:18. And as they were going together, she was moved by her husband to
@c    ask a field of her father, and she sighed as she sat on her ass.  And
@c    Caleb said to her:  What aileth thee?

@c    15:19. But she answered:  Give me a blessing:  thou hast given me a
@c    southern and dry land, give me also a land that Is watered.  And Caleb
@c    gave her the upper and the nether watery ground.

@c    15:20. This is the possession of the tribe of the children of Juda by
@c    their kindreds.

@c    15:21. And the cities from the uttermost parts of the children of Juda
@c    by the borders of Edom to the south, were Cabseel and Eder and Jagur,

@c    15:22. And Cina and Dimona and Adada,

@c    15:23. And Cades and Asor and Jethnam,

@c    15:24. Ziph and Telem and Baloth,

@c    15:25. New Asor and Carioth, Hesron, which is Asor.

@c    15:26. Amam, Sama and Molada,

@c    15:27. And Asergadda and Hassemon and Bethphelet,

@c    15:28. And Hasersual and Bersabee and Baziothia,

@c    15:29. And Baala and Jim and Esem,

@c    15:30. And Eltholad and Cesil and Harma,

@c    15:31. And Siceleg and Medemena and Sensenna,

@c    15:32. Lebaoth and Selim and Aen and Remmon:  all the cities
@c    twenty-nine, and their villages.

@c    15:33. But in the plains:  Estaol and Sarea and Asena,

@c    15:34. And Zanoe and Engannim and Taphua and Enaim,

@c    15:35. And Jerimoth and Adullam, Socho and Azeca,

@c    15:36. And Saraim and Adithaim and Gedera and Gederothaim:  fourteen
@c    cities, and their villages.

@c    15:37. Sanan and Hadassa and Magdalgad,

@c    15:38. Delean and Masepha and Jecthel,

@c    15:39. Lachis and Bascath and Eglon,

@c    15:40. Chebbon and Leheman and Cethlis,

@c    15:41. And Gideroth and Bethdagon and Naama and Maceda:  sixteen cities,
@c    and their villages.

@c    15:42. Labana and Ether and Asan,

@c    15:43. Jephtha and Esna and Nesib,

@c    15:44. And Ceila and Achzib and Maresa:  nine cities, and their
@c    villages.

@c    15:45. Accaron with the towns and villages thereof.

@c    15:46. From Accaron even to the sea:  all places that lie towards Azotus
@c    and the villages thereof.

@c    15:47. Azotus with its towns and villages.  Gaza with its towns and
@c    villages, even to the torrent of Egypt, and the great sea that is the
@c    border thereof.

@c    15:48. And in the mountain Samir and Jether and Socoth,

@c    15:49. And Danna and Cariath-senna, this is Dabir:

@c    15:50. Anab and Istemo and Anim,

@c    15:51. Gosen and Olon and Gilo:  eleven cities and their villages.

@c    15:52. Arab and Ruma and Esaan,

@c    15:53. And Janum and Beththaphua and Apheca,

@c    15:54. Athmatha and Cariath-Arbe, this is Hebron and Sior:  nine cities
@c    and their villages.

@c    15:55. Maon and Carmel and Ziph and Jota,

@c    15:56. Jezrael and Jucadam and Zanoe,

@c    15:57. Accain, Gabaa and Thamna:  ten cities and their villages.

@c    15:58. Halhul, and Bessur, and Gedor,

@c    15:59. Mareth, and Bethanoth, and Eltecon:  six cities and their
@c    villages.

@c    15:60. Cariathbaal, the same is Cariathiarim the city of woods, and
@c    Arebba:  two cities and their villages.

@c    15:61. In the desert Betharaba, Meddin and Sachacha,

@c    15:62. And Nebsan, and the city of salt, and Engaddi:  six cities and
@c    their villages.

@c    15:63. But the children of Juda could not destroy the Jebusite that
@c    dwelt in Jerusalem:  and the Jebusite dwelt with the children of Juda in
@c    Jerusalem until this present day.



@c    Josue Chapter 16


@c    The lot of the sons of Joseph.  The borders of the tribe of Ephraim.

@c    16:1. And the lot of the sons of Joseph fell from the Jordan over
@c    against Jericho and the waters thereof, on the east:  the wilderness
@c    which goeth up from Jericho to the mountain of Bethel:

@c    16:2. And goeth out from Bethel to Luza:  and passeth the border of
@c    Archi, to Ataroth,

@c    16:3. And goeth down westward, by the border of Jephleti, unto the
@c    borders of Beth-horon the nether, and to Gazer:  and the countries of it
@c    are ended by the great sea:

@c    16:4. And Manasses and Ephraim the children of Joseph possessed it.

@c    16:5. And the border of the children of Ephraim was according to their
@c    kindreds:  and their possession towards the east was Ataroth-addar unto
@c    Beth-horon the upper.

@c    16:6. And the confines go out unto the sea:  but Machmethath looketh to
@c    the north, and it goeth round the borders eastward into Thanath-selo:
@c    and passeth along on the east side to Janoe.

@c    Looketh to the north, etc. . .The meaning is, that the border went
@c    towards the north, by Machmethath; and then turned eastward to
@c    Thanath-selo.

@c    16:7. And it goeth down from Janoe into Ataroth and Naaratha:  and it
@c    cometh to Jericho, and goeth out to the Jordan.

@c    16:8. From Taphua it passeth on towards the sea into the valley of
@c    reeds, and the goings out thereof are at the most salt sea.  This is the
@c    possession of the tribe of the children of Ephraim by their families.

@c    16:9. And there were cities with their villages separated for the
@c    children of Ephraim in the midst of the possession of the children of
@c    Manasses.

@c    16:10. And the children of Ephraim slew not the Chanaanite, who dwelt
@c    in Gazer:  and the Chanaanite dwelt in the midst of Ephraim until this
@c    day, paying tribute.



@c    Josue Chapter 17


@c    The lot of the half tribe of Manasses.

@c    17:1. And this lot fell to the tribe of Manasses for he is the
@c    firstborn of Joseph to Machir the firstborn of Manasses the father of
@c    Galaad, who was a warlike man, and had for possession Galaad and Basan.

@c    17:2. And to the rest of the children of Manasses according to their
@c    families:  to the children of Abiezer, and to the children of Helec, and
@c    to the children of Esriel, and to the children of Sechem, and to the
@c    children of Hepher, and to the children of Semida:  these are the male
@c    children of Manasses the son of Joseph, by their kindreds.

@c    17:3. But Salphaad the son of Hepher the son of Galaad the son of
@c    Machir the son of Manasses had no sons, but only daughters:  whose names
@c    are these, Maala and Noa and Hegla and Melcha and Thersa.

@c    17:4. And they came in the presence of Eleazar the priest and of Josue
@c    the son of Nun, and of the princes, saying:  The Lord commanded by the
@c    hand of Moses, that a possession should be given us in the midst of our
@c    brethren.  And he gave them according to the commandment of the Lord a
@c    possession amongst the brethren of their father.

@c    17:5. And there fell ten portions to Manasses, beside the land of
@c    Galaad and Basan beyond the Jordan.

@c    17:6. For the daughters of Manasses possessed inheritance in the midst
@c    of his sons.  And the land of Galaad fell to the lot of the rest of the
@c    children of Manasses.

@c    17:7. And the border of Manasses was from Aser, Machmethath which
@c    looketh towards Sichem:  and it goeth out on the right hand by the
@c    inhabitants of the fountain of Taphua.

@c    17:8. For the lot of Manasses took in the land of Taphua, which is on
@c    the borders of Manasses, and belongs to the children of Ephraim.

@c    17:9. And the border goeth down to the valley of the reeds, to the
@c    south of the torrent of the cities of Ephraim, which are in the midst
@c    of the cities of Manasses:  the border of Manasses is on the north side
@c    of the torrent, and the outgoings of it are at the sea:

@c    17:10. So that the possession of Ephraim is on the south, and on the
@c    north that of Manasses, and the sea is the border of both, and they are
@c    joined together in the tribe of Aser on the north, and in the tribe of
@c    Issachar on the east.

@c    17:11. And the inheritance of Manasses in Issachar and in Aser, was
@c    Bethsan and its villages, and Jeblaam with its villages, and the
@c    inhabitants of Dor, with the towns thereof:  the inhabitants also of
@c    Endor with the villages thereof:  and in like manner the inhabitants of
@c    Thenac with the villages thereof:  and the inhabitants of Mageddo with
@c    their villages, and the third part of the city of Nopheth.

@c    17:12. Neither could the children of Manasses overthrow these cities,
@c    but the Chanaanite began to dwell in his land.

@c    17:13. But after that the children of Israel were grown strong, they
@c    subdued the Chanaanites, and made them their tributaries, and they did
@c    not kill them.

@c    17:14. And the children of Joseph spoke to Josue, and said:  Why hast
@c    thou given me but one lot and one portion to possess, whereas I am of
@c    so great a multitude, and the Lord hath blessed me?

@c    17:15. And Josue said to them:  If thou be a great people, go up into
@c    the woodland, and cut down room for thyself in the land of the
@c    Pherezite and the Raphaims:  because the possession of mount Ephraim is
@c    too narrow for thee.

@c    17:16. And the children of Joseph answered him:  We cannot go up to the
@c    mountains, for the Chanaanites that dwell in the low lands, wherein are
@c    situate Bethsan with its towns, and Jezrael in the midst of the valley,
@c    have chariots of iron.

@c    17:17. And Josue said to the house of Joseph, to Ephraim and Manasses:
@c    Thou art a great people, and of great strength, thou shalt not have one
@c    lot only:

@c    17:18. But thou shalt pass to the mountain, and shalt cut down the
@c    wood, and make thyself room to dwell in:  and mayst proceed farther,
@c    when thou hast destroyed the Chanaanites, who as thou sayest have iron
@c    chariots, and are very strong.



@c    Josue Chapter 18


@c    Surveyors are sent to divide the rest of the land into seven tribes.
@c    The lot of Benjamin.

@c    18:1. And all the children of Israel assembled together in Silo, and
@c    there they set up the tabernacle of the testimony, and the land was
@c    subdued before them.

@c    18:2. But there remained seven tribes of the children of Israel, which
@c    as yet had not received their possessions.

@c    18:3. And Josue said to them:  How long are you indolent and slack, and
@c    go not in to possess the land which the Lord the God of your fathers
@c    hath given you?

@c    18:4. Choose of every tribe three men, that I may send them, and they
@c    may go and compass the land, and mark it out according to the number of
@c    each multitude:  and bring back to me what they have marked out.

@c    18:5. Divide to yourselves the land into seven parts:  let Juda be in
@c    his bounds on the south side, and the house of Joseph on the north.

@c    18:6. The land in the midst between these mark ye out into seven parts;
@c    and you shall come hither to me, that I may cast lots for you before
@c    the Lord your God.

@c    The land in the midst between these mark ye out into seven
@c    parts. . .That is to say, the rest of the land, which is not already
@c    assigned to Juda or Joseph.

@c    18:7. For the Levites have no part among you, but the priesthood of the
@c    Lord is their inheritance.  And Gad and Ruben, and the half tribe of
@c    Manasses have already received their possessions beyond the Jordan
@c    eastward:  which Moses the servant of the Lord gave them.

@c    18:8. And when the men were risen up, to go to mark out the land, Josue
@c    commanded them saying:  Go round the land and mark it out, and return to
@c    me:  that I may cast lots for you before the Lord in Silo.

@c    18:9. So they went and surveying it divided it into seven parts,
@c    writing them down in a book.  And they returned to Josue, to the camp in
@c    Silo.

@c    18:10. And he cast lots before the Lord in Silo, and divided the land
@c    to the children of Israel into seven parts.

@c    18:11. And first came up the lot of the children of Benjamin by their
@c    families, to possess the land between the children of Juda, and the
@c    children of Joseph.

@c    18:12. And their border northward was from the Jordan:  going along by
@c    the side of Jericho on the north side, and thence going up westward to
@c    the mountains, and reaching to the wilderness of Bethaven,

@c    18:13. And passing along southward by Luza, the same is Bethel, and it
@c    goeth down into Ataroth-addar to the mountain, that is on the south of
@c    the nether Beth-horon.

@c    18:14. And it bendeth thence going round towards the sea, south of the
@c    mountain that looketh towards Beth-horon to the southwest:  and the
@c    outgoings thereof are into Cariathbaal, which is called also
@c    Cariathiarim, a city of the children of Juda This is their coast
@c    towards the sea, westward.

@c    18:15. But on the south side the border goeth out from part of
@c    Cariathiarim towards the sea, and cometh to the fountain of the waters
@c    of Nephtoa.

@c    18:16. And it goeth down to that part of the mountain that looketh on
@c    the valley of the children of Ennom:  and is over against the north
@c    quarter in the furthermost part of the valley of Raphaim, and it goeth
@c    down into Geennom (that is the valley of Ennom) by the side of the
@c    Jebusite to the south:  and cometh to the fountain of Rogel,

@c    18:17. Passing thence to the north, and going out to Ensemes, that is
@c    to say, the fountain of the sun:

@c    18:18. And It passeth along to the hills that are over against the
@c    ascent of Adommim:  and it goeth down to Abenboen, that is, the stone of
@c    Boen the son of Ruben:  and it passeth on the north side to the
@c    champaign countries; and goeth down Into the plain,

@c    18:19. And it passeth by Bethhagla northward:  and the outgoings thereof
@c    are towards the north of the most salt sea at the south end of the
@c    Jordan.

@c    18:20. Which is the border of it on the east side.  This is the
@c    possession of the children of Benjamin by their borders round about,
@c    and their families.

@c    18:21. And their cities were, Jericho and Bethhagla and Vale-Casis,

@c    18:22. Betharaba and Samaraim and Bethel,

@c    18:23. And Avim and Aphara and Ophera,

@c    18:24. The town Emona and Ophni and Gabee:  twelve cities, and their
@c    villages.

@c    18:25. Gabam and Rama and Beroth,

@c    18:26. And Mesphe, and Caphara, and Amosa,

@c    18:27. And Recem, Jarephel, and Tharela,

@c    18:28. And Sela, Eleph and Jebus, which is Jerusalem, Gabaath and
@c    Cariath:  fourteen cities, and their villages.  This is the possession of
@c    the children of Benjamin by their families.



@c    Josue Chapter 19


@c    The lots of the tribes of Simeon, Zabulon, Issachar, Aser, Nephtali and
@c    Dan.  A city is given to Josue.

@c    19:1. And the second lot came forth for the children of Simeon by their
@c    kindreds:  and their inheritance was

@c    19:2. In the midst of the possession of the children of Juda:  Bersabee
@c    and Sabee and Molada

@c    19:3. And Hasersual, Bala and Asem,

@c    19:4. And Eltholad, Bethul and Harma,

@c    19:5. And Siceleg and Bethmarchaboth and Hasersusa,

@c    19:6. And Bethlebaoth and Sarohen:  thirteen cities, and their villages.

@c    19:7. And Remmon and Athor and Asan:  four cities, and their villages.

@c    19:8. And all the villages round about these cities to Baalath Beer
@c    Ramath to the south quarter.  This is the inheritance of the children of
@c    Simeon according to their kindreds,

@c    19:9. In the possession and lot of the children of Juda:  because it was
@c    too great, and therefore the children of Simeon had their possession in
@c    the midst of their inheritance.

@c    19:10. And the third lot fell to the children of Zabulon by their
@c    kindreds:  and the border of their possession was unto Sarid.

@c    19:11. And It went up from the sea and from Merala, and came to
@c    Debbaseth:  as far as the torrent, which is over against Jeconam.

@c    19:12. And it returneth from Sarid eastward to the borders of
@c    Ceseleththabor:  and it goeth out to Dabereth and ascendeth towards
@c    Japhie.

@c    19:13. And it passeth along from thence to the east side of Gethhepher
@c    and Thacasin:  and goeth out to Remmon, Amthar and Noa.

@c    19:14. And it turneth about to the north of Hanathon:  and the outgoings
@c    thereof are the valley of Jephtahel,

@c    19:15. And Cateth and Naalol and Semeron and Jedala and Bethlehem:
@c    twelve cities and their villages.

@c    19:16. This is the inheritance of the tribe of the children of Zabulon
@c    by their kindreds, the cities and their villages.

@c    19:17. The fourth lot came out to Issachar by their kindreds.

@c    19:18. And his inheritance was Jezrael and Casaloth and Sunem,

@c    19:19. And Hapharaim and Seon and Anaharath,

@c    19:20. And Rabboth and Cesion, Abes,

@c    19:21. And Rameth and Engannim and Enhadda and Bethpheses.

@c    19:22. And the border thereof cometh to Thabor and Sehesima and
@c    Bethsames:  and the outgoings thereof shall be at the Jordan:  sixteen
@c    cities, and their villages.

@c    19:23. This is the possession of the sons of Issachar by their
@c    kindreds, the cities and their villages.

@c    19:24. And the fifth lot fell to the tribe of the children of Aser by
@c    their kindreds:

@c    19:25. And their border was Halcath and Chali and Beten and Axaph,

@c    19:26. And Elmelech and Amaad and Messal:  and it reacheth to Carmel by
@c    the sea and Sihor and Labanath,

@c    19:27. And it returneth towards the east to Bethdagon:  and passeth
@c    along to Zabulon and to the valley of Jephthael towards the north to
@c    Bethemec and Nehiel.  And it goeth out to the left side of Cabul,

@c    19:28. And to Abaran and Rohob and Hamon and Cana, as far as the great
@c    Sidon.

@c    19:29. And it returneth to Horma to the strong city of Tyre, and to
@c    Hosa:  and the outgoings thereof shall be at the sea from the portion of
@c    Achziba:

@c    19:30. And Amma and Aphec and Rohob:  twenty-two cities, and their
@c    villages.

@c    19:31. This is the possession of the children of Aser by their
@c    kindreds, and the cities and their villages.

@c    19:32. The sixth lot came out to the sons of Nephtali by their
@c    families:

@c    19:33. And the border began from Heleph and Elon to Saananim, and
@c    Adami, which is Neceb, and Jebnael even to Lecum:

@c    19:34. And the border returneth westward to Azanotthabor, and goeth out
@c    from thence to Hucuca, and passeth along to Zabulon southward, and to
@c    Aser westward, and to Juda upon the Jordan towards the rising of the
@c    sun.

@c    19:35. And the strong cities are Assedim, Ser, and Emath, and Reccath
@c    and Cenereth,

@c    19:36. And Edema and Arama, Asor,

@c    19:37. And Cedes and Edri, Enhasor,

@c    19:38. And Jeron and Magdalel, Horem, and Bethanath and Bethsames:
@c    nineteen cities, and their villages.

@c    19:39. This is the possession of the tribe of the children of Nephtali
@c    by their kindreds, the cities and their villages.

@c    19:40. The seventh lot came out to the tribe of the children of Dan by
@c    their families

@c    19:41. And the border of their possession was Saraa and Esthaol, and
@c    Hirsemes, that is, the city of the sun,

@c    19:42. Selebin and Aialon and Jethela,

@c    19:43. Elon and Themna and Acron,

@c    19:44. Elthece, Gebbethon and Balaath,

@c    19:45. And Juda and Bane and Barach and Gethremmon:

@c    19:46. And Mejarcon and Arecon, with the border that looketh towards
@c    Joppe,

@c    19:47. And is terminated there.  And the children of Dan went up and
@c    fought against Lesem, and took it:  and they put it to the sword, and
@c    possessed it, and dwelt in it, calling the name of it Lesem Dan, by the
@c    name of Dan their father.

@c    19:48. This is the possession of the tribe of the sons of Dan, by their
@c    kindreds, the cities and their villages.

@c    19:49. And when he had made an end of dividing the land by lot to each
@c    one by their tribes, the children of Israel gave a possession to Josue
@c    the son of Nun in the midst of them,

@c    19:50. According to the commandment of the Lord, the city which he
@c    asked for, Thamnath Saraa, in mount Ephraim:  and he built up the city,
@c    and dwelt in it.

@c    19:51. These are the possessions which Eleazar the priest, and Josue
@c    the son of Nun, and the princes of the families, and of the tribes of
@c    the children of Israel, distributed by lot in Silo, before the Lord at
@c    the door of the tabernacle of the testimony, and they divided the land.



@c    Josue Chapter 20


@c    The cities of refuge are appointed for casual manslaughter.

@c    20:1. And the Lord spoke to Josue, saying:  Speak to children of Israel
@c    and say to them:

@c    20:2. Appoint cities of refuge, of which I spoke to you by the hand of
@c    Moses:

@c    20:3. That whosoever shall kill a person unawares may flee to them, and
@c    may escape the wrath of the kinsman, who is the avenger of blood.

@c    20:4. And when he shall flee to one of these cities:  he shall stand
@c    before the gate of the city, and shall speak to the ancients of that
@c    city, such things as prove him innocent:  and so shall they receive him,
@c    and give him a place to dwell in.

@c    20:5. And when the avenger of blood shall pursue him, they shall not
@c    deliver him into his hands, because he slew his neighbour unawares, and
@c    is not proved to have been his enemy two or three days before,

@c    20:6. And he shall dwell in that city, till he stand before judgment to
@c    give an account of his fact, and till the death of the high priest, who
@c    shall be at that time:  then shall the manslayer return, and go into his
@c    own city and house from whence he fled.

@c    20:7. And they appointed Cedes in Galilee of mount Nephtali, and Sichem
@c    in mount Ephraim, and Cariath-Arbe, the same is Hebron in the mountain
@c    of Juda.

@c    20:8. And beyond the Jordan to the east of Jericho, they appointed
@c    Bosor, which is upon the plain of the wilderness of the tribe of Ruben,
@c    and Ramoth in Galaad of the tribe of Gad, and Gaulon in Basan of the
@c    tribe of Manasses.

@c    20:9. These cities were appointed for all the children of Israel, and
@c    for the strangers, that dwelt among them, that whosoever had killed a
@c    person unawares might flee to them, and not die by the hand of the
@c    kinsman, coveting to revenge the blood that was shed, until he should
@c    stand before the people to lay open his cause.



@c    Josue Chapter 21


@c    Cities with their suburbs are assigned for the priests and Levites.

@c    21:1. Then the princes of the families of Levi came to Eleazar the
@c    priest, and to Josue the son of Nun, and to the princes of the kindreds
@c    of all the tribes of the children of Israel

@c    21:2. And they spoke to them in Silo in the land of Chanaan, and said:
@c    The Lord commanded by the hand of Moses, that cities should be given us
@c    to dwell in, and their suburbs to feed our cattle.

@c    21:3. And the children of Israel gave out of their possessions
@c    according to the commandment of the Lord, cities and their suburbs.

@c    21:4. And the lot came out for the family of Caath of the children of
@c    Aaron the priest out of the tribes of Juda, and of Simeon, and of
@c    Benjamin, thirteen cities.

@c    21:5. And to the rest of the children of Caath, that is, to thee
@c    Levites, who remained, out of the tribes of Ephraim, and of Dan, and
@c    the half tribe of Manasses, ten cities.

@c    21:6. And the lot came out to children of Gerson, that they should take
@c    of the tribes of Issachar and of Aser and of Nephtali, and of the half
@c    tribe of Manasses in Basan, thirteen cities.

@c    21:7. And to the sons of Merari by their kindreds, of the tribes of
@c    Ruben and of Gad and of Zabulon, twelve cities.

@c    21:8. And the children of Israel gave to the Levites the cities and
@c    their suburbs, as the Lord commanded by the hand of Moses, giving to
@c    every one by lot.

@c    21:9. Of the tribes of the children of Juda and of Simeon Josue gave
@c    cities:  whose names are these,

@c    21:10. To the sons of Aaron, of the families of Caath of the race of
@c    Levi (for the first lot came out for them)

@c    21:11. The city of Arbe the father of Enac, which is called Hebron, in
@c    the mountain of Juda, and the suburbs thereof round about.

@c    21:12. But the fields and the villages thereof he had given to Caleb
@c    the son of Jephone for his possession.

@c    21:13. He gave therefore to the children of Aaron the priest, Hebron a
@c    city of refuge, and the suburbs thereof, and Lebna with the suburbs
@c    thereof,

@c    21:14. And Jether and Estemo,

@c    21:15. And Holon, and Dabir,

@c    21:16. And Ain, and Jeta, and Bethsames, with their suburbs:  nine
@c    cities out of the two tribes, as hath been said.

@c    21:17. And out of the tribe of the children of Benjamin, Gabaon, and
@c    Gabae,

@c    21:18. And Anathoth and Almon, with, their suburbs:  four cities.

@c    21:19. All the cities together of the children of Aaron the priest,
@c    were thirteen, with their suburbs,

@c    21:20. And to the rest of the families of the children of Caath of the
@c    race of Levi was given this possession.

@c    21:21. Of the tribe of Ephraim, Sichem one of the cities of refuge,
@c    with the suburbs thereof in mount Ephraim, and Gazer,

@c    21:22. And Cibsaim, and Beth-horon, with their suburbs, four cities.

@c    21:23. And of he tribe of Dan, Eltheco and Gabathon,

@c    21:24. And Aialon and Gethremmon, with their suburbs, four cities.

@c    21:25. And of the half tribe of Manasses, Thanac and Gethremmon, with
@c    their suburbs, two cities.

@c    21:26. All the cities were ten, with their suburbs, which were given to
@c    the children of Caath, of the inferior degree.

@c    21:27. To the children of Gerson also of the race of Levi out of the
@c    half tribe of Manasses, Gaulon in Basan, one of the cities of refuge,
@c    and Bosra, with their suburbs, two cities.

@c    21:28. And of the tribe of Issachar, Cesion, and Dabereth,

@c    21:29. And Jaramoth, and Engannim, with their suburbs, four cities.

@c    21:30. And of the tribe of Aser, Masal and Abdon,

@c    21:31. And Helcath, and Rohob, with their suburbs, four cities.

@c    21:32. Of the tribe also of Nephtali, Cedes in Galilee, one of the
@c    cities of refuge:  and Hammoth Dor, and Carthan, with their suburbs,
@c    three cities.

@c    21:33. All the cities of the families of Gerson, were thirteen, with
@c    their suburbs.

@c    21:34. And to the children of Merari, Levites of the inferior degree,
@c    by their families were given of the tribe of Zabulon, Jecnam and
@c    Cartha,

@c    21:35. And Damna and Naalol, four cities with their suburbs.

@c    21:36. Of the tribe of Ruben beyond the Jordan over against Jericho,
@c    Bosor in the wilderness, one of the cities of refuge, Misor and Jaser
@c    and Jethson and Mephaath, four cities with their suburbs.

@c    Four cities. . .There are no more, though there be five names:  for Misor
@c    is the same city as Bosor, which is to be observed in some other
@c    places, where the number of names exceeds the number of cities.

@c    21:37. Of the tribe of Gad, Ramoth in Galaad, one of the cities of
@c    refuge, and Manaim and Hesebon and Jaser, four cities with their
@c    suburbs,

@c    21:38. All the cities of the children of Merari by their families and
@c    kindreds, were twelve.

@c    21:39. So all the cities of the Levites within the possession of the
@c    children of Israel were forty-eight,

@c    21:40. With their suburbs, each distributed by the families.

@c    21:41. And the Lord God gave to Israel all the land that he had sworn
@c    to give to their fathers:  and they possessed it, and dwelt in it.

@c    21:42. And he gave them peace from all nations round about:  and none of
@c    their enemies durst stand against them, but were brought under their
@c    dominion.

@c    21:43. Not so much as one word, which he had promised to perform unto
@c    them, was made void, but all came to pass.



@c    Josue Chapter 22


@c    The tribes of Ruben and Gad, and half the tribe of Manasses return to
@c    their possessions.  They build an altar by the side of the Jordan, which
@c    alarms the other tribes.  An embassage is sent to them, to which they
@c    give a satisfactory answer.

@c    22:1. At the same time Josue called the Rubenites, and the Gadites, and
@c    the half tribe of Manasses,

@c    22:2. And said to them:  You have done all that Moses the servant of the
@c    Lord commanded you:  you have also obeyed me in all things,

@c    22:3. Neither have you left your brethren this long time, until this
@c    present day, keeping the commandment of the Lord your God.

@c    22:4. Therefore as the Lord your God hath given your brethren rest and
@c    peace, as he promised:  return, and go to your dwellings, and to the
@c    land of your possession, which Moses the servant of the Lord gave you
@c    beyond the Jordan:

@c    22:5. Yet so that you observe attentively, and in work fulfil the
@c    commandment and the law which Moses the servant of the Lord commanded
@c    you:  that you love the Lord your God, and walk in all his ways, and
@c    keep all his commandments, and cleave to him, and serve him with all
@c    your heart, and with all your soul.

@c    22:6. And Josue blessed them, and sent them away, and they returned to
@c    their dwellings.

@c    22:7. Now to half the tribe of Manasses, Moses had given a possession
@c    in Basan:  and therefore to the half that remained, Josue gave a lot
@c    among the rest of their brethren beyond the Jordan to the west.  And
@c    when he sent them away to their dwellings and had blessed them,

@c    22:8. He said to them:  With much substance and riches, you return to
@c    your settlements, with silver and gold, brass and iron, and variety of
@c    raiment:  divide the prey of your enemies with your brethren.

@c    22:9. So the children of Ruben, and the children of Gad, and the half
@c    tribe of Manasses returned, and parted from the children of Israel in
@c    Silo, which is in Chanaan, to go into Galaad the land of their
@c    possession, which they had obtained according to the commandment of the
@c    Lord by the hand of Moses.

@c    22:10. And when they were come to banks of the Jordan, in the land of
@c    Chanaan, they built an altar immensely great near the Jordan.

@c    22:11. And when the children of Israel had heard of it, and certain
@c    messengers brought them an account that the children of Ruben, and of
@c    Gad, and the half tribe of Manasses had built an altar in the land of
@c    Chanaan, upon the banks of the Jordan, over against the children of
@c    Israel:

@c    22:12. They all assembled in Silo, to go up and fight against them.

@c    22:13. And in the mean time they sent to them into the land of Galaad,
@c    Phinees the son of Eleazar the priest,

@c    22:14. And ten princes with him, one of every tribe.

@c    22:15. Who came to the children of Ruben, and of Gad, and the half
@c    tribe of Manasses, into the land of Galaad, and said to them:

@c    22:16. Thus saith all the people of the Lord:  What meaneth this
@c    transgression?  Why have you forsaken the Lord the God of Israel,
@c    building a sacrilegious altar, and revolting from the worship of him?

@c    22:17. Is it a small thing to you that you sinned with Beelphegor, and
@c    the stain of that crime remaineth in us to this day?  and many of the
@c    people perished.

@c    22:18. And you have forsaken the Lord to day, and to morrow his wrath
@c    will rage against all Israel.

@c    22:19. But if you think the land of your possession to be unclean, pass
@c    over to the land wherein is the tabernacle of the Lord, and dwell among
@c    us:  only depart not from the Lord, and from our society, by building an
@c    altar beside the altar of the Lord our God.

@c    22:20. Did not Achan the son of Zare transgress the commandment of the
@c    Lord, and his wrath lay upon all the people of Israel?  And he was but
@c    one man, and would to God he alone had perished in his wickedness.

@c    22:21. And the children of Ruben, and of Gad, and of the half tribe of
@c    Manasses answered the princes of the embassage of Israel:

@c    22:22. The Lord the most mighty God, the Lord the most mighty God, he
@c    knoweth, and Israel also shall understand:  If with the design of
@c    transgression we have set up this altar, let him not save us, but
@c    punish us immediately:

@c    22:23. And if we did it with that mind, that we might lay upon it
@c    holocausts, and sacrifice, and victims of peace offerings, let him
@c    require and judge:

@c    22:24. And not rather with this thought and design, that we should say:
@c    To morrow your children will say to our children:  What have you to do
@c    with the Lord the God of Israel?

@c    22:25. The Lord hath put the river Jordan for a border between us and
@c    you, O ye children of Ruben, and ye children of Gad:  and therefore you
@c    have no part in the Lord.  And by this occasion your children shall turn
@c    away our children from the fear of the Lord.  We therefore thought it
@c    best,

@c    22:26. And said:  Let us build us an altar, not for holocausts, nor to
@c    offer victims,

@c    22:27. But for a testimony between us and you, and our posterity and
@c    yours, that we may serve the Lord, and that we may have a right to
@c    offer both holocausts, and victims and sacrifices of peace offerings:
@c    and that your children to morrow may not say to our children:  You have
@c    no part in the Lord.

@c    22:28. And if they will say so, they shall answer them:  Behold the
@c    altar of the Lord, which our fathers made, not for holocausts, nor for
@c    sacrifice, but for a testimony between us and you.

@c    22:29. God keep us from any such wickedness that we should revolt from
@c    the Lord, and leave off following his steps, by building an altar to
@c    offer holocausts, and sacrifices, and victims, beside the altar of the
@c    Lord our God, which is erected before his tabernacle.

@c    22:30. And when Phinees the priest, and the princes of the embassage,
@c    who were with him, had heard this, they were satisfied:  and they
@c    admitted most willingly the words of the children of Ruben, and Gad,
@c    and of the half tribe of Manasses,

@c    22:31. And Phinees the priest the son of Eleazar said to them:  Now we
@c    know that the Lord is with us, because you are not guilty of this
@c    revolt, and you have delivered the children of Israel from the hand of
@c    the Lord.

@c    22:32. And he returned with the princes from the children of Ruben and
@c    Gad, out of the land of Galaad, into the land of Chanaan, to the
@c    children of Israel, and brought them word again.

@c    22:33. And the saying pleased all that heard it.  And the children of
@c    Israel praised God, and they no longer said that they would go up
@c    against them, and fight, and destroy the land of their possession.

@c    22:34. And the children of Ruben, and the children of Gad called the
@c    altar which they had built, Our testimony, that the Lord is God,



@c    Josue Chapter 23


@c    Josue being old admonisheth the people to keep God's commandments:  and
@c    to avoid marriages and all society with the Gentiles for fear of being
@c    brought to idolatry.

@c    23:1. And when a long time was passed, after that the Lord had given
@c    peace to Israel, all the nations round about being subdued.  and Josue
@c    being now old, and far advanced in years:

@c    23:2. Josue called for all Israel, and for the elders, and for the
@c    princes, and for the judges, and for the masters, and said to them:  I
@c    am old, and far advanced in years,

@c    23:3. And you see all that the Lord your God hath done to all the
@c    nations round about, how he himself hath fought for you:

@c    23:4. And now since he hath divided to you by lot all the land, from
@c    the east of the Jordan unto the great sea, ant many nations yet remain:

@c    23:5. The Lord your God will destroy them, and take them away from
@c    before your face, and you shall possess the land as he hath promised
@c    you.

@c    23:6. Only take courage, and be careful to observe all things that are
@c    written in the book of the law of Moses:  and turn not aside from them
@c    neither to the right hand nor to the left:

@c    23:7. Lest after that you are come in among the Gentiles, who will
@c    remain among you, you should swear by the name of their gods, and serve
@c    them, and adore them:

@c    23:8. But cleave ye unto the Lord your God, as you have done until this
@c    day.

@c    23:9. And then the Lord God will take away before your eyes nations
@c    that are great and very strong, and no man shall be able to resist you.

@c    23:10. One of you shall chase a thousand men of the enemies:  because
@c    the Lord your God himself will fight for you, as he hath promised.

@c    23:11. This only take care of with all diligence, that you love the
@c    Lord your God.

@c    23:12. But if you will embrace the errors of these nations that dwell
@c    among you, and make marriages with them, and join friendships:

@c    23:13. Know ye for a certainty that the Lord your God will not destroy
@c    them before your face, but they shall be a pit and a snare in your way,
@c    and a stumbling-block at your side, and stakes in your eyes, till he
@c    take you away and destroy you from off this excellent land, which he
@c    hath given you.

@c    23:14. Behold this day I am going into the way of all the earth, and
@c    you shall know with all your mind that of all the words which the Lord
@c    promised to perform for you, not one hath failed,

@c    23:15. Therefore as he hath fulfilled in deed, what he promised, and
@c    all things prosperous have come:  so will he bring upon you all the
@c    evils he hath threatened, till he take you away and destroy you from
@c    off this excellent land, which he hath given you,

@c    23:16. When you shall have transgressed the covenant of the Lord your
@c    God, which he hath made with you, and shall have served strange gods,
@c    and adored them:  then shall the indignation of the Lord rise up quickly
@c    and speedily against you, and you shall be taken away from this
@c    excellent land, which he hath delivered to you.



@c    Josue Chapter 24


@c    Josue assembleth the people, and reneweth the covenant between them and
@c    God.  His death and burial.

@c    24:1. And Josue gathered together all the tribes of Israel in Sichem,
@c    and called for the ancients, and the princes and the judges, and the
@c    masters:  and they stood in the sight of the Lord:

@c    24:2. And he spoke thus to the people:  Thus saith the Lord the God of
@c    Israel:  Your fathers dwelt of old on the other side of the river, Thare
@c    the father of Abraham, and Nachor:  and they served strange gods.

@c    Of the river. . .The Euphrates.

@c    24:3. And I took your father Abraham from the borders of Mesopotamia:
@c    and brought him into the land of Chanaan:  and I multiplied his seed,

@c    24:4. And gave him Isaac:  and to him again I gave Jacob and Esau.  And I
@c    gave to Esau mount Seir for his possession:  but Jacob and his children
@c    went down into Egypt.

@c    24:5. And I sent Moses and Aaron, and I struck Egypt with many signs
@c    and wonders.

@c    24:6. And I brought you and your fathers out of Egypt, and you came to
@c    the sea:  and the Egyptians pursued your fathers with chariots and
@c    horsemen, as far as the Red Sea.

@c    24:7. And the children of Israel cried to the Lord:  and he put darkness
@c    between you and the Egyptians, and brought the sea upon them, and
@c    covered them.  Your eyes saw all that I did in Egypt, and you dwelt in
@c    the wilderness a long time.

@c    24:8. And I brought you into the land of the Amorrhite, who dwelt
@c    beyond the Jordan.  And when they fought against you, I delivered them
@c    into your hands, and you possessed their land, and slew them.

@c    24:9. And Balac son of Sephor king of Moab arose and fought against
@c    Israel.  And he sent and called for Balaam son of Beor, to curse you:

@c    24:10. And I would not hear him, but on the contrary I blessed you by
@c    him, and I delivered you out of his hand.

@c    24:11. And you passed over the Jordan, and you came to Jericho.  And the
@c    men of that city fought against you, the Amorrhite, and the Pherezite,
@c    and the Chanaanite, and the Hethite, and the Gergesite, and the Hevite,
@c    and the Jebusite:  and I delivered them into your hands.

@c    24:12. And I sent before you and I drove them out from their places,
@c    the two kings of the Amorrhites, not with thy sword nor with thy bow,

@c    24:13. And I gave you a land, in which you had not laboured, and cities
@c    to dwell in which you built not, vineyards and oliveyards, which you
@c    planted not.

@c    24:14. Now therefore fear the Lord, and serve him with a perfect and
@c    most sincere heart:  and put away the gods which your fathers served in
@c    Mesopotamia and in Egypt, and serve the Lord.

@c    24:15. But if it seem evil to you to serve the Lord, you have your
@c    choice:  choose this day that which pleaseth you, whom you would rather
@c    serve, whether the gods which your fathers served in Mesopotamia, or
@c    the gods of the Amorrhites, in whose land you dwell:  but as for me and
@c    my house we will serve thee Lord,

@c    24:16. And the people answered, and said, God forbid we should leave
@c    the Lord, and serve strange gods.

@c    24:17. The Lord our God he brought us and our fathers out of the land
@c    of Egypt, out of the house of bondage:  and did very great signs in our
@c    sight, and preserved us in all the way by which we journeyed, and among
@c    all the people through whom we passed.

@c    24:18. And he hath cast out all the nations, the Amorrhite the
@c    inhabitant of the land into which we are come.  Therefore we will serve
@c    the Lord, for he is our God.

@c    24:19. And Josue said to the people:  You will not be able to serve the
@c    Lord:  for he is a holy God, and mighty and jealous, and will not
@c    forgive your wickedness and sins.

@c    You will not be able to serve the Lord, etc. . .This was not said by way
@c    of discouraging them; but rather to make them more earnest and
@c    resolute, by setting before them the greatness of the undertaking, and
@c    the courage and constancy necessary to go through with it.

@c    24:20. If you leave the Lord, and serve strange gods, he will turn, and
@c    will afflict you, and will destroy you after all the good he hath done
@c    you.

@c    24:21. And the people said to Josue:  No, it shall not be so as thou
@c    sayest, but we will serve the Lord.

@c    24:22. And Josue said to the people, You are witnesses, that you
@c    yourselves have chosen you the Lord to serve him.  And they answered:  We
@c    are witnesses.

@c    24:23. Now therefore, said he, put away strange gods from among you,
@c    and incline your hearts to the Lord the God of Israel.

@c    24:24. And the people said to Josue:  We will serve the Lord our God,
@c    and we will be obedient to his commandments.

@c    24:25. Josue therefore on that day made a covenant, and set before the
@c    people commandments and judgments in Sichem.

@c    24:26. And he wrote all these things in the volume of the law of the
@c    Lord:  and he took a great stone, and set it under the oak that was in
@c    the sanctuary of the Lord.

@c    24:27. And he said to all the people:  Behold this stone shall be a
@c    testimony unto you, that it hath heard all the words of the Lord, which
@c    he hath spoken to you:  lest perhaps hereafter you will deny it, and lie
@c    to the Lord your God.

@c    It hath heard. . .This is a figure of speech, by which sensation is
@c    attributed to inanimate things; and they are called upon, as it were,
@c    to bear witness in favour of the great Creator, whom they on their part
@c    constantly obey.

@c    24:28. And he sent the people away every one to their own possession,

@c    24:29. And after these things Josue the son of Nun the servant of the
@c    Lord died, being a hundred and ten years old:

@c    And after, etc. . .If Josue wrote this book, as is commonly believed,
@c    these last verses were added by Samuel, or some other prophet.

@c    24:30. And they buried him in the border of his possession in
@c    Thamnathsare, which is situate in mount Ephraim, on the north side of
@c    mount Gaas.

@c    24:31. And Israel served the Lord all the days of Josue, and of the
@c    ancients that lived a long time after Josue, and that had known all the
@c    works of the Lord which he had done in Israel.

@c    24:32. And the bones of Joseph which the children of Israel had taken
@c    out of Egypt, they buried in Sichem, in that part of the field which
@c    Jacob had bought of the sons of Hemor the father of Sichem, for a
@c    hundred young ewes, and it was in the possession of the sons of Joseph.

@c    24:33. Eleazar also the son of Aaron died:  and they buried him in
@c    Gabaath that belongeth to Phinees his son, which was given him in mount
@c    Ephraim.
