@c    THE BOOK OF JUDGES



@c    This Book is called JUDGES, because it contains the history of what
@c    passed under the government of the judges, who ruled Israel before they
@c    had kings.  The writer of it, according to the more general opinion, was
@c    the prophet Samuel.



@c    Judges Chapter 1


@c    The expedition and victory of Juda against the Chanaanites:  who are
@c    tolerated in many places.

@c    1:1. After the death of Josue, the children of Israel consulted the
@c    Lord, saying:  Who shall go up before us against the Chanaanite, and
@c    shall be the leader of the war?

@c    1:2. And the Lord said:  Juda shall go up:  behold I have delivered the
@c    land into his hands.

@c    1:3. And Juda said to Simeon, his brother:  Come up with me into my lot,
@c    and fight against the Chanaanite, that I also may go along with thee
@c    into thy lot.  And Simeon went with him.

@c    1:4. And Juda went up, and the Lord delivered the Chanaanite, and the
@c    Pherezite into their hands:  and they slew of them in Bezec ten thousand
@c    men.

@c    1:5. And they found Adonibezec in Bezec, and fought against him, and
@c    they defeated the Chanaanite, and the Pherezite.

@c    1:6. And Adonibezec fled:  and they pursued after him and took him, and
@c    cut off his fingers and toes.

@c    1:7. And Adonibezec said:  Seventy kings, having their fingers and toes
@c    cut off, gathered up the leavings of the meat under my table:  as I have
@c    done, so hath God requited me.  And they brought him to Jerusalem, and
@c    he died there.

@c    1:8. And the children of Juda besieging Jerusalem, took it, and put it
@c    to the sword, and set the whole city on fire.

@c    Jerusalem. . .This city was divided into two; one part was called Jebus,
@c    the other Salem:  the one was in the tribe of Juda, the other in the
@c    tribe of Benjamin.  After it was taken and burnt by the men of Juda, it
@c    was quickly rebuilt again by the Jebusites, as we may gather from ver.
@c    21; and continued in their possession till it was taken by king David.

@c    1:9. And afterwards they went down and fought against the Chanaanite,
@c    who dwelt in the mountains, and in the south, and in the plains.

@c    1:10. And Juda going forward against the Chanaanite, that dwelt in
@c    Hebron, (the name whereof was in former times Cariath-Arbe) slew Sesai,
@c    and Ahiman, and Tholmai:

@c    Hebron. . .This expedition against Hebron, etc. is the same as is
@c    related, Jos. 15.24.  It is here repeated, to give the reader at once a
@c    short sketch of all the achievements of the tribe of Juda against the
@c    Chanaanites.

@c    1:11. And departing from thence, he went to the inhabitants of Dabir,
@c    the ancient name of which was Cariath-Sepher, that is, the city of
@c    letters.

@c    The city of letters. . .Perhaps so called from some famous school, or
@c    library, kept there.

@c    1:12. And Caleb said:  He that shall take Cariath-Sepher, and lay it
@c    waste, to him will I give my daughter Axa to wife.

@c    1:13. And Othoniel, the son of Cenez, the younger brother of Caleb,
@c    having taken it, he gave him Axa his daughter to wife.

@c    1:14. And as she was going on her way, her husband admonished her to
@c    ask a field of her father.  And as she sighed sitting on her ass, Caleb
@c    said to her:  What aileth thee?

@c    1:15. But she answered:  Give me a blessing, for thou hast given me a
@c    dry land:  give me also a watery land So Caleb gave her the upper and
@c    the nether watery ground.

@c    1:16. And the children of the Cinite, the kinsman of Moses, went up
@c    from the city of palms, with the children of Juda, into the wilderness
@c    of his lot, which is at the south side of Arad, and they dwelt with
@c    him.

@c    The Cinite. . .Jethro the father in law of Moses was called Cinoeus, or
@c    the Cinite; and his children who came along with the children of Israel
@c    settled themselves among them in the land of Chanaan, embracing their
@c    worship and religion.  From these the Rechabites sprung, of whom see
@c    Jer. 35.--Ibid.  The city of palms. . .Jericho, so called from the
@c    abundance of palm trees.

@c    1:17. And Juda went with Simeon, his brother, and they together
@c    defeated the Chanaanites that dwelt in Sephaath, and slew them.  And the
@c    name of the city was called Horma, that is, Anathema.

@c    1:18. And Juda took Gaza, with its confines, and Ascalon, and Accaron,
@c    with their confines.

@c    Gaza, etc. . .These were three of the principal cities of the
@c    Philistines, famous both in sacred and profane history.  They were taken
@c    at this time by the Israelites:  but as they took no care to put
@c    garrisons in them, the Philistines soon recovered them.

@c    1:19. And the Lord was with Juda, and he possessed the hill country:
@c    but was not able to destroy the inhabitants of the valley, because they
@c    had many chariots armed with scythes.

@c    Was not able, etc. . .Through a cowardly fear of their chariots armed
@c    with hooks and scythes, and for want of confidence in God.

@c    1:20. And they gave Hebron to Caleb, as Moses had said, who destroyed
@c    out of it the three sons of Enac.

@c    1:21. But the sons of Benjamin did not destroy the Jebusites that
@c    inhabited Jerusalem:  and the Jebusite hath dwelt with the sons of
@c    Benjamin in Jerusalem until this present day.

@c    1:22. The house of Joseph also went up against Bethel, and the Lord was
@c    with them.

@c    1:23. For when they were besieging the city, which before was called
@c    Luza,

@c    1:24. They saw a man coming out of the city, and they said to him:  Shew
@c    us the entrance into the city, and we will shew thee mercy.

@c    1:25. And when he had shewed them, they smote the city with the edge of
@c    the sword:  but that man, and all his kindred, they let go:

@c    1:26. Who being sent away, went into the land of Hetthim, and built
@c    there a city, and called it Luza:  which is so called until this day.

@c    1:27. Manasses also did not destroy Bethsan, and Thanac, with their
@c    villages; nor the inhabitants of Dor, and Jeblaam, and Mageddo, with
@c    their villages.  And the Chanaanite began to dwell with them.

@c    1:28. But after Israel was grown strong, he made them tributaries, and
@c    would not destroy them.

@c    1:29. Ephraim also did not slay the Chanaanite that dwelt in Gazer, bnt
@c    dwelt with him.

@c    1:30. Zabulon destroyed not the inhabitants of Cetron, and Naalol:  but
@c    the Chanaanite dwelt among them, and became their tributary.

@c    1:31. Aser also destroyed not the inhabitants of Accho, and of Sidon,
@c    of Ahalab, and of Achazib, and of Helba, and of Aphec, and of Rohob:

@c    1:32. And he dwelt in the midst of the Chanaanites, the inhabitants of
@c    that land, and did not slay them.

@c    1:33. Nephthali also destroyed not the inhabitants of Bethsames, and of
@c    Bethanath:  and he dwelt in the midst of the Chanaanites, the
@c    inhabitants of the land, and the Bethsamites and Bethanites were
@c    tributaries to him.

@c    1:34. And the Amorrhite straitened the children of Dan in the mountain,
@c    and gave them not a place to go down to the plain:

@c    1:35. And he dwelt in the mountain Hares, that is, of potsherds, in
@c    Aialon and Salebim.  And the hand of the house of Joseph was heavy upon
@c    him, and he became tributary to him.

@c    He dwelt. . .That is, the Amorrhite.

@c    1:36. And the border of the Amorrhite was from the ascent of the
@c    scorpion, the rock, and the higher places.



@c    Judges Chapter 2


@c    An angel reproveth Israel.  They weep for their sins.  After the death of
@c    Josue, they often fall, and repenting are delivered from their
@c    afflictions, but still fall worse and worse.

@c    2:1. And an angel of the Lord went up from Galgal to the place of
@c    weepers, and said:  I made you go out of Egypt, and have brought you
@c    into the land for which I swore to your fathers:  and I promised that I
@c    would not make void my covenant with you for ever:

@c    An angel. . .Taking the shape of a man.

@c    2:2. On condition that you should not make a league with the
@c    inhabitants of this land, but should throw down their altars:  and you
@c    would not hear my voice:  why have you done this?

@c    2:3. Wherefore I would not destroy them from before your face; that you
@c    may have enemies, and their gods may be your ruin.

@c    2:4. And when the angel of the Lord spoke these words to all the
@c    children of Israel:  they lifted up their voice, and wept.

@c    2:5. And the name of that place was called, The place of weepers, or of
@c    tears:  and there they offered sacrifices to the Lord.

@c    2:6. And Josue sent away the people, and the children of Israel went
@c    every one to his own possession to hold it:

@c    And Josue, etc. . .This is here inserted out of Jos. 24, by way of
@c    recapitulation of what had happened before, and by way of an
@c    introduction to that which follows.

@c    2:7. And they served the Lord all his days, and the days of the
@c    ancients, that lived a long time after him, and who knew all the works
@c    of the Lord, which he had done for Israel.

@c    2:8. And Josue, the son of Nun, the servant of the Lord, died, being a
@c    hundred and ten years old;

@c    2:9. And they buried him in the borders of his possession in
@c    Thamnathsare, in Mount Ephraim, on the north side of Mount Gaas.

@c    2:10. And all that generation was gathered to their fathers:  and there
@c    arose others that knew not the Lord and the works which he had done for
@c    Israel.

@c    2:11. And the children of Israel did evil in the sight of the Lord, and
@c    they served Baalim

@c    2:12. And they left the Lord, the God of their fathers, who had brought
@c    them out of the land of Egypt:  and they followed strange gods, and the
@c    gods of the people that dwelt round about them, and they adored them:
@c    and they provoked the Lord to anger,

@c    They followed strange gods. . .What is here said of the children of
@c    Israel, as to their falling so often into idolatry, is to be understood
@c    of a great part of them; but not so universally, as if the true worship
@c    of God was ever quite abolished among them:  for the succession of the
@c    true church and religion was kept up all this time by the priests and
@c    Levites, at least in the house of God in Silo.

@c    2:13. Forsaking him, and serving Baal and Astaroth

@c    2:14. And the Lord being angry against Israel, delivered them into the
@c    hands of plunderers:  who took them and sold them to their enemies, that
@c    dwelt round about:  neither could they stand against their enemies:

@c    2:15. But whithersoever they meant to go, the hand of the Lord was upon
@c    them, as he had said, and as he had sworn to them:  and they were
@c    greatly distressed.

@c    2:16. And the Lord raised up judges, to deliver them from the hands of
@c    those that oppressed them:  but they would not hearken to them,

@c    2:17. Committing fornication with strange gods, and adoring them.  They
@c    quickly forsook the way, in which their fathers had walked:  and hearing
@c    the commandments of the Lord, they did all things contrary.

@c    2:18. And when the Lord raised them up judges, in their days, he was
@c    moved to mercy, and heard the groanings of the afflicted, and delivered
@c    them from the slaughter of the oppressors.

@c    2:19. But after the judge was dead, they returned, and did much worse
@c    things than their fathers had done, following strange gods, serving
@c    them, and adoring them.  They left not their own inventions, and the
@c    stubborn way, by which they were accustomed to walk.

@c    2:20. And the wrath of the Lord was kindled against Israel, and he
@c    said:  Behold this nation hath made void my covenant, which I had made
@c    with their fathers, and hath despised to hearken to my voice:

@c    2:21. I also will not destroy the nations which Josue left when he
@c    died:

@c    2:22. That through them I may try Israel, whether they will keep the
@c    way of the Lord, and walk in it, as their fathers kept it, or not.

@c    2:23. The Lord therefore left all these nations, and would not quickly
@c    destroy them, neither did he deliver them into the hands of Josue.



@c    Judges Chapter 3


@c    The people falling into idolatry are oppressed by their enemies; but
@c    repenting are delivered by Othoniel, Aod, and Samgar.

@c    3:1. These are the nations which the Lord left, that by them he might
@c    instruct Israel, and all that had not known the wars of the
@c    Chanaanites:

@c    3:2. That afterwards their children might learn to fight with their
@c    enemies, and to be trained up to war:

@c    3:3. The five princes of the Philistines, and all the Chanaanites, and
@c    the Sidonians, and the Hevites that dwelt in Mount Libanus, from Mount
@c    Baal Hermon to the entering into Emath.

@c    3:4. And he left them, that he might try Israel by them, whether they
@c    would hear the commandments of the Lord, which he had commanded their
@c    fathers, by the hand of Moses, or not.

@c    3:5. So the children of Israel dwelt in the midst of the Chanaanite,
@c    and the Hethite, and the Amorrhite, and the Pherezite, and the Hevite,
@c    and the Jebusite:

@c    3:6. And they took their daughters to wives, and they gave their own
@c    daughters to their sons, and they served their gods.

@c    3:7. And they did evil in the sight of the Lord, and they forgot their
@c    God, and served Baalim and Astaroth.

@c    3:8. And the Lord being angry with Israel, delivered them into the
@c    hands of Chusan Rasathaim, king of Mesopotamia, and they served him
@c    eight years.

@c    Mesopotamia. . .In Hebrew Aramnaharim.  Syria of the two rivers:  so
@c    called because it lies between the Euphrates and the Tigris.  It is
@c    absolutely called Syria, ver. 10.

@c    3:9. And they cried to the Lord, who raised them up a saviour, and
@c    delivered them; to wit, Othoniel, the son of Cenez, the younger brother
@c    of Caleb:

@c    3:10. And the spirit of the Lord was in him, and he judged Israel.  And
@c    he went out to fight, and the Lord delivered Chusan Rasathaim, king of
@c    Syria, and he overthrew him:

@c    3:11. And the land rested forty years, and Othoniel, the son of Cenez,
@c    died.

@c    3:12. And the children of Israel did evil again in the sight of the
@c    Lord:  who strengthened against them Eglon, king of Moab:  because they
@c    did evil in his sight.

@c    3:13. And he joined to him the children of Ammon, and Amalec:  and he
@c    went and overthrew Israel, and possessed the city of palm trees.

@c    3:14. And the children of Israel served Eglon, king of Moab, eighteen
@c    years.

@c    3:15. And afterwards they cried to the Lord, who raised them up a
@c    saviour, called Aod, the son of Cera, the son of Jemini, who used the
@c    left hand as well as the right.  And the children of Israel sent
@c    presents to Eglon, king of Moab, by him.

@c    3:16. And he made himself a two-edged sword, with a haft in the midst
@c    of the length of the palm of the hand, and was girded therewith, under
@c    his garment, on the right thigh.

@c    3:17. And he presented the gifts to Eglon, king of Moab Now Eglon was
@c    exceeding fat.

@c    3:18. And when he had presented the gifts unto him he followed his
@c    companions that came along with him.

@c    3:19. Then returning from Galgal, where the idols were, he said to the
@c    king:  I have a secret message to thee, O king.  And he commanded
@c    silence:  and all being gone out that were about him,

@c    3:20. Aod went in to him:  now he was sitting in a summer parlour alone,
@c    and he said:  I have a word from God to thee.  And he forthwith rose up
@c    from his throne.

@c    A word from God, etc. . .What Aod, who was judge and chief magistrate of
@c    Israel, did on this occasion, was by a special inspiration of God:  but
@c    such things are not to be imitated by private men.

@c    3:21. And Aod put forth his left hand, and took the dagger from his
@c    right thigh, and thrust it into his belly,

@c    3:22. With such force that the haft went in after the blade into the
@c    wound, and was closed up with the abundance of fat.  So that he did not
@c    draw out the dagger, but left it in the body as he had struck it in:
@c    and forthwith, by the secret parts of nature, the excrements of the
@c    belly came out.

@c    3:23. And Aod carefully shutting the doors of the parlour, and locking
@c    them,

@c    3:24. Went out by a postern door.  And the king's servants going in, saw
@c    the doors of the parlour shut, and they said:  Perhaps he is easing
@c    nature in his summer parlour.

@c    3:25. And waiting a long time, till they were ashamed, and seeing that
@c    no man opened the door, they took a key:  and opening, they found their
@c    lord lying dead on the ground.

@c    3:26. But Aod, while they were in confusion, escaped, and passed by the
@c    place of the idols from whence he had returned.  And he came to Seirath:

@c    3:27. And forthwith he sounded the trumpet in Mount Ephraim:  and the
@c    children of Israel went down with him, he himself going in the front.

@c    3:28. And he said to them:  Follow me:  for the Lord hath delivered our
@c    enemies, the Moabites, into our hands.  And they went down after him,
@c    and seized upon the fords of the Jordan, which are in the way to Moab:
@c    and they suffered no man to pass over:

@c    3:29. But they slew of the Moabites at that time, about ten thousand,
@c    all strong and valiant men:  none of them could escape.

@c    3:30. And Moab was humbled that day under the hand of Israel:  and the
@c    land rested eighty years.

@c    3:31. After him was Samgar, the son of Anath, who slew of the
@c    Philistines six hundred men with a ploughshare:  and he also defended
@c    Israel.



@c    Judges Chapter 4


@c    Debbora and Barac deliver Israel from Jabin and Sisara, Jahal killeth
@c    Sisara.

@c    4:1. And the children of Israel again did evil in the sight of the Lord
@c    after the death of Aod:

@c    4:2. And the Lord delivered them up into the hands of Jabin, king of
@c    Chanaan, who reigned in Asor:  and he had a general of his army named
@c    Sisara, and he dwelt in Haroseth of the Gentiles.

@c    4:3. And the children of Israel cried to the Lord:  for he had nine
@c    hundred chariots set with scythes and for twenty years had grievously
@c    oppressed them.

@c    4:4. And there was at that time Debbora, a prophetess, the wife of
@c    Lapidoth, who judged the people.

@c    4:5. And she sat under a palm tree, which was called by her name,
@c    between Rama and Bethel, in Mount Ephraim:  and the children of Israel
@c    came up to her for all judgment.

@c    4:6. And she sent and called Barac, the Son of Abinoem, out of Cedes,
@c    in Nephthali:  and she said to him:  The Lord God of Israel hath
@c    commanded thee:  Go, and lead an army to Mount Thabor, and thou shalt
@c    take with thee ten thousand fighting men of the children of Nephthali,
@c    and of the children of Zabulon:

@c    4:7. And I will bring unto thee in the place of the torrent Cison,
@c    Sisara, the general of Jabin's army, and his chariots, and all his
@c    multitude, and will deliver them into thy hand.

@c    4:8. And Barac said to her:  If thou wilt come with me, I will go:  if
@c    thou wilt not come with me, I will not go.

@c    4:9. She said to him:  I will go, indeed, with thee, but at this time
@c    the victory shall not be attributed to thee, because Sisara shall be
@c    delivered into the hand of a woman.  Debbora therefore arose, and went
@c    with Barac to Cedes.

@c    4:10. And he called unto him Zabulon and Nephthali, and went up with
@c    ten thousand fighting men, having Debbora in his company.

@c    4:11. Now Haber, the Cinite, had some time before departed from the
@c    rest of the Cinites, his brethren, the sons of Hobab, the kinsman of
@c    Moses:  and had pitched his tents unto the valley, which is called
@c    Sennim, and was near Cedes.

@c    4:12. And it was told Sisara, that Barac, the son of Abinoem, was gone
@c    up to Mount Thabor:

@c    4:13. And he gathered together his nine hundred chariots armed with
@c    scythes, and all his army, from Haroseth of the Gentiles, to the
@c    torrent Cison.

@c    4:14. And Debbora said to Barac:  Arise, for this is the day wherein the
@c    Lord hath delivered Sisara into thy hands:  behold, he is thy leader.
@c    And Barac went down from Mount Thabor, and ten thousand fighting men
@c    with him.

@c    4:15. And the Lord struck a terror into Sisara, and all his chariots,
@c    and all his multitude, with the edge of the sword, at the sight of
@c    Barac; insomuch, that Sisara leaping down from off his chariot, fled
@c    away on foot,

@c    4:16. And Barac pursued after the fleeing chariots, and the army, unto
@c    Haroseth of the Gentiles; and all the multitude of the enemies was
@c    utterly destroyed.

@c    4:17. But Sisara fleeing, came to the tent of Jahel, the wife of Haber,
@c    the Cinite, for there was peace between Jabin, the king of Asor, and
@c    the house of Haber, the Cinite.

@c    4:18. And Jahel went forth to meet Sisara, and said to him:  Come in to
@c    me, my lord; come in, fear not.  He went into her tent, and being
@c    covered by her with a cloak,

@c    4:19. Said to her:  Give me, I beseech thee, a little water, for I am
@c    very thirsty.  She opened a bottle of milk, and gave him to drink, and
@c    covered him.

@c    4:20. And Sisara said to her:  Stand before the door of the tent, and
@c    when any shall come and inquire of thee, saying:  Is there any man here?
@c    thou shalt say:  There is none.

@c    4:21. So Jahel, Haber's wife, took a nail of the tent, and taking also
@c    a hammer:  and going in softly, and with silence, she put the nail upon
@c    the temples of his head, and striking it with the hammer, drove it
@c    through his brain fast into the ground:  and so passing from deep sleep
@c    to death, he fainted away and died.

@c    4:22. And behold, Barac came pursuing after Sisara:  and Jahel went out
@c    to meet him, and said to him:  Come, and I will shew thee the man whom
@c    thou seekest.  And when he came into her tent, he saw Sisara lying dead,
@c    and the nail fastened in his temples.

@c    4:23. So God that day humbled Jabin, the king of Chanaan, before the
@c    children of Israel:

@c    4:24. Who grew daily stronger, and with a mighty hand overpowered
@c    Jabin, king of Chanaan, till they quite destroyed him.



@c    Judges Chapter 5


@c    The canticle of Debbora and Barac after their victory.

@c    5:1. In that day Debbora and Barac, son of Abinoem, sung, and said:

@c    5:2. O you of Israel, that have willingly offered your lives to danger,
@c    bless the Lord.

@c    5:3. Hear, O ye kings, give ear, O ye princes:  It is I, it is I, that
@c    will sing to the Lord, I will sing to the Lord, the God of Israel.

@c    5:4. O Lord, when thou wentest out of Seir, and passedst by the regions
@c    of Edom, the earth trembled, and the heavens and clouds dropped water.

@c    5:5. The mountains melted before the face of the Lord, and Sinai before
@c    the face of the Lord the God of Israel.

@c    5:6. In the days of Samgar, the son of Anath, in the days of Jahel, the
@c    paths rested:  and they that went by them, walked through bye-ways.

@c    The paths rested. . .The ways to the sanctuary of God were unfrequented:
@c    and men walked in the by-ways of error and sin.

@c    5:7. The valiant men ceased, and rested in Israel:  until Debbora arose,
@c    a mother arose in Israel.

@c    5:8. The Lord chose new wars, and he himself overthrew the gates of the
@c    enemies:  a shield and spear was not seen among forty thousand of
@c    Israel.

@c    5:9. My heart loveth the princes of Israel:  O you, that of your own
@c    good will offered yourselves to danger, bless the Lord.

@c    5:10.  Speak, you that ride upon fair asses, and you that sit in
@c    judgment, and walk in the way.

@c    5:11. Where the chariots were dashed together, and the army of the
@c    enemies was choked, there let the justices of the Lord be rehearsed,
@c    and his clemency towards the brave men of Israel:  then the people of
@c    the Lord went down to the gates, and obtained the sovereignty.

@c    5:12. Arise, arise, O Debbora, arise, arise, and utter a canticle.
@c    Arise, Barac, and take hold of thy captives, O son of Abinoem.

@c    5:13. The remnants of the people are saved, the Lord hath fought among
@c    the valiant ones.

@c    5:14. Out of Ephraim he destroyed them into Amalec, and after him out
@c    of Benjamin into thy people, O Amalec:  Out of Machir there came down
@c    princes, and out of Zabulon they that led the army to fight.

@c    Out of Ephraim, etc. . .The enemies straggling in their flight were
@c    destroyed, as they were running through the land of Ephraim, and of
@c    Benjamin, which lies after, that is beyond Ephraim:  and so on to the
@c    very confines of Amalec.  Or, it alludes to former victories of the
@c    people of God, particularly that which was freshest in memory, when the
@c    men of Ephraim and Benjamin, with Aod at their head, overthrew their
@c    enemies the Moabites with the Amalecites their allies.  See chap.
@c    3.--Ibid.  Machir. . .The tribe of Manasses, whose eldest son was Machir.

@c    5:15. The captains of Issachar were with Debbora, and followed the
@c    steps of Barac, who exposed himself to danger, as one going headlong,
@c    and into a pit.  Ruben being divided against himself, there was found a
@c    strife of courageous men.

@c    Divided against himself, etc. . .By this it seems that the valient men
@c    of the tribe of Ruben were divided in their sentiments, with relation
@c    to this war; which division kept them at home within their own borders,
@c    to hear the bleating of their flocks.

@c    5:16. Why dwellest thou between two borders, that thou mayst hear the
@c    bleatings of the flocks?  Ruben being divided against himself, there was
@c    found a strife of courageous men.

@c    5:17. Galaad rested beyond the Jordan, and Dan applied himself to
@c    ships:  Aser dwelt on the sea shore, and abode in the havens.

@c    5:18. But Zabulon and Nephthali offered their lives to death in the
@c    region of Merome.

@c    5:19. The kings came and fought, the kings of Chanaan fought in Thanac,
@c    by the waters of Mageddo and yet they took no spoils.

@c    5:20. There was war made against them from heaven:  the stars, remaining
@c    in their order and courses, fought against Sisara.

@c    5:21. The torrent of Cison dragged their carcasses, the torrent of
@c    Cadumim, the torrent of Cison:  tread thou, my soul, upon the strong
@c    ones.

@c    5:22. The hoofs of the horses were broken whilst the stoutest of the
@c    enemies fled amain, and fell headlong down.

@c    5:23. Curse ye the land of Meroz, said the angel of the Lord:  curse the
@c    inhabitants thereof, because they came not to the help of the Lord, to
@c    help his most valiant men.

@c    Meroz. . .Where this land of Meroz was, which is here laid under a
@c    curse, we cannot find:  nor is there mention of it anywhere else in holy
@c    writ.  In the spiritual sense, they are cursed who refuse to assist the
@c    people of God in their warfare against their spiritual enemies.

@c    5:24. Blessed among women be Jahel, the wife of Haber the Cinite, and
@c    blessed be she in her tent.

@c    5:25. He asked her water, and she gave him milk, and offered him butter
@c    in a dish fit for princes.

@c    5:26. She put her left hand to the nail, and her right hand to the
@c    workman's hammer, and she struck Sisara, seeking in his head a place
@c    for the wound, and strongly piercing through his temples.

@c    5:27. Between her feet he fell:  he fainted, and he died:  he rolled
@c    before her feet, and there he lay lifeless and wretched.

@c    5:28. His mother looked out at a window, and howled:  and she spoke from
@c    the dining room:  Why is his chariot so long in coming back?  Why are the
@c    feet of his horses so slow?

@c    5:29. One that was wiser than the rest of his wives, returned this
@c    answer to her mother in law:

@c    5:30. Perhaps he is now dividing the spoils, and the fairest of the
@c    women is chosen out for him:  garments of divers colours are given to
@c    Sisara for his prey, and furniture of different kinds is heaped
@c    together to adorn necks.

@c    5:31. So let all thy enemies perish, O Lord:  but let them that love
@c    thee shine, as the sun shineth in his rising.

@c    5:32. And the land rested for forty years.



@c    Judges Chapter 6


@c    The people for their sins, are oppressed by the Madianites.  Gedeon is
@c    called to deliver them.

@c    6:1. And the children of Israel again did evil in the sight of the
@c    Lord:  and he delivered them into the hand of Madian seven years,

@c    6:2. And they were grievously oppressed by them.  And they made
@c    themselves dens and caves in the mountains, and strong holds to resist.

@c    6:3. And when Israel had sown, Madian and Amalec, and the rest of the
@c    eastern nations, came up:

@c    6:4. And pitching their tents among them, wasted all things as they
@c    were in the blade, even to the entrance of Gaza:  and they left nothing
@c    at all in Israel for sustenance of life, nor sheep, nor oxen, nor
@c    asses.

@c    6:5. For they and all their flocks came with their tents, and like
@c    locusts filled all places, an innumerable multitude of men, and of
@c    camels, wasting whatsoever they touched.

@c    6:6. And Israel was humbled exceedingly in the sight of Madian.

@c    6:7. And he cried to the Lord, desiring help against the Madianites.

@c    6:8. And he sent unto them a prophet, and he spoke:  Thus saith the
@c    Lord, the God of Israel:  I made you to come up out of Egypt, and
@c    brought you out of the house of bondage,

@c    6:9. And delivered you out of the hands of the Egyptians, and of all
@c    the enemies that afflicted you:  and I cast them out at your coming in,
@c    and gave you their land.

@c    6:10. And I said:  I am the Lord your God, fear not the gods of the
@c    Amorrhites, in whose land you dwell.  And you would not hear my voice.

@c    6:11. And an angel of the Lord came, and sat under an oak that was in
@c    Ephra, and belonged to Joas, the father of the family of Ezri.  And when
@c    Gedeon, his son, was threshing and cleansing wheat by the winepress, to
@c    flee from Madian,

@c    6:12. The angel of the Lord appeared to him, and said:  The Lord is with
@c    thee, O most valiant of men.

@c    6:13. And Gedeon said to him:  I beseech thee, my lord, if the Lord be
@c    with us, why have these evils fallen upon us?  Where are his miracles,
@c    which our fathers have told us of, saying:  The Lord brought us out of
@c    Egypt but now the Lord hath forsaken us, and delivered us into the hand
@c    of Madian.

@c    6:14. And the Lord looked upon him, and said:  Go, in this thy strength,
@c    and thou shalt deliver Israel out of the hand of Madian:  know that I
@c    have sent thee.

@c    6:15. He answered, and said:  I beseech thee, my lord wherewith shall I
@c    deliver Israel?  Behold, my family is the meanest in Manasses, and I am
@c    the least in my father's house.

@c    The meanest in Manasses, etc. . .Mark how the Lord chooseth the humble
@c    (who are mean and little in their own eyes) for the greatest
@c    enterprises.

@c    6:16. And the Lord said to him:  I will be with thee:  and thou shalt cut
@c    off Madian as one man.

@c    6:17. And he said:  If I have found grace before thee, give me a sign
@c    that it is thou that speakest to me:

@c    6:18. And depart not hence, till I return to thee, and bring a
@c    sacrifice, and offer it to thee.  And he answered:  I will wait thy
@c    coming.

@c    6:19. So Gedeon went in, and boiled a kid, and made unleavened loaves
@c    of a measure of flour:  and putting the flesh in a basket, and the broth
@c    of the flesh into a pot, he carried all under the oak, and presented to
@c    him.

@c    6:20. And the angel of the Lord said to him:  Take the flesh and the
@c    unleavened loaves, and lay them upon that rock, and pour out the broth
@c    thereon.  And when he had done so,

@c    6:21. The angel of the Lord put forth the tip of the rod, which he held
@c    in his hand, and touched the flesh and the unleavened loaves:  and there
@c    arose a fire from the rock, and consumed the flesh and the unleavened
@c    loaves:  and the angel of the Lord vanished out of his sight.

@c    6:22. And Gedeon seeing that it was the angel of the Lord, said:  Alas,
@c    my Lord God:  for I have seen the angel of the Lord face to face.

@c    6:23. And the Lord said to him:  Peace be with thee:  fear not, thou
@c    shalt not die.

@c    6:24. And Gedeon built there an altar to the Lord, and called it the
@c    Lord's peace, until this present day.  And when he was yet in Ephra,
@c    which is of the family of Ezri,

@c    6:25. That night the Lord said to him:  Take a bullock of thy father's,
@c    and another bullock of seven years, and thou shalt destroy the altar of
@c    Baal, which is thy father's:  and cut down the grove that is about the
@c    altar:

@c    6:26. And thou shalt build un altar to the Lord thy God, in the top of
@c    this rock, whereupon thou didst lay the sacrifice before:  and thou
@c    shalt take the second bullock, and shalt offer a holocaust upon a pile
@c    of the wood, which thou shalt cut down out of the grove.

@c    6:27. Then Gedeon, taking ten men of his servants, did as the Lord had
@c    commanded him.  But fearing his father's house, and the men of that
@c    city, he would not do it by day, but did all by night.

@c    6:28. And when the men of that town were risen in the morning, they saw
@c    the altar of Baal destroyed, and the grove cut down, and the second
@c    bullock laid upon the altar, which then was built.

@c    6:29. And they said one to another:  Who hath done this?  And when they
@c    inquired for the author of the fact, it was said:  Gedeon, the son of
@c    Joas, did all this.

@c    6:30. And they said to Joas:  Bring out thy son hither, that he may die:
@c    because he hath destroyed the altar of Baal, and hath cut down his
@c    grove.

@c    6:31. He answered them:  Are you the avengers of Baal, that you fight
@c    for him?  he that is his adversary, let him die before to morrow light
@c    appear:  if he be a god, let him revenge himself on him that hath cast
@c    down his altar.

@c    6:32. From that day Gedeon was called Jerobaal, because Joas had said:
@c    Let Baal revenge himself on him that hath cast down his altar.

@c    6:33. Now all Madian, and Amalec, and the eastern people, were gathered
@c    together, and passing over the Jordan, camped in the valley of Jezrael.

@c    6:34. But the spirit of the Lord came upon Gedeon, and he sounded the
@c    trumpet, and called together the house of Abiezer, to follow him.

@c    6:35. And he sent messengers into all Manasses, and they also followed
@c    him :  and other messengers into Aser and Zabulon, and Nephthali, and
@c    they came to meet him.

@c    6:36. And Gedeon said to God:  If thou wilt save Israel by my hand, as
@c    thou hast said,

@c    6:37. I will put this fleece of wool on the floor:  if there be dew in
@c    the fleece only, and it be dry on all the ground beside, I shall know
@c    that by my hand, as thou hast said, thou wilt deliver Israel.

@c    6:38. And it was so.  And rising before day, wringing the fleece, he
@c    filled a vessel with the dew.

@c    6:39. And he said again to God:  Let not thy wrath be kindled against
@c    me, if I try once more, seeking a sign in the fleece.  I pray that the
@c    fleece only may be dry, and all the ground wet with dew.

@c    6:40. And God did that night as he had requested:  and it was dry on the
@c    fleece only, and there was dew on all the ground.



@c    Judges Chapter 7


@c    Gedeon, with three hundred men, by stratagem defeateth the Madianites.

@c    7:1. Then Jerobaal, who is the same as Gedeon, rising up early, and all
@c    the people with him, came to the fountain that is called Harad.  Now the
@c    camp of Madian was in the valley, on the north side of the high hill.

@c    7:2. And the Lord said to Gedeon:  The people that are with thee are
@c    many, and Madian shall not be delivered into their hands:  lest Israel
@c    should glory against me, and say:  I was delivered by my own strength.

@c    Lest Israel, etc. . .By this we see that God will not choose for his
@c    instruments in great achievements, which depend purely on his grace,
@c    such as, through pride and self conceit, will take the glory to
@c    themselves.

@c    7:3. Speak to the people, and proclaim in the hearing of all:  Whosoever
@c    is fearful and timorous, let him return.  So two and twenty thousand men
@c    went away from Mount Galaad and returned home, and only ten thousand
@c    remained.

@c    7:4. And the Lord said to Gedeon:  The people are still too many, bring
@c    them to the waters, and there I will try them:  and of whom I shall say
@c    to thee, This shall go with thee, let him go:  whom I shall forbid to
@c    go, let him return.

@c    7:5. And when the people were come down to the waters, the Lord said to
@c    Gedeon:  They that shall lap the water with their tongues, as dogs are
@c    wont to lap, thou shalt set apart by themselves:  but they that shall
@c    drink bowing down their knees, shall be on the other side.

@c    7:6. And the number of them that had lapped water; casting it with the
@c    hand to their mouth, was three hundred men:  and all the rest of the
@c    multitude had drunk kneeling.

@c    7:7. And the Lord said to Gedeon:  By the three hundred men, that lapped
@c    water, I will save you, and deliver Madian into thy hand:  but let all
@c    the rest of the people return to their place.

@c    That lapped water. . .These were preferred that took the water up in
@c    their hands, and so lapped it, before them who laid themselves quite
@c    down to the waters to drink:  which argued a more eager and sensual
@c    disposition.

@c    7:8. So taking victuals and trumpets according to their number, he
@c    ordered all the rest of the multitude to depart to their tents:  and he
@c    with the three hundred gave himself to the battle.  Now the camp of
@c    Madia was beneath him in the valley.

@c    7:9. The same night the Lord said to him:  Arise, and go down into the
@c    camp:  because I have delivered them into thy hand.

@c    7:10. But if thou be afraid to go alone, let Phara, thy servant, go
@c    down with thee.

@c    7:11. And when thou shalt hear what they are saying, then shall thy
@c    hands be strengthened, and thou shalt go down more secure to the
@c    enemies' camp.  And he went down with Phara his servant, into part of
@c    the camp, where was the watch of men in arms.

@c    7:12. But Madian and Amalec, and all the eastern people, lay scattered
@c    in the valley, as a multitude of locusts:  their camels also were
@c    innumerable, as the sand that lieth on the sea shore.

@c    7:13. And when Gedeon was come, one told his neighbour a dream:  and in
@c    this manner related what he had seen:  I dreamt a dream, and it seemed
@c    to me as if a hearth cake of barley bread rolled and came down into the
@c    camp of Madian:  and when it was come to a tent, it struck it, and beat
@c    it down flat to the ground.

@c    A dream. . .Observation of dreams is commonly superstitious, and as such
@c    is condemned in the word of God:  but in some extraordinary cases, as we
@c    here see, God is pleased by dreams to foretell what he is about to do.

@c    7:14. He to whom he spoke, answered:  This is nothing else but the sword
@c    of Gedeon, the son of Joas, a man of Israel.  For the Lord hath
@c    delivered Madian, and all their camp into his hand.

@c    7:15. And when Gedeon had heard the dream, and the interpretation
@c    thereof, he adored:  and returned to the camp of Israel, and said:
@c    Arise, for the Lord hath delivered the camp of Madian into our hands.

@c    7:16. And he divided the three hundred men into three parts, and gave
@c    them trumpets in their hands, and empty pitchers, and lamps within the
@c    pitchers.

@c    7:17. And he said to them:  What you shall see me do, do you the same:  I
@c    will go into one part of the camp, and do you as I shall do.

@c    7:18. When the trumpet shall sound in my hand, do you also blow the
@c    trumpets on every side of the camp, and shout together to the Lord and
@c    to Gedeon.

@c    7:19. And Gedeon, and the three hundred men that were with him, went
@c    into part of the camp, at the beginning of the midnight watch, and the
@c    watchmen being alarmed, they began to sound their trumpets, and to clap
@c    the pitchers one against another.

@c    Their trumpets, etc. . .In a mystical sense, the preachers of the
@c    gospel, in order to spiritual conquests, must not only sound with the
@c    trumpet of the word of God, but must also break their earthen pitchers,
@c    by the mortification of the flesh and its passions, and carry lamps in
@c    their hands by the light of their virtues.

@c    7:20. And when they sounded their trumpets in three places round about
@c    the camp, and had broken their pitchers, they held their lamps in their
@c    left hands, and with their right hands the trumpets which they blew,
@c    and they cried out:  The sword of the Lord and of Gedeon:

@c    7:21. Standing every man in his place round about the enemies' camp.  So
@c    all the camp was troubled, and crying out and howling, they fled away:

@c    7:22. And the three hundred men nevertheless persisted sounding the
@c    trumpets.  And the Lord sent the sword into all the camp, and they
@c    killed one another,

@c    7:23. Fleeing as far as Bethsetta, and the border of Abelmahula, in
@c    Tebbath.  But the men of Israel, shouting from Nephthali, and Aser, and
@c    from all Manasses, pursued after Madian.

@c    7:24. And Gedeon sent messengers into all Mount Ephraim, saying:  Come
@c    down to meet Madian, and take the waters before them to Bethbera and
@c    the Jordan.  And all Ephraim shouted, and took the waters before them
@c    and the Jordan as far as Bethbera.

@c    7:25. And having taken two men of Madian, Oreb and Zeb:  Oreb they slew
@c    in the rock of Oreb, and Zeb in the winepress of Zeb.  And they pursued
@c    Madian, carrying the heads of Oreb and Zeb to Gedeon, beyond the waters
@c    of the Jordan.

@c    Two men. . .That is, two of their chiefs.



@c    Judges Chapter 8


@c    Gedeon appeaseth the Ephraimites.  Taketh Zebee and Salmana.  Destroyeth
@c    Soccoth and Phanuel.  Refuseth to be king.  Maketh an ephod of the gold
@c    of the prey, and dieth in a good old age.  The people return to
@c    idolatry.

@c    8:1. And the men of Ephraim said to him:  What is this that thou meanest
@c    to do, that thou wouldst not call us, when thou wentest to fight
@c    against Madian?  And they chid him sharply, and almost offered violence.

@c    8:2. And he answered them:  What could I have done like to that which
@c    you have done?  Is not one bunch of grapes of Ephraim better than the
@c    vintages of Abiezer?

@c    What could I, etc. . .A meek and humble answer appeased them; who
@c    otherwise might have come to extremities.  So great is the power of
@c    humility both with God and man.

@c    8:3. The Lord hath delivered into your hands the princes of Madian,
@c    Oreb and Zeb:  what could I have done like to what you have done?  And
@c    when he had said this, their spirit was appeased, with which they
@c    swelled against him.

@c    8:4. And when Gedeon was come to the Jordan, he passed over it with the
@c    three hundred men that were with him:  who were so weary that they could
@c    not pursue after them that fled.

@c    8:5. And he said to the men of Soccoth:  Give, I beseech you, bread to
@c    the people that is with me, for they are faint:  that we may pursue
@c    Zebee, and Salmana, the kings of Madian.

@c    8:6. The princes of Soccoth answered:  Peradventure the palms of the
@c    hands of Zebee and Salmana are in thy hand, and therefore thou
@c    demandest that we should give bread to thy army.

@c    8:7. And he said to them:  When the Lord therefore shall have delivered
@c    Zebee and Salmana into my hands, I will thresh your flesh with the
@c    thorns and briers of the desert.

@c    8:8. And going up from thence, he came to Phanuel:  and he spoke the
@c    like things to the men of that place.  And they also answered him, as
@c    the men of Soccoth had answered.

@c    8:9. He said, therefore, to them also:  When I shall return a conqueror
@c    in peace, I will destroy this tower.

@c    8:10. But Zebee and Salmana were resting with all their army.  For
@c    fifteen thousand men were left of all the troops of the eastern people,
@c    and one hundred and twenty thousand warriors that drew the sword were
@c    slain.

@c    8:11. And Gedeon went up by the way of them that dwelt in tents, on the
@c    east of Nobe and Jegbaa, and smote the camp of the enemies, who were
@c    secure, and suspected no hurt.

@c    8:12. And Zebee and Salmana fled, and Gedeon pursued and took them, all
@c    their host being put in confusion.

@c    8:13. And returning from the battle before the sun rising,

@c    8:14. He took a boy of the men of Soccoth:  and he asked him the names
@c    of the princes and ancients of Soccoth, and he described unto him
@c    seventy-seven men.

@c    8:15. And he came to Soccoth, and said to them:  Behold Zebee, and
@c    Salmana, concerning whom you upbraided me, saying:  Peradventure the
@c    hands of Zebee and Salmana are in thy hands, and therefore thou
@c    demandest that we should give bread to the men that are weary and
@c    faint.

@c    8:16. So he took the ancients of the city, and thorns and briers of the
@c    desert, and tore them with the same, and cut in pieces the men of
@c    Soccoth.

@c    8:17. And he demolished the tower of Phanuel, and slew the men of the
@c    city.

@c    8:18. And he said to Zebee and Salmana:  What manner of men were they,
@c    whom you slew in Thabor?  They answered:  They were like thee, and one of
@c    them as the son of a king.

@c    8:19. He answered them:  They were my brethren, the sons of my mother.
@c    As the Lord liveth, if you had saved them, I would not kill you.

@c    8:20. And he said to Jether, his eldest son:  Arise, and slay them.  But
@c    he drew not his sword:  for he was afraid, being but yet a boy.

@c    8:21. And Zebee and Salmana said:  Do thou rise and run upon us:  because
@c    the strength of a man is according to his age:  Gedeon rose up, and slew
@c    Zebee and Salmana:  and he took the ornaments and bosses, with which the
@c    necks of the camels of kings are wont to be adorned.

@c    8:22. And all the men of Israel said to Gedeon:  Rule thou over us, and
@c    thy son, and thy son's son:  because thou hast delivered us from the
@c    hand of Madian.

@c    8:23. And he said to them:  I will not rule over you, neither shall my
@c    son rule over you, but the Lord shall rule over you.

@c    8:24. And he said to them:  I desire one request of you:  Give me the
@c    earlets of your spoils.  For the Ismaelites were accustomed to wear
@c    golden earlets.

@c    8:25. They answered:  We will give them most willingly.  And spreading a
@c    mantle on the ground, they cast upon it the earlets of the spoils.

@c    8:26. And the weight of the earlets that he requested, was a thousand
@c    seven hundred sicles of gold, besides the ornaments, and jewels, and
@c    purple raiment, which the kings of Madian were wont to use, and besides
@c    the golden chains that were about the camels necks.

@c    8:27. And Gedeon made an ephod thereof, and put it in his city Ephra.
@c    And all Israel committed fornication with it, and it became a ruin to
@c    Gedeon, and to all his house.

@c    An ephod. . .A priestly garment which Gedeon made with a good design;
@c    but the Israelites, after his death, abused it by making it an
@c    instrument of their idolatrous worship.

@c    8:28. But Madian was humbled before the children of Israel, neither
@c    could they any more lift up their heads:  but the land rested for forty
@c    years, while Gedeon presided.

@c    8:29. So Jerobaal, the son of Joas, went and dwelt in his own house:

@c    8:30. And he had seventy sons, who came out of his thigh, for he had
@c    many wives.

@c    8:31. And his concubine, that he had in Sichem, bore him a son, whose
@c    name was Abimelech.

@c    His concubine. . .She was his servant, but not his harlot:  and is called
@c    his concubine, as wives of an inferior degree are commonly called in
@c    the Old Testament, though otherwise lawfully married.

@c    8:32. And Gedeon, the son of Joas died in a good old age, and was
@c    buried in the sepulchre of his father, in Ephra, of the family of Ezri.

@c    8:33. But after Gedeon was dead, the children of Israel turned again,
@c    and committed fornication with Baalim.  And they made a covenant with
@c    Baal, that he should be their god:

@c    8:34. And they remembered not the Lord their God, who delivered them
@c    out of the hands of all their enemies round about:

@c    8:35. Neither did they shew mercy to the house of Jerobaal Gedeon,
@c    according to all the good things he had done to Israel.



@c    Judges Chapter 9


@c    Abimelech killeth his brethren.  Joatham's parable.  Gaal conspireth with
@c    the Sichemites against Abimelech, but is overcome.  Abimelech destroyeth
@c    Sichem:  but is killed at Thebes.

@c    9:1. And Abimelech, the son of Jerobaal, went to Sichem, to his
@c    mother's brethren, and spoke to them, and to all the kindred of his
@c    mother's father, saying:

@c    9:2. Speak to all the men of Sichem:  whether is better for you that
@c    seventy men, all the sons of Jerobaal, should rule over you, or that
@c    one man should rule over you?  And withal, consider that I am your bone,
@c    and your flesh.

@c    9:3. And his mother's brethren spoke of him to all the men of Sichem,
@c    all these words, and they inclined their hearts after Abimelech,
@c    saying:  He is our brother:

@c    9:4. And they gave him seventy weight of silver out of the temple of
@c    Baalberith:  wherewith he hired to himself men that were needy, and
@c    vagabonds, and they followed him.

@c    Baalberith. . .That is, Baal of the covenant, so called from the
@c    covenant they had made with Baal, chap. 8.33.

@c    9:5. And he came to his father's house in Ephra, and slew his brethren,
@c    the sons of Jerobaal, seventy men, upon one stone:  and there remained
@c    only Joatham, the youngest son of Jerobaal, who was hidden.

@c    9:6. And all the men of Sichem were gathered together, and all the
@c    families of the city of Mello:  and they went and made Abimelech king,
@c    by the oak that stood in Sichem.

@c    9:7. This being told to Joatham, he went, and stood on the top of Mount
@c    Garizim:  and lifting up his voice, he cried, and said:  Hear me, ye men
@c    of Sichem, so may God hear you.

@c    9:8. The trees went to anoint a king over them:  and they said to the
@c    olive tree:  Reign thou over us.

@c    9:9. And it answered:  Can I leave my fatness, which both gods and men
@c    make use of, to come to be promoted among the trees?

@c    Both gods and men make use of. . .The olive tree is introduced, speaking
@c    in this manner, because oil was used both in the worship of the true
@c    God, and in that of the false gods, whom the Sichemites served.

@c    9:10. And the trees said to the fig tree:  Come thou and reign over us.

@c    9:11. And it answered them:  Can I leave my sweetness, and my delicious
@c    fruits, and go to be promoted among the other trees?

@c    9:12. And the trees said to the vine:  Come thou and reign over us.

@c    9:13. And it answered them:  Can I forsake my wine, that cheereth God
@c    and men, and be promoted among the other trees?

@c    Cheereth God and men. . .Wine is here represented as agreeable to God,
@c    because he had appointed it to be offered up with his sacrifices.  But
@c    we are not obliged to take these words, spoken by the trees, in
@c    Joatham's parable, according to the strict literal sense:  but only in a
@c    sense accomodated to the design of the parable expressed in the
@c    conclusion of it.

@c    9:14. And all the trees said to the bramble:  Come thou and reign over
@c    us.

@c    9:15. And it answered them:  If, indeed, you mean to make me king, come
@c    ye, and rest under my shadow:  but if you mean it not, let fire come out
@c    from the bramble, and devour the cedars of Libanus.

@c    9:16. Now, therefore, if you have done well, and without sin, in
@c    appointing Abimelech king over you, and have dealt well with Jerobaal,
@c    and with his house, and have made a suitable return for the benefits of
@c    him who fought for you,

@c    9:17. And exposed his life to dangers, to deliver you from the hand of
@c    Madian,

@c    9:18. And you are now risen up against my father's house, and have
@c    killed his sons, seventy men, upon one stone, and have made Abimelech,
@c    the son of his handmaid, king over the inhabitants of Sichem, because
@c    he is your brother:

@c    9:19. If therefore you have dealt well, and without fault, with
@c    Jerobaal and his house, rejoice ye, this day, in Abimelech, and may he
@c    rejoice in you.

@c    9:20. But if unjustly:  let fire come out from him, and consume the
@c    inhabitants of Sichem, and the town of Mello:  and let fire come out
@c    from the men of Sichem and from the town of Mello, and devour
@c    Abimelech.

@c    9:21. And when he had said thus, he fled, and went into Bera:  and dwelt
@c    there for fear of Abimelech, his brother.

@c    9:22. So Abimelech reigned over Israel three years.

@c    9:23. And the Lord sent a very evil spirit between Abimelech and the
@c    inhabitants of Sichem; who began to detest him,

@c    9:24. And to lay the crime of the murder of the seventy sons of
@c    Jerobaal, and the shedding of their blood, upon Abimelech, their
@c    brother, and upon the rest of the princes of the Sichemites, who aided
@c    him.

@c    9:25. And they set an ambush against him on the top of the mountains:
@c    and while they waited for his coming, they committed robberies, taking
@c    spoils of all that passed by:  and it was told Abimelech.

@c    9:26. And Gaal, the son of Obed, came with his brethren, and went over
@c    to Sichem.  And the inhabitants of Sichem, taking courage at his coming,

@c    9:27. Went out into the fields, wasting the vineyards, and treading
@c    down the grapes:  and singing and dancing, they went into the temple of
@c    their god, and in their banquets and cups they cursed Abimelech.

@c    9:28. And Gaal, the son of Obed, cried:  Who is Abimelech, and what is
@c    Sichem, that we should serve him?  Is he not the son of Jerobaal, and
@c    hath made Zebul, his servant, ruler over the men of Emor, the father of
@c    Sichem?  Why then shall we serve him?

@c    9:29. Would to God that some man would put this people under my hand,
@c    that I might remove Abimelech out of the way.  And it was said to
@c    Abimelech:  Gather together the multitude of an army, and come.

@c    9:30. For Zebul, the ruler of the city, hearing the words of Gaal, the
@c    son of Obed, was very angry,

@c    9:31. And sent messengers privately to Abimelech, saying:  Behold, Gaal,
@c    the son of Obed, is come into Sichem with his brethren, and
@c    endeavoureth to set the city against thee.

@c    9:32. Arise, therefore, in the night, with the people that is with
@c    thee, and lie hid in the field:

@c    9:33. And betimes in the morning, at sun rising, set upon the city, and
@c    when he shall come out against thee, with his people, do to him what
@c    thou shalt be able.

@c    9:34. Abimelech, therefore, arose with all his army, by night, and laid
@c    ambushes near Sichem in four places.

@c    9:35. And Gaal, the son of Obed, went out, and stood in the entrance of
@c    the gate of the city.  And Abimelech rose up, and all his army with him,
@c    from the places of the ambushes.

@c    9:36. And when Gaal saw the people, he said to Zebul:  Behold, a
@c    multitude cometh down from the mountains.  And he answered him:  Thou
@c    seest the shadows of the mountains as if they were the heads of men,
@c    and this is thy mistake.

@c    9:37. Again Gaal said:  Behold, there cometh people down from the midst
@c    of the land, and one troop cometh by the way that looketh towards the
@c    oak.

@c    9:38. And Zebul said to him:  Where is now thy mouth, wherewith thou
@c    saidst:  Who is Abimelech, that we should serve him?  Is not this the
@c    people which thou didst despise?  Go out, and fight against him.

@c    9:39. So Gaal went out, in the sight of the people of Sichem, and
@c    fought against Abimelech,

@c    9:40. Who chased and put him to flight, and drove him to the city:  and
@c    many were slain of his people, even to the gate of the city:

@c    9:41. And Abimelech sat down in Ruma:  but Zebul drove Gaal, and his
@c    companions, out of the city, and would not suffer them to abide in it.

@c    9:42. So the day following the people went out into the field.  And it
@c    was told to Abimelech,

@c    9:43. And he took his army, and divided it into three companies, and
@c    laid ambushes in the fields.  And seeing that the people came out of the
@c    city, he arose, and set upon them,

@c    9:44. With his own company, assaulting and besieging the city:  whilst
@c    the two other companies chased the enemies that were scattered about
@c    the field.

@c    9:45. And Abimelech assaulted the city all that day:  and took it, and
@c    killed the inhabitants thereof, and demolished it, so that he sowed
@c    salt in it.

@c    Sowed salt. . .To make the ground barren, and fit for nothing.

@c    9:46. And when they who dwelt in the tower of Sichem, had heard this,
@c    they went into the temple of their god Berith, where they had made a
@c    covenant with him, and from thence the place had taken its name, and it
@c    was exceeding strong.

@c    9:47. Abimelech also hearing that the men of the tower of Sichem were
@c    gathered together,

@c    9:48. Went up into mount Selmon, he and all his people with him:  and
@c    taking an axe, he cut down the bough of a tree, and laying it on his
@c    shoulder, and carrying it, he said to his companions:  What you see me
@c    do, do ye out of hand.

@c    9:49. So they cut down boughs from the trees, every man as fast as he
@c    could, and followed their leader.  And surrounding the fort, they set it
@c    on fire:  and so it came to pass, that with the smoke and with the fire
@c    a thousand persons were killed, men and women together, of the
@c    inhabitants of the town of Sichem.

@c    9:50. Then Abimelech, departing from thence, came to the town of
@c    Thebes, which he surrounded and besieged with his army.

@c    9:51. And there was in the midst of the city a high tower, to which
@c    both the men and the women were fled together, and all the princes of
@c    the city, and having shut and strongly barred the gate, they stood upon
@c    the battlements of the tower to defend themselves.

@c    9:52. And Abimelech, coming near the tower, fought stoutly:  and,
@c    approaching to the gate, endeavoured to set fire to it:

@c    9:53. And behold, a certain woman casting a piece of a millstone from
@c    above, dashed it against the head of Abimelech, and broke his skull.

@c    9:54. And he called hastily to his armourbearer, and said to him:  Draw
@c    thy sword, and kill me:  lest it should be said that I was slain by a
@c    woman.  He did as he was commanded, and slew him.

@c    9:55. And when he was dead all the men of Israel that were with him,
@c    returned to their homes.

@c    9:56. And God repaid the evil that Abimelech had done against his
@c    father, killing his seventy brethren.

@c    9:57. The Sichemites also were rewarded for what they had done, and the
@c    curse of Joatham, the son of Jerobaal, came upon them.



@c    Judges Chapter 10


@c    Thola ruleth Israel twenty-three years; and Jair twenty-two.  The people
@c    fall again into idolatry, and are afflicted again by the Philistines
@c    and Ammonites.  They cry to God for help, who upon their repentance hath
@c    compassion on them.

@c    10:1. After Abimelech, there arose a ruler in Israel, Thola, son of
@c    Phua, the uncle of Abimelech, a man of Issachar, who dwelt in Samir of
@c    mount Ephraim:

@c    Uncle of Abimelech. . .i.  e., half brother to Gedeon, as being born of
@c    the same mother, but by a different father, and of a different tribe.

@c    10:2. And he judged Israel three and twenty years, and he died, and was
@c    buried in Samir.

@c    10:3. To him succeeded Jair, the Galaadite, who judged Israel for two
@c    and twenty years,

@c    10:4. Having thirty sons, that rode on thirty ass colts, and were
@c    princes of thirty cities, which from his name were called Havoth Jair,
@c    that is, the towns of Jair, until this present day, in the land of
@c    Galaad.

@c    Havoth Jair. . .This name was now confirmed to these towns, which they
@c    had formerly received from another Jair.  Num. 32.41.

@c    10:5. And Jair died, and was buried in the place which is called Camon.

@c    10:6. But the children of Israel, adding new sins to their old ones,
@c    did evil in the sight of the Lord, and served idols, Baalim and
@c    Astaroth, and the gods of Syria, and of Sidon, and of Moab, and of the
@c    children of Ammon, and of the Philistines:  and they left the Lord, and
@c    did not serve him.

@c    10:7. And the Lord being angry with them, delivered them into the hands
@c    of the Philistines, and of the children of Ammon.

@c    10:8. And they were afflicted, and grievously oppressed for eighteen
@c    years, all they that dwelt beyond the Jordan in the land of the
@c    Amorrhite, who is in Galaad:

@c    10:9. Insomuch that the children of Ammon, passing over the Jordan,
@c    wasted Juda, and Benjamin, and Ephraim:  and Israel was distressed
@c    exceedingly.

@c    10:10. And they cried to the Lord, and said, We have sinned against
@c    thee, because we have forsaken the Lord our God, and have served
@c    Baalim.

@c    10:11. And the Lord said to them:  Did not the Egyptians, and the
@c    Amorrhites, and the children of Ammon, and the Philistines,

@c    10:12. The Sidonians also, and Amalec, and Chanaan, oppress you, and
@c    you cried to me, and I delivered you out of their hand?

@c    10:13. And yet you have forsaken me, and have worshipped strange gods:
@c    therefore I will deliver you no more:

@c    10:14. Go, and call upon the gods which you have chosen:  let them
@c    deliver you in the time of distress.

@c    10:15. And the children of Israel said to the Lord:  We have sinned, do
@c    thou unto us whatsoever pleaseth thee:  only deliver us this time.

@c    10:16. And saying these things, they cast away out of their coasts all
@c    the idols of strange gods, and served the Lord their God:  and he was
@c    touched with their miseries.

@c    10:17. And the children of Ammon shouting together, pitched their tents
@c    in Galaad:  against whom the children of Israel assembled themselves
@c    together, and camped in Maspha.

@c    10:18. And the princes of Galaad said one to another:  Whosoever of us
@c    shall first begin to fight against the children of Ammon, he shall be
@c    the leader of the people of Galaad.



@c    Judges Chapter 11


@c    Jephte is made ruler of the people of Galaad:  he first pleads their
@c    cause against the Ammonites; then making a vow obtains a signal
@c    victory; he performs his vow.

@c    11:1. There was at that time Jephte, the Galaadite, a most valiant man,
@c    and a warrior, the son of a woman that was a harlot, and his father was
@c    Galaad.

@c    11:2. Now Galaad had a wife of whom he had sons:  who, after they were
@c    grown up, thrust out Jephte, saying:  Thou canst not inherit in the
@c    house of our father, because thou art born of another mother.

@c    11:3. Then he fled and avoided them, and dwelt in the land of Tob:  and
@c    there were gathered to him needy men and robbers, and they followed him
@c    as their prince.

@c    11:4. In those days the children of Ammon made war against Israel.

@c    11:5. And as they pressed hard upon them, the ancients of Galaad went
@c    to fetch Jephte out of the land of Tob to help them:

@c    11:6. And they said to him:  Come thou, and be our prince, and fight
@c    against the children of Ammon.

@c    11:7. And he answered them:  Are not you the men that hated me, and cast
@c    me out of my father's house, and now you are come to me, constrained by
@c    necessity?

@c    11:8. And the princes of Galaad said to Jephte:  For this cause we are
@c    now come to thee, that thou mayst go with us, and fight against the
@c    children of Ammon, and be head over all the inhabitants of Galaad.

@c    11:9. Jephte also said to them:  If you be come to me sincerely, that I
@c    should fight for you against the children of Ammon, and the Lord shall
@c    deliver them into my hand, shall I be your prince?

@c    11:10. They answered him:  The Lord, who heareth these things, he
@c    himself is mediator and witness that we will do as we have promised.

@c    11:11. Jephte therefore went with the princes of Galaad, and all the
@c    people made him their prince.  And Jephte spoke all his words before the
@c    Lord in Maspha.

@c    11:12. And he sent messengers to the king of the children of Ammon, to
@c    say in his name:  What hast thou to do with me, that thou art come
@c    against me, to waste my land?

@c    11:13. And he answered them:  Because Israel took away my land, when he
@c    came up out of Egypt, from the confines of the Arnon unto the Jaboc and
@c    the Jordan:  now, therefore, restore the same peaceably to me.

@c    11:14. And Jephte again sent word by them, and commanded them to say to
@c    the king of Ammon:

@c    11:15. Thus saith Jephte:  Israel did not take away the land of Moab,
@c    nor the land of the children of Ammon:

@c    11:16. But when they came up out of Egypt, he walked through the desert
@c    to the Red Sea, and came into Cades.

@c    11:17. And he sent messengers to the king of Edom, saying:  Suffer me to
@c    pass through thy land.  But he would not condescend to his request.  He
@c    sent also to the king of Moab, who, likewise, refused to give him
@c    passage.  He abode, therefore, in Cades,

@c    11:18. And went round the land of Edom at the side, and the land of
@c    Moab:  and came over against the east coast of the land of Moab, and
@c    camped on the other side of the Arnon:  and he would not enter the
@c    bounds of Moab.

@c    11:19. So Israel sent messengers to Sehon, king of the Amorrhites, who
@c    dwelt in Hesebon, and they said to him:  Suffer me to pass through thy
@c    land to the river.

@c    11:20. But he, also despising the words of Israel, suffered him not to
@c    pass through his borders:  but gathering an infinite multitude, went out
@c    against him to Jasa, and made strong opposition.

@c    11:21. And the Lord delivered him, with all his army, into the hands of
@c    Israel, and he slew him, and possessed all the land of the Amorrhite,
@c    the inhabitant of that country,

@c    11:22. And all the coasts thereof from the Arnon to the Jaboc, and from
@c    the wilderness to the Jordan.

@c    11:23. So the Lord, the God of Israel, destroyed the Amorrhite, his
@c    people of Israel fighting against him, and wilt thou now possess his
@c    land?

@c    11:24. Are not those things which thy god Chamos possesseth, due to
@c    thee by right?  But what the Lord our God hath obtained by conquest,
@c    shall be our possession:

@c    Chamos. . .The idol of the Moabites and Ammonites.  He argues from their
@c    opinion, who thought they had a just title to the countries which they
@c    imagined they had conquered by the help of their gods:  how much more
@c    then had Israel in indisputable title to the countries which God, by
@c    visible miracles, had conquered for them.

@c    11:25. Unless, perhaps, thou art better than Balac, the son of Sephor,
@c    king of Moab:  or canst shew that he strove against Israel, and fought
@c    against him,

@c    11:26. Whereas he hath dwelt in Hesebon, and the villages thereof, and
@c    in Aroer, and its villages, and in all the cities near the Jordan, for
@c    three hundred years.  Why have you for so long a time attempted nothing
@c    about this claim?

@c    11:27. Therefore I do not trespass against thee, but thou wrongest me
@c    by declaring an unjust war against me.  The Lord be judge, and decide
@c    this day, between Israel and the children of Ammon.

@c    11:28. And the king of the children of Ammon would not hearken to the
@c    words of Jephte, which he sent him by the messengers.

@c    11:29. Therefore the spirit of the Lord came upon Jephte, and going
@c    round Galaad, and Manasses, and Maspha of Galaad, and passing over from
@c    thence to the children of Ammon,

@c    11:30. He made a vow to the Lord, saying:  If thou wilt deliver the
@c    children of Ammon into my hands,

@c    11:31. Whosoever shall first come forth out of the doors of my house,
@c    and shall meet me, when I return in peace from the children of Ammon,
@c    the same will I offer a holocaust to the Lord.

@c    Whosoever, etc. . .Some are of opinion, that the meaning of this vow of
@c    Jephte, was to consecrate to God whatsoever should first meet him,
@c    according to the condition of the thing; so as to offer it up as a
@c    holocaust, if it were such a thing as might be offered by the law; or
@c    to devote it otherwise to God, if it were not such as the law allowed
@c    to be offered in sacrifice.  And therefore they think the daughter of
@c    Jephte was not slain by her father, but only consecrated to perpetual
@c    virginity.  But the common opinion followed by the generality of the
@c    holy fathers and divines is, that she was offered as a holocaust, in
@c    consequence of her father's vow:  and that Jephte did not sin, at least
@c    not mortally, neither in making, nor in keeping, his vow:  since he is
@c    no ways blamed for it in scripture; and was even inspired by God
@c    himself to make the vow (as appears from ver. 29, 30) in consequence of
@c    which he obtained the victory; and therefore he reasonably concluded
@c    that God, who is the master of life and death, was pleased on this
@c    occasion to dispense with his own law; and that it was the divine will
@c    he should fulfil his vow.

@c    11:32. And Jephte passed over to the children of Ammon to fight against
@c    them:  and the Lord delivered them into his hands.

@c    11:33. And he smote them from Aroer till you come to Mennith, twenty
@c    cities, and as far as Abel, which is set with vineyards, with a very
@c    great slaughter:  and the children of Ammon were humbled by the children
@c    of Israel.

@c    11:34. And when Jephte returned into Maspha, to his house, his only
@c    daughter met him with timbrels and with dances:  for he had no other
@c    children.

@c    11:35. And when he saw her, he rent his garments, and said:  Alas! my
@c    daughter, thou hast deceived me, and thou thyself art deceived:  for I
@c    have opened my mouth to the Lord, and I can do no other thing.

@c    11:36. And she answered him:  My father, if thou hast opened thy mouth
@c    to the Lord, do unto me whatsoever thou hast promised, since the
@c    victory hath been granted to thee, and revenge of thy enemies.

@c    11:37. And she said to her father:  Grant me only this, which I desire:
@c    Let me go, that I may go about the mountains for two months, and may
@c    bewail my virginity with my companions.

@c    Bewail my virginity. . .The bearing of children was much coveted under
@c    the Old Testament, when women might hope that from some child of
@c    theirs, the Saviour of the world might one day spring.  But under the
@c    New Testament virginity is preferred.  1 Cor. 7.35.

@c    11:38. And he answered her:  Go.  And he sent her away for two months.
@c    And when she was gone with her comrades and companions, she mourned her
@c    virginity in the mountains.

@c    11:39. And the two months being expired, she returned to her father,
@c    and he did to her as he had vowed, and she knew no man.  From thence
@c    came a fashion in Israel, and a custom has been kept:

@c    11:40. That, from year to year, the daughters of Israel assemble
@c    together, and lament the daughter of Jephte the Galaadite, for four
@c    days.



@c    Judges Chapter 12


@c    The Ephraimites quarrel with Jephte:  forty-two thousand of them are
@c    slain:  Abeson, Ahialon, and Abdon, are judges.

@c    12:1. But behold there arose a sedition in Ephraim.  And passing towards
@c    the north, they said to Jephte:  When thou wentest to fight against the
@c    children of Ammon, why wouldst thou not call us, that we might go with
@c    thee?  Therefore we will burn thy house.

@c    12:2. And he answered them:  I and my people were at great strife with
@c    the children of Ammon:  and I called you to assist me, and you would not
@c    do it.

@c    12:3. And when I saw this, I put my life in my own hands, and passed
@c    over against the children of Ammon and the Lord delivered them into my
@c    hands.  What have I deserved, that you should rise up to fight against
@c    me?

@c    12:4. Then calling to him all the men of Galaad, he fought against
@c    Ephraim:  and the men of Galaad defeated Ephraim, because he had said:
@c    Galaad is a fugitive of Ephraim, and dwelleth in the midst of Ephraim
@c    and Manasses.

@c    12:5. And the Galaadites secured the fords of the Jordan, by which
@c    Ephraim was to return.  And when any one of the number of Ephraim came
@c    thither in the flight, and said:  I beseech you let me pass:  the
@c    Galaadites said to him:  Art thou not an Ephraimite?  If he said:  I am
@c    not:

@c    12:6. They asked him:  Say then, Scibboleth, which is interpreted, An
@c    ear of corn.  But he answered, Sibboleth, not being able to express an
@c    ear of corn by the same letter.  Then presently they took him and killed
@c    him in the very passage of the Jordan.  And there fell at that time of
@c    Ephraim, two and forty thousand.

@c    12:7. And Jephte, the Galaadite, judged Israel six years:  and he died,
@c    and was buried in his city of Galaad.

@c    12:8. After him Abesan of Bethlehem judged Israel:

@c    12:9. He had thirty sons, and as many daughters, whom he sent abroad,
@c    and gave to husbands, and took wives for his sons, of the same number,
@c    bringing them into his house.  And he judged Israel seven years:

@c    12:10. And he died, and was buried in Bethlehem.

@c    12:11. To him succeeded Ahialon, a Zabulonite:  and he judged Israel ten
@c    years:

@c    12:12. And he died, and was buried in Zabulon.

@c    12:13. After him, Abdon, the son of Illel, a Pharathonite, judged
@c    Israel:

@c    12:14. And he had forty sons, and of them thirty grandsons, mounted
@c    upon seventy ass colts, and he judged Israel eight years:

@c    12:15. And he died, and was buried in Pharathon, in the land of
@c    Ephraim, in the mount of Amalech.



@c    Judges Chapter 13


@c    The people fall again into idolatry and are afflicted by the
@c    Philistines.  An angel foretelleth the birth of Samson.

@c    13:1. And the children of Israel did evil again in the sight of the
@c    Lord:  and he delivered them into the hands of the Philistines forty
@c    years.

@c    13:2. Now there was a certain man of Saraa, and of the race of Dan,
@c    whose name was Manue, and his wife was barren.

@c    13:3. And an angel of the Lord appeared to her, and said:  Thou art
@c    barren and without children:  but thou shalt conceive and bear a son.

@c    13:4. Now therefore beware, and drink no wine nor strong drink, and eat
@c    not any unclean thing.

@c    13:6. Because thou shalt conceive, and bear a son, and no razor shall
@c    touch his head:  for he shall be a Nazarite of God, from his infancy,
@c    and from his mother's womb, and he shall begin to deliver Israel from
@c    the hands of the Philistines.

@c    13:6. And when she was come to her husband, she said to him:  A man of
@c    God came to me, having the countenance of an angel, very awful.  And
@c    when I asked him whence he came, and by what name he was called, he
@c    would not tell me:

@c    13:7. But he answered thus:  Behold thou shalt conceive and bear a son:
@c    beware thou drink no wine, nor strong drink, nor eat any unclean thing:
@c    for the child shall be a Nazarite of God from his infancy, from his
@c    mother's womb until the day of his death.

@c    13:8. Then Manue prayed to the Lord, and said:  I beseech thee, O Lord,
@c    that the man of God, whom thou didst send, may come again, and teach us
@c    what we ought to do concerning the child, that shall be born.

@c    13:9. And the Lord heard the prayer of Manue, and the angel of the Lord
@c    appeared again to his wife, as she was sitting in the field.  But Manue
@c    her husband was not with her.  And when she saw the angel,

@c    13:10. She made haste, and ran to her husband:  and told him, saying:
@c    Behold the man hath appeared to me, whom I saw before.

@c    13:11. He rose up, and followed his wife:  and coming to the man, said
@c    to him:  Art thou he that spoke to the woman?  And he answered:  I am.

@c    13:12. And Manue said to him:  When thy word shall come to pass, what
@c    wilt thou that the child should do?  or from what shall he keep himself?

@c    13:13. And the angel of the Lord said to Manue:  From all the things I
@c    have spoken of to thy wife, let her refrain herself:

@c    Let her refrain, etc. . .By the Latin text it is not clear whether this
@c    abstinence was prescribed to the mother, or to the child; but the
@c    Hebrew (in which the verbs relating thereto are of the feminine gender)
@c    determineth it to the mother.  But then the child also was to refrain
@c    from the like things, because he was to be from his infancy a Nazarite
@c    of God, ver. 5, that is, one set aside, in a particular manner, and
@c    consecrated to God:  now the Nazarites by the law were to abstain from
@c    all these things.

@c    13:14. And let her eat nothing that cometh of the vine, neither let her
@c    drink wine or strong drink, nor eat any unclean thing:  and whatsoever I
@c    have commanded her, let her fulfil and observe.

@c    13:15. And Manue said to the angel of the Lord:  I beseech thee to
@c    consent to my request, and let us dress a kid for thee.

@c    13:16. And the angel answered him:  If thou press me I will not eat of
@c    thy bread:  but if thou wilt offer a holocaust, offer it to the Lord.
@c    And Manue knew not it was the angel of the Lord.

@c    13:17. And he said to him:  What is thy name, that, if thy word shall
@c    come to pass, we may honour thee?

@c    13:18. And he answered him:  Why askest thou my name, which is
@c    wonderful?

@c    13:19. Then Manue took a kid of the flocks, and the libations, and put
@c    them upon a rock, offering to the Lord, who doth wonderful things:  and
@c    he and his wife looked on.

@c    13:20. And when the flame from the altar went up towards heaven, the
@c    angel of the Lord ascended also in the same.  And when Manue and his
@c    wife saw this, they fell flat on the ground;

@c    13:21. And the angel of the Lord appeared to them no more.  And
@c    forthwith Manue understood that it was an angel of the Lord,

@c    13:22. And he said to his wife:  We shall certainly die, because we have
@c    seen God.

@c    Seen God. . .Not in his own person, but in the person of his messenger.
@c    The Israelites, in those days, imagined they should die if they saw an
@c    angel, taking occasion perhaps from those words spoken by the Lord to
@c    Moses, Ex. 33.20, No man shall see me and live.  But the event
@c    demonstrated that it was but a groundless imagination.

@c    13:23. And his wife answered him:  If the Lord had a mind to kill us, he
@c    would not have received a holocaust and libations at our hands; neither
@c    would he have shewed us all these things, nor have told us the things
@c    that are to come.

@c    13:24. And she bore a son, and called his name Samson.  And the child
@c    grew, and the Lord blessed him.

@c    13:25. And the Spirit of the Lord began to be with him in the camp of
@c    Dan, between Saraa and Esthaol.



@c    Judges Chapter 14


@c    Samson desireth a wife of the Philistines.  He killeth a lion:  in whose
@c    mouth he afterwards findeth honey.  His marriage feast, and riddle,
@c    which is discovered by his wife.  He killeth, and strippeth thirty
@c    Philistines.  His wife taketh another man.

@c    14:1. Then Samson went down to Thamnatha, and seeing there a woman of
@c    the daughters of the Philistines,

@c    14:2. He came up, and told his father and his mother, saying:  I saw a
@c    woman in Thamnatha of the daughters of the Philistines:  I beseech you,
@c    take her for me to wife.

@c    14:3. And his father and mother said to him:  Is there no woman among
@c    the daughters of thy brethren, or among all my people, that thou wilt
@c    take a wife of the Philistines, who are uncircumcised?  And Samson said
@c    to his father:  Take this woman for me; for she hath pleased my eyes.

@c    Is there no woman among the daughters of thy brethren. . .This shews his
@c    parents were at first against his marriage with a Gentile, it being
@c    prohibited, Deut. 7.3; but afterwards they consented, knowing it to be
@c    by the dispensation of God; which otherwise would have been sinful in
@c    acting contrary to the law.

@c    14:4. Now his parents knew not that the thing was done by the Lord, and
@c    that he sought an occasion against the Philistines:  for at that time
@c    the Philistines had dominion over Israel.

@c    14:5. Then Samson went down with his father and mother to Thamnatha.
@c    And when they were come to the vineyards of the town, behold a young
@c    lion met him, raging and roaring.

@c    14:6. And the Spirit of the Lord came upon Samson, and he tore the lion
@c    as he would have torn a kid in pieces, having nothing at all in his
@c    hand:  and he would not tell this to his father and mother.

@c    14:7. And he went down, and spoke to the woman that had pleased his
@c    eyes.

@c    14:8. And after some days, returning to take her, he went aside to see
@c    the carcass of the lion, and behold there was a swarm of bees in the
@c    mouth of the lion, and a honey-comb.

@c    14:9. And when he had taken it in his hands, he went on eating:  and
@c    coming to his father and mother, he gave them of it, and they ate:  but
@c    he would not tell them that he had taken the honey from the body of the
@c    lion.

@c    14:10. So his father went down to the woman, and made a feast for his
@c    son Samson:  for so the young men used to do.

@c    14:11. And when the citizens of that place saw him, they brought him
@c    thirty companions to be with him.

@c    14:12. And Samson said to them:  I will propose to you a riddle, which
@c    if you declare unto me within the seven days of the feast, I will give
@c    you thirty shirts, and as many coats:

@c    14:13. But if you shall not be able to declare it, you shall give me
@c    thirty shirts and the same number of coats.  They answered him:  Put
@c    forth the riddle, that we may hear it.

@c    14:14. And he said to them:  Out of the eater came forth meat, and out
@c    of the strong came forth sweetness.  And they could not for three days
@c    expound the riddle.

@c    14:15. And when the seventh day came, they said to the wife of Samson:
@c    Sooth thy husband, and persuade him to tell thee what the riddle
@c    meaneth.  But if thou wilt not do it, we will burn thee, and thy
@c    father's house.  Have you called us to the wedding on purpose to strip
@c    us?

@c    14:16. So she wept before Samson and complained, saying:  Thou hatest
@c    me, and dost not love me:  therefore thou wilt not expound to me the
@c    riddle, which thou hast proposed to the sons of my people.  But he
@c    answered:  I would not tell it to my father and mother:  and how can I
@c    tell it to thee?

@c    14:17. So she wept before him the seven days of the feast:  and, at
@c    length, on the seventh day, as she was troublesome to him, he expounded
@c    it.  And she immediately told her countrymen.

@c    14:18. And they, on the seventh day before the sun went down, said to
@c    him:  What is sweeter than honey?  and what is stronger than a lion?  And
@c    he said to them:  If you had not ploughed with my heifer, you had not
@c    found out my riddle.

@c    14:19. And the Spirit of the Lord came upon him, and he went down to
@c    Ascalon, and slew there thirty men whose garments he took away, and
@c    gave to them that had declared the riddle.  And being exceeding angry,
@c    he went up to his father's house:

@c    14:20. But his wife took one of his friends and bridal companions for
@c    her husband.



@c    Judges Chapter 15


@c    Samson is denied his wife.  He burns the corn of the Philistines, and
@c    kills many of them.

@c    15:1. And a while after, when the days of the wheat harvest were at
@c    hand, Samson came, meaning to visit his wife, and he brought her a kid
@c    of the flock.  And when he would have gone into her chamber, as usual,
@c    her father would not suffer him, saying:

@c    15:2. I thought thou hadst hated her, and therefore I gave her to thy
@c    friend:  but she hath a sister, who is younger and fairer than she, take
@c    her to wife instead of her.

@c    15:3. And Samson answered him:  From this day I shall be blameless in
@c    what I do against the Philistines:  for I will do you evils.

@c    15:4. And he went and caught three hundred foxes, and coupled them tail
@c    to tail, and fastened torches between the tails:

@c    Foxes. . .Being judge of the people he might have many to assist him to
@c    catch with nets or otherwise a number of these animals; of which there
@c    were great numbers in that country.

@c    15:6. And setting them on fire he let the foxes go, that they might run
@c    about hither and thither.  And they presently went into the standing
@c    corn of the Philistines.  Which being set on fire, both the corn that
@c    was already carried together, and that which was yet standing, was all
@c    burnt, insomuch that the flame consumed also the vineyards and the
@c    oliveyards.

@c    15:6. Then the Philistines said:  Who hath done this thing?  And it was
@c    answered:  Samson, the son in law of the Thamnathite, because he took
@c    away his wife, and gave her to another, hath done these things.  And the
@c    Philistines went up and burnt both the woman and her father.

@c    15:7. But Samson said to them:  Although you have done this, yet will I
@c    be revenged of you, and then I will be quiet.

@c    15:8. And he made a great slaughter of them, so that in astonishment
@c    they laid the calf of the leg upon the thigh.  And going down he dwelt
@c    in a cavern of the rock Etam.

@c    15:9. Then the Philistines going up into the land of Juda, camped in
@c    the place which afterwards was called Lechi, that is, the Jawbone,
@c    where their army was spread abroad.

@c    15:10. And the men of the tribe of Juda said to them:  Why are you come
@c    up against us?  They answered:  We are come to bind Samson, and to pay
@c    him for what he hath done against us.

@c    15:11. Wherefore three thousand men of Juda went down to the cave of
@c    the rock Etam, and said to Samson:  Knowest thou not that the
@c    Philistines rule over us?  Why wouldst thou do thus?  And he said to
@c    them:  As they did to me, so have I done to them.

@c    15:12. And they said to him:  We are come to bind thee, and to deliver
@c    thee into the hands of the Philistines.  And Samson said to them:  Swear
@c    to me, and promise me that you will not kill me.

@c    15:13. They said:  We will not kill thee:  but we will deliver thee up
@c    bound.  And they bound him with two new cords, and brought him from the
@c    rock Etam.

@c    15:14. Now when he was come to the place of the Jawbone, and the
@c    Philistines shouting went to meet him, the Spirit of the Lord came
@c    strongly upon him:  and as flax is wont to be consumed at the approach
@c    of fire, so the bands with which he was bound were broken and loosed.

@c    15:15. And finding a jawbone, even the jawbone of an ass, which lay
@c    there, catching it up, he slew therewith a thousand men.

@c    15:16. And he said:  With the jawbone of an ass, with the jaw of the
@c    colt of asses, I have destroyed them, and have slain a thousand men.

@c    15:17. And when he had ended these words, singing, he threw the jawbone
@c    out of his hand, and called the name of that place Ramathlechi, which
@c    is interpreted the lifting up of the jawbone.

@c    15:18. And being very thirsty, he cried to the Lord, and said:  Thou
@c    hast given this very great deliverance and victory into the hand of thy
@c    servant:  and behold I die for thirst, and shall fall into the hands of
@c    the uncircumcised.

@c    15:19. Then the Lord opened a great tooth in the jaw of the ass and
@c    waters issued out of it.  And when he had drunk them, he refreshed his
@c    spirit, and recovered his strength.  Therefore the name of that place
@c    was called The Spring of him that invoked from the jawbone, until this
@c    present day.

@c    15:20. And he judged Israel, in the days of the Philistines, twenty
@c    years.



@c    Judges Chapter 16


@c    Samson is deluded by Dalila:  and falls into the hands of the
@c    Philistines.  His death.

@c    16:1. He went also into Gaza, and saw there a woman, a harlot, and went
@c    in unto her.

@c    16:2. And when the Philistines had heard this, and it was noised about
@c    among them, that Samson was come into the city, they surrounded him,
@c    setting guards at the gate of the city, and watching there all the
@c    night in silence, that in the morning they might kill him as he went
@c    out.

@c    16:3. But Samson slept till midnight, and then rising, he took both the
@c    doors of the gate, with the posts thereof and the bolt, and laying them
@c    on his shoulders, carried them up to the top of the hill, which looketh
@c    towards Hebron.

@c    16:4. After this he loved a woman, who dwelt in the valley of Sorec,
@c    and she was called Dalila.

@c    Dalila. . .Some are of opinion she was married to Samson; others that
@c    she was his harlot.  If the latter opinion be true, we cannot wonder
@c    that, in punishment of his lust, the Lord delivered him up, by her
@c    means, into the hands of his enemies.  However if he was guilty, it is
@c    not to be doubted but that under his afflictions he heartily repented
@c    and returned to God, and so obtained forgiveness of his sins.

@c    16:5. And the princes of the Philistines came to her, and said:  Deceive
@c    him, and learn of him wherein his great strength lieth, and how we may
@c    be able to overcome him, to bind and afflict him:  which if thou shalt
@c    do, we will give thee every one of us eleven hundred pieces of silver.

@c    16:6. And Dalila said to Samson:  Tell me, I beseech thee, wherein thy
@c    greatest strength lieth, and what it is, wherewith if thou wert bound,
@c    thou couldst not break loose.

@c    16:7. And Samson answered her:  If I shall be bound with seven cords,
@c    made of sinews not yet dry, but still moist, I shall be weak like other
@c    men.

@c    16:8. And the princes of the Philistines brought unto her seven cords,
@c    such as he spoke of, with which she bound him;

@c    16:9. Men lying privately in wait with her, and in the chamber,
@c    expecting the event of the thing, and she cried out to him:  The
@c    Philistines are upon thee, Samson.  And he broke the bands, as a man
@c    would break a thread of tow twined with spittle, when it smelleth the
@c    fire:  so it was not known wherein his strength lay.

@c    16:10. And Dalila said to him:  Behold thou hast mocked me, and hast
@c    told me a false thing:  but now at least tell me wherewith thou mayest
@c    be bound.

@c    16:11. And he answered her:  If I shall be bound with new ropes, that
@c    were never in work, I shall be weak and like other men.

@c    16:12. Dalila bound him again with these, and cried out:  The
@c    Philistines are upon thee, Samson, there being an ambush prepared for
@c    him in the chamber.  But he broke the bands like threads of webs.

@c    16:13. And Dalila said to him again:  How long dost thou deceive me, and
@c    tell me lies?  Shew me wherewith thou mayest be bound.  And Samson
@c    answered her:  If thou plattest the seven locks of my head with a lace,
@c    and tying them round about a nail, fastenest it in the ground, I shall
@c    be weak.

@c    16:14. And when Dalila had done this, she said to him:  The Philistines
@c    are upon thee, Samson.  And awaking out of his sleep, he drew out the
@c    nail with the hairs and the lace.

@c    16:15. And Dalila said to him:  How dost thou say thou lovest me, when
@c    thy mind is not with me?  Thou hast told me lies these three times, and
@c    wouldst not tell me wherein thy greatest strength lieth.

@c    16:16. And when she pressed him much, and continually hung upon him for
@c    many days, giving him no time to rest, his soul fainted away, and was
@c    wearied even unto death.

@c    16:17. Then opening the truth of the thing, he said to her:  The razor
@c    hath never come upon my head, for I am a Nazarite, that is to say,
@c    consecrated to God from my mother's womb:  If my head be shaven, my
@c    strength shall depart from me, and I shall become weak, and shall be
@c    like other men.

@c    16:18. Then seeing that he had discovered to her all his mind, she sent
@c    to the princes of the Philistines, saying:  Come up this once more, for
@c    now he hath opened his heart to me.  And they went up, taking with them
@c    the money which they had promised.

@c    16:19. But she made him sleep upon her knees, and lay his head in her
@c    bosom.  And she called a barber and shaved his seven locks, and began to
@c    drive him away, and thrust him from her:  for immediately his strength
@c    departed from him.

@c    16:20. And she said:  The Philistines are upon thee, Samson.  And awaking
@c    from sleep, he said in his mind:  I will go out as I did before, and
@c    shake myself, not knowing that the Lord was departed from him.

@c    16:21. Then the Philistines seized upon him, and forthwith pulled out
@c    his eyes, and led him bound in chains to Gaza, and shutting him up in
@c    prison made him grind.

@c    16:22. And now his hair began to grow again,

@c    16:23. And the princes of the Philistines assembled together, to offer
@c    great sacrifices to Dagon their god, and to make merry, saying:  Our god
@c    hath delivered our enemy Samson into our hands.

@c    16:24. And the people also seeing this, praised their god, and said the
@c    same:  Our god hath delivered our adversary into our hands, him that
@c    destroyed our country, and killed very many.

@c    16:25. And rejoicing in their feasts, when they had now taken their
@c    good cheer, they commanded that Samson should be called, and should
@c    play before them.  And being brought out of prison, he played before
@c    them; and they made him stand between two pillars.

@c    16:26. And he said to the lad that guided his steps:  Suffer me to touch
@c    the pillars which support the whole house, and let me lean upon them,
@c    and rest a little.

@c    16:27. Now the house was full of men and women, and all the princes of
@c    the Philistines were there.  Moreover about three thousand persons of
@c    both sexes, from the roof and the higher part of the house, were
@c    beholding Samson's play.

@c    16:28. But he called upon the Lord, saying:  O Lord God remember me, and
@c    restore to me now my former strength, O my God, that I may revenge
@c    myself on my enemies, and for the loss of my two eyes I may take one
@c    revenge.

@c    Revenge myself. . .This desire of revenge was out of zeal for justice
@c    against the enemies of God and his people; and not out of private
@c    rancour and malice of heart.

@c    16:29. And laying hold on both the pillars on which the house rested,
@c    and holding the one with his right hand, and the other with his left,

@c    16:30. He said:  Let me die with the Philistines.  And when he had
@c    strongly shook the pillars, the house fell upon all the princes, and
@c    the rest of the multitude, that was there:  and he killed many more at
@c    his death, than he had killed before in his life.

@c    Let me die. . .Literally, let my soul die.  Samson did not sin on this
@c    occasion, though he was indirectly the cause of his own death.  Because
@c    he was moved to what he did, by a particular inspiration of God, who
@c    also concurred with him by a miracle, in restoring his strength upon
@c    the spot, in consequence of his prayer.  Samson, by dying in this
@c    manner, was a figure of Christ, who by his death overcame all his
@c    enemies.

@c    16:31. And his brethren and all his kindred, going down took his body,
@c    and buried it between Saraa and Esthaol, in the buryingplace of his
@c    father Manue:  and he judged Israel twenty years.



@c    Judges Chapter 17


@c    The history of the idol of Michas, and the young Levite.

@c    17:1. There was at that time a man of mount Ephraim, whose name was
@c    Michas.

@c    17:2. Who said to his mother:  The eleven hundred pieces of silver,
@c    which thou hadst put aside for thyself, and concerning which thou didst
@c    swear in my hearing, behold I have, and they are with me.  And she said
@c    to him.  Blessed be my son by the Lord.

@c    17:3. So he restored them to his mother, who said to him:  I have
@c    consecrated and vowed this silver to the Lord, that my son may receive
@c    it at my hand, and make a graven and a molten god; so now I deliver it
@c    to thee.

@c    17:4. And he restored them to his mother:  and she took two hundred
@c    pieces of silver and gave them to the silversmith, to make of them a
@c    graven and a molten God, which was in the house of Michas.

@c    17:5. And he separated also therein a little temple for the god, and
@c    made an ephod, and theraphim, that is to say, a priestly garment, and
@c    idols:  and he filled the hand of one of his sons, and he became his
@c    priest.

@c    Filled the hand. . .That is, appointed and consecrated him to the
@c    priestly office.

@c    17:6. In those days there was no king in Israel, but every one did that
@c    which seemed right to himself.

@c    17:7. There was also another young man of Bethlehem Juda, of the
@c    kindred thereof:  and he was a Levite, and dwelt there.

@c    17:8. Now he went out from the city of Bethlehem, and desired to
@c    sojourn wheresoever he should find it convenient for him.  And when he
@c    was come to mount Ephraim, as he was on his journey, and had turned
@c    aside a little into the house of Michas,

@c    17:9. He was asked by him whence he came.  And he answered:  I am a
@c    Levite of Bethlehem Juda, and I am going to dwell where I can, and
@c    where I shall find a place to my advantage.

@c    17:10. And Michas said:  Stay with me, and be unto me a father and a
@c    priest, and I will give thee every year ten pieces of silver, and a
@c    double suit of apparel, and thy victuals.

@c    17:11. He was content, and abode with the man, and was unto him as one
@c    of his sons.

@c    17:12. And Michas filled his hand, and had the young man with him for
@c    his priest, saying:

@c    17:13. Now I know God will do me good, since I have a priest of the
@c    race of the Levites.



@c    Judges Chapter 18


@c    The expedition of the men of Dan against Lais:  in their way they rob
@c    Michas of his priest and his gods.

@c    18:1. In those days there was no king in Israel, and the tribe of Dan
@c    sought them an inheritance to dwell in:  for unto that day they had not
@c    received their lot among the other tribes.

@c    Not received, etc. . .They had their portions assigned them, Jos. 19.40.
@c    But, through their own sloth, possessed as yet but a small part of it.
@c    See Judges 1.34.

@c    18:2. So the children of Dan sent five most valiant men, of their stock
@c    and family, from Saraa and Esthaol, to spy out the land, and to view it
@c    diligently:  and they said to them:  Go, and view the land.  They went on
@c    their way, and when they came to mount Ephraim, they went into the
@c    house of Michas, and rested there:

@c    18:3. And knowing the voice of the young man the Levite, and lodging
@c    with him, they said to him:  Who brought thee hither?  what dost thou
@c    here?  why wouldst thou come hither?

@c    18:4. He answered them:  Michas hath done such and such things for me,
@c    and hath hired me to be his priest.

@c    18:5. Then they desired him to consult the Lord, that they might know
@c    whether their journey should be prosperous, and the thing should have
@c    effect.

@c    18:6. He answered them:  Go in peace:  the Lord looketh on your way, and
@c    the journey that you go.

@c    18:7. So the five men going on came to Lais:  and they saw how the
@c    people dwelt therein without any fear, according to the custom of the
@c    Sidonians, secure and easy, having no man at all to oppose them, being
@c    very rich, and living separated, at a distance from Sidon and from all
@c    men.

@c    18:8. And they returned to their brethren in Saraa and Esthaol, who
@c    asked them what they had done:  to whom they answered:

@c    18:9. Arise, and let us go up to them:  for we have seen the land which
@c    is exceeding rich and fruitful:  neglect not, lose no time:  let us go
@c    and possess it, there will be no difficulty.

@c    18:10. We shall come to a people that is secure, into a spacious
@c    country, and the Lord will deliver the place to us, in which there is
@c    no want of any thing that groweth on the earth.

@c    18:11. There went therefore of the kindred of Dan, to wit, from Saraa
@c    and Esthaol, six hundred men, furnished with arms for war.

@c    18:12. And going up they lodged in Cariathiarim of Juda:  which place
@c    from that time is called the camp of Dan, and is behind Cariathiarim.

@c    18:13. From thence they passed into mount Ephraim.  And when they were
@c    come to the house of Michas,

@c    18:14. The five men, that before had been sent to view the land of
@c    Lais, said to the rest of their brethren:  You know that in these houses
@c    there is an ephod and theraphim, and a graven and a molten god:  see
@c    what you are pleased to do.

@c    18:15. And when they had turned a little aside, they went into the
@c    house of the young man the Levite, who was in the house of Michas:  and
@c    they saluted him with words of peace.

@c    18:16. And the six hundred men stood before the door, appointed with
@c    their arms.

@c    18:17. But they that were gone into the house of the young man, went
@c    about to take away the graven god, and the ephod, and the theraphim,
@c    and the molten god, and the priest stood before the door, the six
@c    hundred valiant men waiting not far off.

@c    18:18. So they that were gone in took away the graven thing, the ephod,
@c    and the idols, and the molten god, And the priest said to them:  What
@c    are you doing?

@c    18:19. And they said to him:  Hold thy peace, and put thy finger on thy
@c    mouth, and come with us, that we may have thee for a father, and a
@c    priest.  Whether is better for thee, to be a priest in the house of one
@c    man, or in a tribe and family in Israel?

@c    18:20. When he heard this, he agreed to their words, and took the
@c    ephod, and the idols, and the graven god, and departed with them.

@c    18:21. And when they were going forward, and had put before them the
@c    children and the cattle, and all that was valuable,

@c    18:22. And were now at a distance from the house of Michas, the men
@c    that dwelt in the houses of Michas gathering together followed them,

@c    18:23. And began to shout out after them.  They looked back, and said to
@c    Michas:  What aileth thee?  Why dost thou cry?

@c    18:24. And he answered:  You have taken away my gods which I have made
@c    me, and the priest, and all that I have, and do you say:  What aileth
@c    thee?

@c    18:25. And the children of Dan said to him:  See thou say no more to us,
@c    lest men enraged come upon thee, and thou perish with all thy house.

@c    18:26. And so they went on the journey they had begun.  But Michas
@c    seeing that they were stronger than he, returned to his house.

@c    18:27. And the six hundred men took the priest, and the things we spoke
@c    of before, and came to Lais, to a people that was quiet and secure, and
@c    smote them with the edge of the sword:  and the city they burnt with
@c    fire,

@c    18:28. There being no man at all who brought them any succour, because
@c    they dwelt far from Sidon, and had no society or business with any man.
@c    And the city was in the land of Rohob:  and they rebuilt it, and dwelt
@c    therein,

@c    18:29. Calling the name of the city Dan, after the name of their
@c    father, who was the son of Israel, which before was called Lais.

@c    18:30. And they set up to themselves the graven idol, and Jonathan the
@c    son of Gersam, the son of Moses, he and his sons were priests in the
@c    tribe of Dan, until the day of their captivity.

@c    18:31. And the idol of Michas remained with them all the time that the
@c    house of God was in Silo.  In those days there was no king in Israel.



@c    Judges Chapter 19


@c    A Levite bringing home his wife, is lodged by an old man at Gabaa in
@c    the tribe of Benjamin.  His wife is there abused by wicked men, and in
@c    the morning found dead.  Her husband cutteth her body in pieces, and
@c    sendeth to every tribe of Israel, requiring them to revenge the wicked
@c    fact.

@c    19:1. There was a certain Levite, who dwelt on the side of mount
@c    Ephraim, who took a wife of Bethlehem Juda:

@c    19:2. And she left him, and returned to her father's house in
@c    Bethlehem, and abode with him four months.

@c    19:3. And her husband followed her, willing to be reconciled with her,
@c    and to speak kindly to her, and to bring her back with him, having with
@c    him a servant and two asses:  and she received him, and brought him into
@c    her father's house.  And when his father in law had heard this, and had
@c    seen him, he met him with joy,

@c    19:4. And embraced the man.  And the son in law tarried in the house of
@c    his father in law three days, eating with him and drinking familiarly.

@c    19:5. But on the fourth day, arising early in the morning, he desired
@c    to depart.  But his father in law kept him, and said to him:  Taste first
@c    a little bread, and strengthen thy stomach, and so thou shalt depart.

@c    19:6. And they sat down together, and ate and drank.  And the father of
@c    the young woman said to his son in law:  I beseech thee to stay here to
@c    day, and let us make merry together.

@c    19:7. But he rising up, began to be for departing.  And nevertheless his
@c    father in law earnestly pressed him, and made him stay with him.

@c    19:8. But when morning was come, the Levite prepared to go on his
@c    journey.  And his father in law said to him again:  I beseech thee to
@c    take a little meat, and strengthening thyself, till the day be farther
@c    advanced, afterwards thou mayest depart.  And they ate together.

@c    19:9. And the young man arose to set forward with his wife and servant.
@c    And his father in law spoke to him again:  Consider that the day is
@c    declining, and draweth toward evening:  tarry with me to day also, and
@c    spend the day in mirth, and to morrow thou shalt depart, that thou
@c    mayest go into thy house.

@c    19:10. His son in law would not consent to his words:  but forthwith
@c    went forward, and came over against Jebus, which by another name is
@c    called Jerusalem, leading with him two asses loaden, and his concubine.

@c    Concubine.  She was his lawful wife, but even lawful wives are
@c    frequently in scripture called concubines.  See above, chap. 8. ver.
@c    31.-ver. 16.  Jemini. . .That is, Benjamin.

@c    19:11. And now they were come near Jebus, and the day was far spent:
@c    and the servant said to his master:  Come, I beseech thee, let us turn
@c    into the city of the Jebusites, and lodge there.

@c    19:12. His master answered him:  I will not go into the town of another
@c    nation, who are not of the children of Israel, but I will pass over to
@c    Gabaa:

@c    19:13. And when I shall come thither, we will lodge there, or at least
@c    in the city of Rama.

@c    19:14. So they passed by Jebus, and went on their journey, and the sun
@c    went down upon them when they were by Gabaa, which is in the tribe of
@c    Benjamin:

@c    19:15. And they turned into it to lodge there.  And when they were come
@c    in, they sat in the street of the city, for no man would receive them
@c    to lodge.

@c    19:16. And behold they saw an old man, returning out of the field and
@c    from his work in the evening, and he also was of mount Ephraim, and
@c    dwelt as a stranger in Gabaa; but the men of that country were the
@c    children of Jemini.

@c    19:17. And the old man lifting up his eyes, saw the man sitting with
@c    his bundles in the street of the city, and said to him:  Whence comest
@c    thou?  and whither goest thou?

@c    19:18. He answered him:  We came out from Bethlehem Juda, and we are
@c    going to our home, which is on the side of mount Ephraim, from whence
@c    we went to Bethlehem:  and now we go to the house of God, and none will
@c    receive us under his roof:

@c    19:19. We have straw and hay for provender of the asses, and bread and
@c    wine for the use of myself and of thy handmaid, and of the servant that
@c    is with me:  we want nothing but lodging.

@c    19:20. And the old man answered him:  Peace be with thee:  I will furnish
@c    all things that are necessary:  only I beseech thee, stay not in the
@c    street.

@c    19:21. And he brought him into his house, and gave provender to his
@c    asses:  and after they had washed their feet, he entertained them with a
@c    feast.

@c    19:22. While they were making merry, and refreshing their bodies with
@c    meat and drink, after the labour of the journey, the men of that city,
@c    sons of Belial (that is, without yoke), came and beset the old man's
@c    house, and began to knock at the door, calling to the master of the
@c    house, and saying:  Bring forth the man that came into thy house, that
@c    we may abuse him:

@c    19:23. And the old man went out to them, and said:  Do not so, my
@c    brethren, do not so wickedly:  because this man is come into my lodging,
@c    and cease I pray you from this folly.

@c    19:24. I have a maiden daughter, and this man hath a concubine, I will
@c    bring them out to you, and you may humble them, and satisfy your lust:
@c    only, I beseech you, commit not this crime against nature on the man.

@c    19:25. They would not be satisfied with his words; which the man
@c    seeing, brought out his concubine to them, and abandoned her to their
@c    wickedness:  and when they had abused her all the night, they let her go
@c    in the morning.

@c    19:26. But the woman, at the dawning of the day, came to the door of
@c    the house, where her lord lodged, and there fell down.

@c    19:27. And in the morning the man arose, and opened the door, that he
@c    might end the journey he had begun:  and behold his concubine lay before
@c    the door with her hands spread on the threshold.

@c    19:28. He thinking she was taking her rest, said to her:  Arise, and let
@c    us be going.  But as she made no answer, perceiving she was dead, he
@c    took her up, and laid her upon his ass, and returned to his house.

@c    19:29. And when he was come home, he took a sword, and divided the dead
@c    body of his wife with her bones into twelve parts, and sent the pieces
@c    into all the borders of Israel.

@c    19:30. And when every one had seen this, they all cried out:  There was
@c    never such a thing done in Israel, from the day that our fathers came
@c    up out of Egypt, until this day:  give sentence, and decree in common
@c    what ought to be done.



@c    Judges Chapter 20


@c    The Israelites warring against Benjamin are twice defeated; but in the
@c    third battle the Benjamites are all slain, saving six hundred men.

@c    20:1. Then all the children of Israel went out, and gathered together
@c    as one man, from Dan to Bersabee, with the land of Galaad, to the Lord
@c    in Maspha:

@c    20:2. And all the chiefs of the people, and all the tribes of Israel,
@c    met together in the assembly of the people of God, four hundred
@c    thousand footmen fit for war.

@c    20:3. (Nor were the children of Benjamin ignorant that the children of
@c    Israel were come up to Maspha.)  And the Levite, the husband of the
@c    woman that was killed being asked, how so great a wickedness had been
@c    committed,

@c    20:4. Answered:  I came into Gabaa, of Benjamin, with my wife, and there
@c    I lodged:

@c    20:5. And behold the men of that city, in the night beset the house
@c    wherein I was, intending to kill me, and abused my wife with an
@c    incredible fury of lust, so that at last she died.

@c    20:6. And I took her and cut her in pieces, and sent the parts into all
@c    the borders of your possession:  because there never was so heinous a
@c    crime, and so great an abomination committed in Israel.

@c    20:7. You are all here, O children of Israel, determine what you ought
@c    to do.

@c    20:8. And all the people standing, answered as by the voice of one man:
@c    We will not return to our tents, neither shall any one of us go into
@c    his own house:

@c    20:9. But this we will do in common against Gabaa:

@c    20:10. We will take ten men of a hundred out of all the tribes of
@c    Israel, and a hundred out of a thousand, and a thousand out of ten
@c    thousand, to bring victuals for the army, that we may fight against
@c    Gabaa of Benjamin, and render to it for its wickedness, what it
@c    deserveth.

@c    20:11. And all Israel were gathered together against the city, as one
@c    man, with one mind, and one counsel:

@c    20:12. And they sent messengers to all the tribe of Benjamin, to say to
@c    them:  Why hath so great an abomination been found among you?

@c    20:13. Deliver up the men of Gabaa, that have committed this heinous
@c    crime, that they may die, and the evil may be taken away out of Israel.
@c    But they would not hearken to the proposition of their brethren the
@c    children of Israel:

@c    20:14. But out of all the cities which were of their lot, they gathered
@c    themselves together into Gabaa, to aid them, and to fight against the
@c    whole people of Israel.

@c    20:15. And there were found of Benjamin five and twenty thousand men
@c    that drew the sword, besides the inhabitants of Gabaa,

@c    20:16. Who were seven hundred most valiant men, fighting with the left
@c    hand as well as with the right:  and slinging stones so sure that they
@c    could hit even a hair, and not miss by the stone's going on either
@c    side.

@c    20:17. Of the men of Israel also, beside the children of Benjamin, were
@c    found four hundred thousand that drew swords and were prepared to
@c    fight.

@c    20:18. And they arose and came to the house of God, that is, to Silo:
@c    and they consulted God, and said:  Who shall be in our army the first to
@c    go to the battle against the children of Benjamin?  And the Lord
@c    answered them:  Let Juda be your leader.

@c    20:19. And forthwith the children of Israel rising in the morning,
@c    camped by Gabaa:

@c    20:20. And going out from thence to fight against Benjamin, began to
@c    assault the city.

@c    20:21. And the children of Benjamin coming out of Gabaa slew of the
@c    children of Israel that day two and twenty thousand men.

@c    20:22. Again Israel, trusting in their strength and their number, set
@c    their army in array in the same place, where they had fought before:

@c    Trusting in their strength. . .The Lord suffered them to be overthrown
@c    and many of them to be slain, though their cause was just; partly in
@c    punishment of the idolatry which they exercised or tolerated in the
@c    tribe of Dan, and elsewhere; and partly because they trusted in their
@c    own strength; and therefore, though he bid them fight, he would not
@c    give them the victory, till they were thoroughly humbled and had
@c    learned to trust in him alone.

@c    20:23. Yet so that they first went up and wept before the Lord until
@c    night:  and consulted him and said:  Shall I go out any more to fight
@c    against the children of Benjamin my brethren or not?  And he answered
@c    them:  Go up against them, and join battle.

@c    20:24. And when the children of Israel went out the next day to fight
@c    against the children of Benjamin,

@c    20:25. The children of Benjamin sallied forth out of the gates of
@c    Gabaa:  and meeting them, made so great a slaughter of them, as to kill
@c    eighteen thousand men that drew the sword.

@c    20:26. Wherefore all the children of Israel came to the house of God,
@c    and sat and wept before the Lord:  and they fasted that day till the
@c    evening, and offered to him holocausts, and victims of peace offerings,

@c    20:27. And inquired of him concerning their state.  At that time the ark
@c    of the covenant of the Lord was there,

@c    20:28. And Phinees, the son of Eleazar, the son of Aaron, was over the
@c    house.  So they consulted the Lord, and said:  Shall we go out any more
@c    to fight against the children of Benjamin, our brethren, or shall we
@c    cease?  And the Lord said to them:  Go up, for to morrow I will deliver
@c    them into your hands.

@c    20:29. And the children of Israel set ambushes round about the city of
@c    Gabaa:

@c    20:30. And they drew up their army against Benjamin the third time, as
@c    they had done the first and second.

@c    20:31. And the children of Benjamin boldly issued out of the city, and
@c    seeing their enemies flee, pursued them a long way, so as to wound and
@c    kill some of them, as they had done the first and second day, whilst
@c    they fled by two highways, whereof one goeth up to Bethel and the other
@c    to Gabaa, and they slew about thirty men:

@c    20:32. For they thought to cut them off as they did before.  But they
@c    artfully feigning a flight, designed to draw them away from the city,
@c    and by their seeming to flee, to bring them to the highways aforesaid.

@c    20:33. Then all the children of Israel rising up out of the places
@c    where they were, set their army in battle array, in the place which is
@c    called Baalthamar.  The ambushes also, which were about the city, began
@c    by little and little to come forth,

@c    20:34. And to march from the west side of the city.  And other ten
@c    thousand men chosen out of all Israel, attacked the inhabitants of the
@c    city.  And the battle grew hot against the children of Benjamin:  and
@c    they understood not that present death threatened them on every side.

@c    20:35. And the Lord defeated them before the children of Israel, and
@c    they slew of them in that day five and twenty thousand, and one
@c    hundred, all fighting men, and that drew the sword.

@c    20:36. But the children of Benjamin, when they saw themselves to be too
@c    weak, began to flee.  Which the children of Israel seeing, gave them
@c    place to flee, that they might come to the ambushes that were prepared,
@c    which they had set near the city.

@c    20:37. And they that were in ambush arose on a sudden out of their
@c    coverts, and whilst Benjamin turned their backs to the slayers, went
@c    into the city, and smote it with the edge of the sword.

@c    20:38. Now the children of Israel had given a sign to them, whom they
@c    had laid in ambushes, that after they had taken the city, they should
@c    make a fire:  that by the smoke rising on high, they might shew that the
@c    city was taken.

@c    20:39. And when the children of Israel saw this in the battle, (for the
@c    children of Benjamin thought they fled, and pursued them vigorously,
@c    killing thirty men of their army)

@c    20:40. And perceived, as it were, a pillar of smoke rise up from the
@c    city; and Benjamin looking back, saw that the city was taken, and that
@c    the flames ascended on high:

@c    20:41. They that before had made as if they fled, turning their faces,
@c    stood bravely against them.  Which the children of Benjamin seeing,
@c    turned their backs,

@c    20:42. And began to go towards the way of the desert, the enemy
@c    pursuing them thither also.  And they that fired the city came also out
@c    to meet them.

@c    20:43. And so it was, that they were slain on both sides by the
@c    enemies, and there was no rest of their men dying.  They fell and were
@c    beaten down on the east side of the city of Gabaa.

@c    20:44. And they that were slain in the same place, were eighteen
@c    thousand men, all most valiant soldiers.

@c    20:45. And when they that remained of Benjamin saw this, they fled into
@c    the wilderness, and made towards the rock that is called Remmon.  In
@c    that flight also, as they were straggling, and going different ways;
@c    they slew of them five thousand men.  And as they went farther, they
@c    still pursued them, and slew also other two thousand.

@c    20:46. And so it came to pass, that all that were slain of Benjamin, in
@c    divers places, were five and twenty thousand fighting men, most valiant
@c    for war.

@c    20:47. And there remained of all the number of Benjamin only six
@c    hundred men that were able to escape, and flee to the wilderness:  and
@c    they abode in the rock Remmon four months.

@c    20:48. But the children of Israel returning, put all the remains of the
@c    city to the sword, both men and beasts, and all the cities and villages
@c    of Benjamin were consumed with devouring flames.



@c    Judges Chapter 21


@c    The tribe of Benjamin is saved from being utterly extinct, by providing
@c    wives for the six hundred that remained.

@c    21:1. Now the children of Israel had also sworn in Maspha, saying:  None
@c    of us shall give of his daughters to the children of Benjamin to wife.

@c    21:2. And they all came to the house of God in Silo, and sitting before
@c    him till the evening, lifted up their voices, and began to lament and
@c    weep, saying:

@c    21:3. O Lord God of Israel, why is so great an evil come to pass in thy
@c    people, that this day one tribe should be taken away from among us?

@c    21:4. And rising early the next day, they built an altar:  and offered
@c    there holocausts, and victims of peace, and they said:

@c    21:5. Who is there among all the tribes of Israel that came not up with
@c    the army of the Lord?  for they had bound themselves with a great oath,
@c    when they were in Maspha, that whosoever were wanting should be slain.

@c    21:6. And the children of Israel being moved with repentance for their
@c    brother Benjamin, began to say:  One tribe is taken away from Israel.

@c    21:7. Whence shall they take wives?  For we have all in general sworn,
@c    not to give our daughters to them.

@c    21:8. Therefore they said:  Who is there of all the tribes of Israel,
@c    that came not up to the Lord to Maspha?  And, behold, the inhabitants of
@c    Jabes Galaad were found not to have been in that army.

@c    21:9. (At that time also when they were in Silo, no one of them was
@c    found there,)

@c    21:10. So they sent ten thousand of the most valiant men, and commanded
@c    them, saying:  Go and put the inhabitants of Jabes Galaad to the sword,
@c    with their wives and their children.

@c    21:11. And this is what you shall observe:  Every male, and all women
@c    that have known men, you shall kill, but the virgins you shall save.

@c    21:12. And there were found of Jabes Galaad four hundred virgins, that
@c    had not known the bed of a man, and they brought them to the camp in
@c    Silo, into the land of Chanaan.

@c    21:13. And they sent messengers to the children of Benjamin, that were
@c    in the rock Remmon, and commanded them to receive them in peace.

@c    21:14. And the children of Benjamin came at that time, and wives were
@c    given them of Jabes Galaad:  but they found no others, whom they might
@c    give in like manner.

@c    21:15. And all Israel was very sorry, and repented for the destroying
@c    of one tribe out of Israel.

@c    21:16. And the ancients said:  What shall we do with the rest, that have
@c    not received wives?  for all the women in Benjamin are dead.

@c    21:17. And we must use all care, and provide with great diligence, that
@c    one tribe be not destroyed out of Israel.

@c    21:18. For as to our own daughters we cannot give them, being bound
@c    with an oath and a curse, whereby we said:  Cursed be he that shall give
@c    Benjamin any of his daughters to wife.

@c    21:19. So they took counsel, and said:  Behold, there is a yearly
@c    solemnity of the Lord in Silo, which is situate on the north of the
@c    city of Bethel, and on the east side of the way, that goeth from Bethel
@c    to Sichem, and on the south of the town of Lebona.

@c    21:20. And they commanded the children of Benjamin and said:  Go, and
@c    lie hid in the vineyards,

@c    21:21. And when you shall see the daughters of Silo come out, as the
@c    custom is, to dance, come ye on a sudden out of the vineyards, and
@c    catch you every man his wife among them, and go into the land of
@c    Benjamin.

@c    21:22. And when their fathers and their brethren shall come, and shall
@c    begin to complain against you, and to chide, we will say to them:  Have
@c    pity on them:  for they took them not away as by the right of war or
@c    conquest, but when they asked to have them, you gave them not, and the
@c    fault was committed on your part.

@c    21:23. And the children of Benjamin did as they had been commanded:
@c    and, according to their number, they carried off for themselves every
@c    man his wife of them that were dancing:  and they went into their
@c    possession, and built up their cities, and dwelt in them.

@c    21:24. The children of Israel also returned by their tribes, and
@c    families, to their dwellings.  In those days there was no king in
@c    Israel:  but every one did that which seemed right to himself.
