@c    THE PROPHECY OF JOEL



@c    JOEL, whose name, according to ST. JEROME, signifies THE LORD GOD:  or,
@c    as others say, THE COMING DOWN OF GOD:  prophesied about the same time
@c    in the kingdom of Judea, as OSEE did in the kingdom of Israel.  He
@c    foretells under figure the great evils that were coming upon the people
@c    for their sins:  earnestly exhorts them to repentance:  and comforts them
@c    with the promise of a TEACHER OF JUSTICE, viz., CHRIST JESUS OUR LORD,
@c    and of the coming down of his holy SPIRIT.



@c    Joel Chapter 1


@c    The prophet describes the judgments that shall fall upon the people,
@c    and invites them to fasting and prayer.

@c    1:1. The word of the Lord, that came to Joel, the son of Phatuel.

@c    1:2. Hear this, ye old men, and give ear, all ye inhabitants of the
@c    land:  did this ever happen in your days, or in the days of your
@c    fathers?

@c    1:3. Tell ye of this to your children, and let your children tell their
@c    children, and their children to another generation.

@c    1:4. That which the palmerworm hath left, the locust hath eaten:  and
@c    that which the locust hath left, the bruchus hath eaten:  and that which
@c    the bruchus hath left, the mildew hath destroyed.

@c    That which the palmerworm hath left, etc. . .Some understand this
@c    literally of the desolation of the land by these insects:  others
@c    understand it of the different invasions of the Chaldeans, or other
@c    enemies.

@c    1:5. Awake, ye that are drunk, and weep, and mourn all ye that take
@c    delight; in drinking sweet wine:  for it is cut off from your mouth.

@c    1:6. For a nation come up upon my land, strong, and without number:  his
@c    teeth are like the teeth of a lion:  and his cheek teeth as of a lion's
@c    whelp.

@c    1:7. He hath laid my vineyard waste, and hath pilled off the bark of my
@c    fig tree:  he hath stripped it bare, and cast it away; the branches
@c    thereof are made white.

@c    1:8. Lament like a virgin girded with sackcloth for the husband of her
@c    youth.

@c    1:9. Sacrifice and libation is cut off from the house of the Lord:  the
@c    priests, the Lord's ministers, have mourned:

@c    1:10. The country is destroyed, the ground hath mourned:  for the corn
@c    is wasted, the wine is confounded, the oil hath languished.

@c    1:11. The husbandmen are ashamed, the vinedressers have howled for the
@c    wheat, and for the barley, because the harvest of the field is
@c    perished.

@c    1:12. The vineyard is confounded, and the fig tree hath languished:  the
@c    pomegranate tree, and the palm tree, and the apple tree, and all the
@c    trees of the field are withered:  because joy is withdrawn from the
@c    children of men.

@c    1:13. Gird yourselves, and lament, O ye priests, howl, ye ministers of
@c    the altars:  go in, lie in sackcloth, ye ministers of my God:  because
@c    sacrifice and libation is cut off from the house of your God.

@c    1:14. Sanctify ye a fast, call an assembly, gather together the
@c    ancients, all the inhabitants of the land into the house of your God:
@c    and cry ye to the Lord:

@c    1:15. Ah, ah, ah, for the day:  because the day of the Lord is at hand,
@c    and it shall come like destruction from the mighty.

@c    1:16. Is not your food cut off before your eyes, joy and gladness from
@c    the house of our God?

@c    1:17. The beasts have rotted in their dung, the barns are destroyed,
@c    the storehouses are broken down:  because the corn is confounded.

@c    1:18. Why did the beasts groan, why did the herds of cattle low?
@c    because there is no pasture for them:  yea, and the flocks of sheep are
@c    perished.

@c    1:19. To thee, O Lord, will I cry:  because fire hath devoured the
@c    beautiful places of the wilderness:  and the flame hath burnt all the
@c    trees of the country.

@c    1:20. Yea, and the beasts of the field have looked up to thee, as a
@c    garden bed that thirsteth after rain, for the springs of waters are
@c    dried up, and fire hath devoured the beautiful places of the
@c    wilderness.



@c    Joel Chapter 2


@c    2:1. Blow ye the trumpet in Sion, sound an alarm in my holy mountain,
@c    let all the inhabitants of the land tremble:  because the day of the
@c    Lord cometh, because it is nigh at hand.

@c    The day of the Lord. . .That is, the time when he will execute justice
@c    upon sinners.

@c    2:2. A day of darkness, and of gloominess, a day of clouds and
@c    whirlwinds:  a numerous and strong people as the morning spread upon the
@c    mountains:  the like to it hath not been from the beginning, nor shall
@c    be after it, even to the years of generation and generation.

@c    A numerous and strong people. . .The Assyrians, or Chaldeans.  Others
@c    understand all this of an army of locusts laying waste the land.

@c    2:3. Before the face thereof a devouring fire, and behind it a burning
@c    flame:  the land is like a garden of pleasure before it, and behind it a
@c    desolate wilderness, neither is there any one that can escape it.

@c    2:4. The appearance of them is as the appearance of horses, and they
@c    shall run like horsemen.

@c    2:5. They shall leap like the noise of chariots upon the tops of
@c    mountains, like the noise of a flame of fire devouring the stubble, as
@c    a strong people prepared to battle.

@c    2:6. At their presence the people shall be in grievous pains:  all faces
@c    shall be made like a kettle.

@c    2:7. They shall run like valiant men:  like men of war they shall scale
@c    the wall:  the men shall march every one on his way, and they shall not
@c    turn aside from their ranks.

@c    2:8. No one shall press upon his brother:  they shall walk every one in
@c    his path:  yea, and they shall fall through the windows, and shall take
@c    no harm.

@c    2:9. They shall enter into the city:  they shall run upon the wall, they
@c    shall climb up the houses, they shall come in at the windows, as a
@c    thief.

@c    2:10. At their presence the earth hath trembled, the heavens are moved:
@c    the sun and moon are darkened, and the stars have withdrawn their
@c    shining.

@c    2:11. And the Lord hath uttered his voice before the face of his army:
@c    for his armies are exceedingly great, for they are strong, and execute
@c    his word:  for the day of the Lord is great and very terrible:  and who
@c    can stand it?

@c    2:12. Now, therefore, saith the Lord.  Be converted to me with all your
@c    heart, in fasting, and in weeping, and mourning.

@c    2:13. And rend your hearts, and not your garments and turn to the Lord
@c    your God:  for he is gracious and merciful, patient and rich in mercy,
@c    and ready to repent of the evil.

@c    2:14. Who knoweth but he will return, and forgive, and leave a blessing
@c    behind him, sacrifice and libation to the Lord your God?

@c    2:15. Blow the trumpet in Sion, sanctify a fast, call a solemn
@c    assembly,

@c    2:16. Gather together the people, sanctify the church, assemble the
@c    ancients, gather together the little ones, and them that suck at the
@c    breasts:  let the bridegroom go forth from his bed, and the bride out of
@c    her bridal chamber.

@c    2:17. Between the porch and the altar the priests, the Lord's
@c    ministers, shall weep, and shall say:  Spare, O Lord, spare thy people:
@c    and give not thy inheritance to reproach, that the heathens should rule
@c    over them.  Why should they say among the nations:  Where is their God?

@c    2:18. The Lord hath been zealous for his land, and hath spared his
@c    people.

@c    2:19. And the Lord answered, and said to his people:  Behold I will send
@c    you corn, and wine, and oil, and you shall be filled with them:  and I
@c    will no more make you a reproach among the nations.

@c    2:20. And I will remove far off from you the northern enemy:  and I will
@c    drive him into a land unpassable, and desert, with his face towards the
@c    east sea, and his hinder part towards the utmost sea:  and his stench
@c    shall ascend, and his rottenness shall go up, because he hath done
@c    proudly.

@c    The northern enemy. . .Some understand this of Holofernes and his army:
@c    others, of the locusts.

@c    2:21. Fear not, O land, be glad, and rejoice:  for the Lord hath done
@c    great things.

@c    2:22. Fear not, ye beasts of the fields:  for the beautiful places of
@c    the wilderness are sprung, for the tree hath brought forth its fruit,
@c    the fig tree, and the vine have yielded their strength.

@c    2:23. And you, O children of Sion, rejoice, and be joyful in the Lord
@c    your God:  because he hath given you a teacher of justice, and he will
@c    make the early and the latter rain to come down to you as in the
@c    beginning.

@c    2:24. And the floors shall be filled with wheat, and the presses shall
@c    overflow with wine, and oil.

@c    2:25. And I will restore to you the years which the locust, and the
@c    bruchus, and the mildew, and the palmerworm hath eaten; my great host
@c    which I sent upon you.

@c    2:26. And you shall eat in plenty, and shall be filled and you shall
@c    praise the name of the Lord your God; who hath done wonders with you,
@c    and my people shall not be confounded for ever.

@c    2:27. And you shall know that I am in the midst of Israel:  and I am the
@c    Lord your God, and there is none besides:  and my people shall not be
@c    confounded forever.

@c    2:28. And it shall come to pass after this, that I will pour out my
@c    spirit upon all flesh:  and your sons and your daughters shall prophesy:
@c    your old men shall dream dreams, and your young men shall see visions.

@c    2:29. Moreover, upon my servants and handmaids in those days I will
@c    pour forth my spirit.

@c    2:30. And I will shew wonders in heaven; and in earth, blood, and fire,
@c    and vapour of smoke.

@c    2:31. The sun shall be turned into darkness, and the moon into blood:
@c    before the great and dreadful day of the Lord doth come.

@c    2:32. And it shall come to pass, that every one that shall call upon
@c    the name of the Lord, shall be saved:  for in Mount Sion, and in
@c    Jerusalem shall be salvation, as the Lord hath said, and in the residue
@c    whom the Lord shall call.



@c    Joel Chapter 3


@c    3:1. For behold in those days, and in that time when I shall bring back
@c    the captivity of Juda, and Jerusalem:

@c    3:2. I will gather together all nations and will bring them down into
@c    the valley of Josaphat:  and I will plead with them there for my people,
@c    and for my inheritance, Israel, whom they have scattered among the
@c    nations, and have parted my land.

@c    3:3. And they have cast lots upon my people:  and the boy they have put
@c    in the stews, and the girl they have sold for wine, that they might
@c    drink.

@c    3:4. But what have you to do with me, O Tyre, and Sidon, and all the
@c    coast of the Philistines?  will you revenge yourselves on me?  and if you
@c    revenge yourselves on me, I will very soon return you a recompense upon
@c    your own head.

@c    3:5. For you have taken away my silver, and my gold:  and my desirable,
@c    and most beautiful things you have carried into your temples.

@c    3:6. And the children of Juda, and the children of Jerusalem, you have
@c    sold to the children of the Greeks, that you might remove them far off
@c    from their own country.

@c    3:7. Behold, I will raise them up out of the place wherein you have
@c    sold them:  and I will return your recompense upon your own heads.

@c    3:8. And I will sell your sons, and your daughters, by the hands of the
@c    children of Juda, and they shall sell them to the Sabeans, a nation far
@c    off, for the Lord hath spoken it.

@c    3:9. Proclaim ye this among the nations:  Prepare war, raise up the
@c    strong:  let them come, let all the men of war come up.

@c    3:10. Cut your ploughshares into swords, and your spades into spears.
@c    Let the weak say:  I am strong.

@c    3:11. Break forth, and come, all ye nations from round about, and
@c    gather yourselves together:  there will the Lord cause all thy strong
@c    ones to fall down.

@c    3:12. Let them arise, and let the nations come up into the valley of
@c    Josaphat:  for there I will sit to judge all nations round about.

@c    3:13. Put ye in the sickles, for the harvest is ripe:  come and go down,
@c    for the press is full, the fats run over:  for their wickedness is
@c    multiplied.

@c    3:14. Nations, nations in the valley of destruction:  for the day of the
@c    Lord is near in the valley of destruction.

@c    3:15. The sun and the moon are darkened, and the stars have withdrawn
@c    their shining.

@c    3:16. And the Lord shall roar out of Sion, and utter his voice from
@c    Jerusalem:  and the heavens and the earth shall be moved, and the Lord
@c    shall be the hope of his people, and the strength of the children of
@c    Israel.

@c    3:17. And you shall know that I am the Lord your God, dwelling in Sion,
@c    my holy mountain:  and Jerusalem shall be holy, and strangers shall pass
@c    through it no more.

@c    3:18. And it shall come to pass in that day, that the mountains shall
@c    drop down sweetness, aud the hills shall flow with milk:  and waters
@c    shall flow through all the rivers of Juda:  and a fountain shall come
@c    forth of the house of the Lord, and shall water the torrent of thorns.

@c    A fountain shall come forth of the house of the Lord, etc. . .Viz., the
@c    fountain of grace in the church militant, and of glory in the church
@c    triumphant:  which shall water the torrent or valley of thorns, that is,
@c    the souls that before, like barren ground brought forth nothing but
@c    thorns; or that were afflicted with the thorns of crosses and
@c    tribulations.

@c    3:19. Egypt shall be a desolation, and Edom a wilderness destroyed:
@c    because they have done unjustly against the children of Juda, and have
@c    shed innocent blood in their land.

@c    3:20. And Judea shall be inhabited for ever, and Jerusalem to
@c    generation and generation.

@c    Judea--and Jerusalem. . .That is, the spiritual Jerusalem, viz., the
@c    church of Christ.

@c    3:21. And I will cleanse their blood, which I had not cleansed:  and the
@c    Lord will dwell in Sion.
