@node papicimoi pagbu, , , pamoi pagbu
@chapter papicimoi pagbu             [Book of Leviticus]

@c    THE BOOK OF LEVITICUS
JAVNRLEVI

.iva'i

KIXSKU
@c anyone have a better word for "call" in this context?

@c    This Book is called LEVITICUS, because it treats of the Offices,
@c    Ministries, Rites and Ceremonies of the Priests and Levites.  The
@c    Hebrews call it VAICRA, from the word with which it begins.



@c    Leviticus Chapter 1


@c    Of holocausts or burnt offerings.

@c    1:1. And the Lord called Moses, and spoke to him from the tabernacle of
@c    the testimony, saying:

@c    1:2. Speak to the children of Israel, and thou shalt say to them:  The
@c    man among you that shall offer to the Lord a sacrifice of the cattle,
@c    that is, offering victims of oxen and sheep:

@c    1:3. If his offering be a holocaust, and of the herd, he shall offer a
@c    male without blemish, at the door of the testimony, to make the Lord
@c    favourable to him.

@c    A holocaust. . .That is, a whole burnt offering (olokauston), so called,
@c    because the whole victim was consumed with fire; and given in such
@c    manner to God as wholly to evaporate, as it were, for his honour and
@c    glory; without having any part of it reserved for the use of man.  The
@c    other sacrifices in the Old Testament were either offerings for sin, or
@c    peace offerings:  and these latter again were either offered in
@c    thanksgiving for blessings received; or by way of prayer for new
@c    favours or graces.  So that sacrifices were then offered to God for four
@c    different ends or intentions, answerable to the different obligations
@c    which man has to God:  1. By way of adoration, homage, praise, and glory
@c    due to his divine majesty.  2. By way of thanksgiving for all benefits
@c    received from him.  3. By way of confessing and craving pardon for sins.
@c    4. By way of prayer and petition for grace and relief in all
@c    necessities.  In the New Law we have but one sacrifice, viz., that of
@c    the body and blood of Christ:  but this one sacrifice of the New
@c    Testament perfectly answers all these four ends; and both priest and
@c    people, as often as it is celebrated, ought to join in offering it up
@c    for these four ends.

@c    1:4. And he shall put his hand upon the head of the victim:  and it
@c    shall be acceptable, and help to its expiation.

@c    1:5. And he shall immolate the calf before the Lord:  and the priests
@c    the sons of Aaron shall offer the blood thereof, pouring it round about
@c    the altar, which is before the door of the tabernacle.

@c    1:6. And when they have flayed the victim, they shall cut the joints
@c    into pieces:

@c    1:7. And shall put fire on the altar, having before laid in order a
@c    pile of wood.

@c    1:8. And they shall lay the parts that are cut out in order thereupon:
@c    to wit, the head, and all things that cleave to the liver;

@c    1:9. The entrails and feet being washed with water.  And the priest
@c    shall burn them upon the altar for a holocaust, and a sweet savour to
@c    the Lord.

@c    1:10. And if the offering be of the flocks, a holocaust of sheep or of
@c    goats, he shall offer a male without blemish.

@c    1:11. And he shall immolate it at the side of the altar that looketh to
@c    the north, before the Lord:  but the sons of Aaron shall pour the blood
@c    thereof upon the altar round about.

@c    1:12. And they shall divide the joints, the head, and all that cleave
@c    to the liver:  and shall lay them upon the wood, under which the fire is
@c    to be put.

@c    1:13. But the entrails and the feet they shall wash with water.  And the
@c    priest shall offer it all and burn it all upon the altar for a
@c    holocaust, and most sweet savour to the Lord.

@c    1:14. But if the oblation of a holocaust to the Lord be of birds, of
@c    turtles, or of young pigeons:

@c    1:15. The priest shall offer it at the altar:  and twisting back the
@c    neck, and breaking the place of the wound, he shall make the blood run
@c    down upon the brim of the altar.

@c    1:16. But the crop of the throat, and the feathers he shall cast beside
@c    the altar at the east side, in the place where the ashes are wont to be
@c    poured out.

@c    1:17. And he shall break the pinions thereof, and shall not cut, nor
@c    divide it with a knife:  and shall burn it upon the altar, putting fire
@c    under the wood.  It is a holocaust and oblation of most sweet savour to
@c    the Lord.



@c    Leviticus Chapter 2


@c    Of offerings of flour, and firstfruits.

@c    2:1. When any one shall offer an oblation of sacrifice to the Lord, his
@c    offering shall be of fine flour:  and he shall pour oil upon it, and put
@c    frankincense,

@c    2:2. And shall bring it to the sons of Aaron the priests.  And one of
@c    them shall take a handful of the flour and oil, and all the
@c    frankincense; and shall put it a memorial upon the altar for a most
@c    sweet savour to the Lord.

@c    2:3. And the remnant of the sacrifice shall be Aaron's, and his sons',
@c    holy of holies of the offerings of the Lord.

@c    Holy of holies. . .That is, most holy, as being dedicated to God, and
@c    set aside by his ordinance for the use of his priests.

@c    2:4. But when thou offerest a sacrifice baked in the oven of flour, to
@c    wit, loaves without leaven, tempered with oil, and unleavened wafers,
@c    anointed with oil:

@c    2:5. If thy oblation be from the fryingpan, of flour tempered with oil,
@c    and without leaven:

@c    2:6. Thou shalt divide it into little pieces, and
@c    shalt pour oil upon it.

@c    2:7. And if the sacrifice be from the gridiron, in like manner the
@c    flour shall be tempered with oil.

@c    2:8. And when thou offerest it to the Lord, thou shalt deliver it to
@c    the hands of the priest.

@c    2:9. And when he hath offered it, he shall take a memorial out of the
@c    sacrifice, and burn it upon the altar for a sweet savour to the Lord.

@c    2:10. And whatsoever is left, shall be Aaron's, and his sons':  holy of
@c    holies of the offerings of the Lord.

@c    2:11. Every oblation that is offered to the Lord shall be made without
@c    leaven:  neither shall any leaven or honey be burnt in the sacrifice to
@c    the Lord.

@c    Without leaven or honey. . .No leaven nor honey was to be used in the
@c    sacrifice offered to God; to signify that we are to exclude from the
@c    pure worship of the gospel, all double dealing and affection to carnal
@c    pleasures.

@c    2:12. You shall offer only the firstfruits of them and gifts:  but they
@c    shall not be put upon the altar, for a savour of sweetness.

@c    2:13. Whatsoever sacrifice thou offerest, thou shalt season it with
@c    salt:  neither shalt thou take away the salt of the covenant of thy God
@c    from thy sacrifice.  In all thy oblations thou shalt offer salt.

@c    Salt. . .In every sacrifice salt was to be used, which is an emblem of
@c    wisdom and discretion, without which none of our performances are
@c    agreeable to God.

@c    2:14. But if thou offer a gift of the firstfruits of thy corn to the
@c    Lord, of the ears yet green, thou shalt dry it at the fire, and break
@c    it small like meal; and so shalt thou offer thy firstfruits to the
@c    Lord:

@c    2:15. Pouring oil upon it and putting on frankincense, because it is
@c    the oblation of the Lord.

@c    2:16. Whereof the priest shall burn for a memorial of the gift, part of
@c    the corn broken small and of the oil, and all the frankincense.



@c    Leviticus Chapter 3


@c    Of peace offerings.

@c    3:1. And if his oblation be a sacrifice of peace offerings, and he will
@c    offer of the herd, whether male or female:  he shall offer them without
@c    blemish before the Lord.

@c    Peace offerings. . .Peace, in the scripture language, signifies
@c    happiness, welfare or prosperity; in a word, all kind of
@c    blessings.--Such sacrifices, therefore, as were offered either on
@c    occasion of blessings received, or to obtain new favours, were called
@c    pacific or peace offerings.  In these, some part of the victim was
@c    consumed with fire on the altar of God; other parts were eaten by the
@c    priests and by the persons for whom the sacrifice was offered.

@c    3:2. And he shall lay his hand upon the head of his victim, which shall
@c    be slain in the entry of the tabernacle of the testimony:  and the sons
@c    of Aaron the priests shall pour the blood round about upon the altar.

@c    3:3. And they shall offer of the sacrifice of peace offerings, for an
@c    oblation to the Lord:  the fat that covereth the entrails, and all the
@c    fat that is within,

@c    3:4. The two kidneys with the fat wherewith the flanks are covered, and
@c    the caul of the liver with the two little kidneys.

@c    3:5. And they shall burn them upon the altar, for a holocaust, putting
@c    fire under the wood:  for an oblation of most sweet savour to the Lord.

@c    3:6. But if his oblation and the sacrifice of peace offering be of the
@c    flock, whether he offer male or female, they shall be without blemish.

@c    3:7. If he offer a lamb before the Lord:

@c    3:8. He shall put his hand upon the head of the victim.  And it shall be
@c    slain in the entry of the tabernacle of the testimony:  and the sons of
@c    Aaron shall pour the blood thereof round about upon the altar.

@c    3:9. And they shall offer of the victim of peace offerings, a sacrifice
@c    to the Lord:  the fat and the whole rump,

@c    3:10. With the kidneys, and the fat that covereth the belly and all the
@c    vitals and both the little kidneys, with the fat that is about the
@c    flanks, and the caul of the liver with the little kidneys.

@c    3:11. And the priest shall burn them upon the altar, for the food of
@c    the fire, and of the oblation of the Lord.

@c    3:12. If his offering be a goat, and he offer it to the Lord:

@c    3:13. He shall put his hand upon the head thereof:  and shall immolate
@c    it in the entry of the tabernacle of the testimony.  And the sons of
@c    Aaron shall pour the blood thereof round about upon the altar.

@c    3:14. And they shall take of it for the food of the Lord's fire, the
@c    fat that covereth the belly, and that covereth all the vital parts:

@c    3:15. The two little kidneys with the caul that is upon them which is
@c    by the flanks, and the fat of the liver with the little kidneys.

@c    3:16. And the priest shall burn them upon the altar, for the food of
@c    the fire, and of a most sweet savour.  All the fat shall be the Lord's.

@c    3:17. By a perpetual law for your generations, and in all your
@c    habitations:  neither blood nor fat shall you eat at all.

@c    Fat. . .It is meant of the fat, which by the prescription of the law was
@c    to be offered on God's altar; not of the fat of meat, such as we
@c    commonly eat.



@c    Leviticus Chapter 4


@c    Of offerings for sins of ignorance.

@c    4:1. And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying:

@c    4:2. Say to the children of Israel:  The soul that sinneth through
@c    ignorance, and doth any thing concerning any of the commandments of the
@c    Lord, which he commanded not to be done:

@c    Ignorance. . .To be ignorant of what we are bound to know is sinful; and
@c    for such culpable ignorance, these sacrifices, prescribed in this and
@c    the following chapter, were appointed.

@c    4:3. If the priest that is anointed shall sin, making the people to
@c    offend, he shall offer to the Lord for his sin a calf without blemish.

@c    4:4. And he shall bring it to the door of the testimony before the
@c    Lord:  and shall put his hand upon the head thereof, and shall sacrifice
@c    it to the Lord.

@c    4:5. He shall take also of the blood of the calf:  and carry it into the
@c    tabernacle of the testimony.

@c    The blood. . .As the figure of the blood of Christ shed for the
@c    remission of our sins, and carried by him into the sanctuary of heaven.

@c    4:6. And having dipped his finger in the blood, he shall sprinkle with
@c    it seven times before the Lord, before the veil of the sanctuary.

@c    4:7. And he shall put some of the same blood upon the horns of the
@c    altar of the sweet incense most acceptable to the Lord, which is in the
@c    tabernacle of the testimony.  And he shall pour all the rest of the
@c    blood at the foot of the altar of holocaust in the entry of the
@c    tabernacle.

@c    4:8. And he shall take off the fat of the calf for the sin offering, as
@c    well that which covereth the entrails, as all the inwards:

@c    4:9. The two little kidneys, and the caul that is upon them, which is
@c    by the flanks, and the fat of the liver with the little kidneys:

@c    4:10. As it is taken off from the calf of the sacrifice of peace
@c    offerings.  And he shall burn them upon the altar of holocaust.

@c    4:11. But the skin and all the flesh with the head and the feet and the
@c    bowels and the dung:

@c    4:12. And the rest of the body, he shall carry forth without the camp
@c    into a clean place where the ashes are wont to be poured out:  and he
@c    shall burn them upon a pile of wood.  They shall be burnt in the place
@c    where the ashes are poured out.

@c    4:13. And if all the multitude of Israel shall be ignorant, and through
@c    ignorance shall do that which is against the commandment of the Lord,

@c    4:14. And afterwards shall understand their sin:  they shall offer for
@c    their sin a calf, and shall bring it to the door of the tabernacle.

@c    4:15. And the ancients of the people shall put their hands upon the
@c    head thereof before the Lord.  And the calf being immolated in the sight
@c    of the Lord:

@c    4:16. The priest that is anointed shall carry of the blood into the
@c    tabernacle of the testimony.

@c    4:17. And shall dip his finger in it and sprinkle it seven times before
@c    the veil.

@c    4:18. And he shall put of the same blood on the horns of the altar that
@c    is before the Lord, in the tabernacle of the testimony.  And the rest of
@c    the blood he shall pour at the foot of the altar of holocaust, which is
@c    at the door of the tabernacle of the testimony.

@c    4:19. And all the fat thereof he shall take off, and shall burn it upon
@c    the altar:

@c    4:20. Doing so with this calf, as he did also with that before.  And the
@c    priest praying for them, the Lord will be merciful unto them.

@c    4:21. But the calf itself he shall carry forth without the camp, and
@c    shall burn it as he did the former calf:  because it is for the sin of
@c    the multitude.

@c    4:22. If a prince shall sin, and through ignorance do any one of the
@c    things that the law of the Lord forbiddeth,

@c    4:23. And afterwards shall come to know his sin:  he shall offer a buck
@c    goat without blemish, a sacrifice to the Lord.

@c    4:24. And he shall put his hand upon the head thereof:  and when he hath
@c    immolated it in the place where the holocaust is wont to be slain
@c    before the Lord, because it is for sin,

@c    4:25. The priest shall dip his finger in the blood of the victim for
@c    sin, touching therewith the horns of the altar of holocaust, and
@c    pouring out the rest at the foot thereof.

@c    4:26. But the fat he shall burn upon it, as is wont to be done with the
@c    victims of peace offerings.  And the priest shall pray for him, and for
@c    his sin:  and it shall be forgiven him.

@c    4:27. And if any one of the people of the land shall sin through
@c    ignorance, doing any of those things that by the law of the Lord are
@c    forbidden, and offending,

@c    4:28. And shall come to know his sin:  he shall offer a she goat without
@c    blemish.

@c    4:29. And he shall put his hand upon the head of the victim that is for
@c    sin:  and shall immolate it in the place of the holocaust.

@c    4:30. And the priest shall take of the blood with his finger, and shall
@c    touch the horns of the altar of holocaust:  and shall pour out the rest
@c    at the foot thereof.

@c    4:31. But taking off all the fat, as is wont to be taken away of the
@c    victims of peace offerings, he shall burn it upon the altar, for a
@c    sweet savour to the Lord:  and he shall pray for him, and it shall be
@c    forgiven him.

@c    4:32. But if he offer of the flock a victim for his sin, to wit, an ewe
@c    without blemish:

@c    4:33. He shall put his hand upon the head thereof, and shall immolate
@c    it in the place where the victims of holocausts are wont to be slain.

@c    4:34. And the priest shall take of the blood thereof with his finger,
@c    and shall touch the horns of the altar of holocaust:  and the rest he
@c    shall pour out at the foot thereof.

@c    4:35. All the fat also he shall take off, as the fat of the ram that is
@c    offered for peace offerings is wont to be taken away:  and shall burn it
@c    upon the altar, for a burnt sacrifice of the Lord.  And he shall pray
@c    for him and his sin, and it shall be forgiven him.



@c    Leviticus Chapter 5


@c    Of other sacrifices for sins.

@c    5:1. If any one sin, and hear the voice of one swearing, and is a
@c    witness either because he himself hath seen, or is privy to it:  if he
@c    do not utter it, he shall bear his iniquity.

@c    5:2. Whosoever toucheth any unclean thing, either that which hath been
@c    killed by a beast, or died of itself, or any other creeping thing:  and
@c    forgetteth his uncleanness, he is guilty, and hath offended.

@c    5:3. And if he touch any thing of the uncleanness of man, according to
@c    any uncleanness wherewith he is wont to be defiled:  and having
@c    forgotten it, come afterwards to know it, he shall be guilty of an
@c    offence.

@c    5:4. The person that sweareth, and uttereth with his lips, that he
@c    would do either evil or good, and bindeth the same with an oath, and
@c    his word:  and having forgotten it afterwards understandeth his offence,

@c    5:5. Let him do penance for his sin:

@c    5:6. And offer of the flocks an ewe lamb, or a she goat, and the priest
@c    shall pray for him and for his sin.

@c    5:7. But if he be not able to offer a beast, let him offer two turtles,
@c    or two young pigeons to the Lord, one for sin, and the other for a
@c    holocaust,

@c    5:8. And he shall give them to the priest:  who shall offer the first
@c    for sin, and twist back the head of it to the little pinions, so that
@c    it stick to the neck, and be not altogether broken off.

@c    5:9. And of its blood he shall sprinkle the side of the altar:  and
@c    whatever is left, he shall let it drop at the bottom thereof, because
@c    it is for sin.

@c    5:10. And the other he shall burn for a holocaust, as is wont to be
@c    done.  And the priest shall pray for him, and for his sin, and it shall
@c    be forgiven him.

@c    5:11. And if his hand be not able to offer two turtles, or two young
@c    pigeons, he shall offer for his sin the tenth part of an ephi of flour.
@c    He shall not put oil upon it, nor put any frankincense thereon, because
@c    it is for sin.

@c    5:12. And he shall deliver it to the priest, who shall take a handful
@c    thereof, and shall burn it upon the altar for a memorial of him that
@c    offered it:

@c    5:13. Praying for him and making atonement.  But the part that is left,
@c    he himself shall have for a gift.

@c    5:14. And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying:

@c    5:15. If any one shall sin through mistake, transgressing the
@c    ceremonies in those things that are sacrificed to the Lord, he shall
@c    offer for his offence a ram without blemish out of the flocks, that may
@c    be bought for two sicles, according to the weight of the sanctuary.

@c    5:16. And he shall make good the damage itself which he hath done, and
@c    shall add the fifth part besides, delivering it to the priest, who
@c    shall pray for him, offering the ram:  and it shall be forgiven him.

@c    5:17. If any one sin through ignorance, and do one of those things
@c    which by the law of the Lord are forbidden, and being guilty of sin,
@c    understand his iniquity:

@c    5:18. He shall offer of the flocks a ram without blemish to the priest,
@c    according to the measure and estimation of the sin.  And the priest
@c    shall pray for him, because he did it ignorantly:  And it shall be
@c    forgiven him,

@c    5:19. Because by mistake he trespassed against the Lord.



@c    Leviticus Chapter 6


@c    Oblation for sins of injustice:  ordinances concerning the holocausts
@c    and the perpetual fire:  the sacrifices of the priests, and the sin
@c    offerings.

@c    6:1. The Lord spoke to Moses, saying:

@c    6:2. Whosoever shall sin, and despising the Lord, shall deny to his
@c    neighbour the thing delivered to his keeping, which was committed to
@c    his trust; or shall by force extort any thing, or commit oppression;

@c    6:3. Or shall find a thing lost, and denying it, shall also swear
@c    falsely, or shall do any other of the many things, wherein men are wont
@c    to sin:

@c    6:4. Being convicted of the offence, he shall restore

@c    6:5. All that he would have gotten by fraud, in the principal, and the
@c    fifth part besides, to the owner, whom he wronged.

@c    6:6. Moreover for his sin he shall offer a ram without blemish out of
@c    the flock:  and shall give it to the priest, according to the estimation
@c    and measure of the offence.

@c    6:7. And he shall pray for him before the Lord:  and he shall have
@c    forgiveness for every thing in doing of which he bath sinned.

@c    6:8. And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying:

@c    6:9. Command Aaron and his sons:  This is the law of a holocaust.  It
@c    shall be burnt upon the altar, all night until morning:  the fire shall
@c    be of the same altar.

@c    6:10. The priest shall be vested with the tunick and the linen
@c    breeches; and he shall take up the ashes of that which the devouring
@c    fire hath burnt:  and putting them beside the altar,

@c    6:11. Shall put off his former vestments, and being clothed with
@c    others, shall carry them forth without the camp, and shall cause them
@c    to be consumed to dust in a very clean place.

@c    6:12. And the fire on the altar shall always burn, and the priest shall
@c    feed it, putting wood on it every day in the morning:  and laying on the
@c    holocaust, shall burn thereupon the fat of the peace offerings.

@c    6:13. This is the perpetual fire which shall never go out on the altar.

@c    The perpetual fire. . .This fire came from heaven, (infra. chap. 9.24,)
@c    and was always kept burning on the altar, as a figure of the heavenly
@c    fire of divine love, which ought to be always burning in the heart of a
@c    Christian.

@c    6:14. This is the law of the sacrifice and libations, which the
@c    children of Aaron shall offer before the Lord, and before the altar.

@c    6:15. The priest shall take a handful of the flour that is tempered
@c    with oil, and all the frankincense that is put upon the flour:  and he
@c    shall burn on the altar for a memorial of most sweet odour to the Lord.

@c    6:16. And the part of the flour that is left, Aaron and his sons shall
@c    eat, without leaven:  and he shall eat it in the holy place of the court
@c    of the tabernacle.

@c    6:17. And therefore it shall not be leavened, because part thereof is
@c    offered for the burnt sacrifice of the Lord.  It shall be most holy, as
@c    that which is offered for sin and for trespass.

@c    6:18. The males only of the race of Aaron shall eat it.  It shall be an
@c    ordinance everlasting in your generations concerning the sacrifices of
@c    the Lord:  Every one that toucheth them shall be sanctified.

@c    6:19. And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying:

@c    6:20. This is the oblation of Aaron, and of his sons, which they must
@c    offer to the Lord, in the day of their anointing.  They shall offer the
@c    tenth part of an ephi of flour for a perpetual sacrifice, half of it in
@c    the morning, and half of it in the evening.

@c    6:21. It shall be tempered with oil, and shall be fried in a fryingpan.

@c    6:22. And the priest that rightfully succeedeth his father, shall offer
@c    it hot, for a most sweet odour to the Lord:  and it shall he wholly
@c    burnt on the altar.

@c    6:23. For every sacrifice of the priest shall be consumed with fire:
@c    neither shall any man eat thereof.

@c    6:24. And the Lord spoke to Moses.  saying:

@c    6:25. Say to Aaron and his sons:  This is the law of the victim for sin.
@c    In the place where the holocaust is offered, it shall be immolated
@c    before the Lord.  It is holy of holies.

@c    6:26. The priest that offereth it, shall eat it in a holy place, in the
@c    court of the tabernacle.

@c    6:27. Whatsoever shall touch the flesh thereof, shall be sanctified.  If
@c    a garment be sprinkled with the blood thereof, it shall be washed in a
@c    holy place.

@c    6:28. And the earthen vessel, wherein it was sodden, shall be broken:
@c    but if the vessel be of brass, it shall be scoured, and washed with
@c    water.

@c    6:29. Every male of the priestly race shall eat of the flesh thereof,
@c    because it is holy of holies.

@c    6:30. For the victim that is slain for sin, the blood of which is
@c    carried into the tabernacle of the testimony to make atonement in the
@c    sanctuary, shall not be eaten, but shall be burnt with fire.



@c    Leviticus Chapter 7


@c    Of sacrifices for trespasses and thanks offerings.  No fat nor blood is
@c    to be eaten.

@c    7:1. This also is the law of the sacrifice for a trespass:  it is most
@c    holy.

@c    Trespass. . .Trespasses, for which these offerings were to be made, were
@c    lesser offences than those for which the sin offerings were appointed.

@c    7:2. Therefore where the holocaust is immolated, the victim also for a
@c    trespass shall be slain:  the blood thereof shall be poured round about
@c    the altar.

@c    7:3. They shall offer thereof the rump and the fat that covereth the
@c    entrails:

@c    7:4. The two little kidneys, and the fat which is by the flanks, and
@c    the caul of the liver with the little kidneys.

@c    7:5. And the priest shall burn them upon the altar:  it is the burnt
@c    sacrifice of the Lord for a trespass.

@c    7:6. Every male of the priestly race, shall eat this flesh in a holy
@c    place, because it is most holy.

@c    7:7. As the sacrifice for sin is offered, so is also that for a
@c    trespass:  the same shall be the law of both these sacrifices.  It shall
@c    belong to the priest that offereth it.

@c    7:8. The priest that offereth the victim of holocaust, shall have the
@c    skin thereof.

@c    7:9. And every sacrifice of flour that is baked in the oven, and
@c    whatsoever is dressed on the gridiron, or in the fryingpan, shall be
@c    the priest's that offereth it.

@c    7:10. Whether they be tempered with oil, or dry, all the sons of Aaron
@c    shall have one as much as another.

@c    7:11. This is the law of the sacrifice of peace offerings that is
@c    offered to the Lord.

@c    7:12. If the oblation be for thanksgiving, they shall offer loaves
@c    without leaven tempered with oil, and unleavened wafers anointed with
@c    oil, and fine flour fried, and cakes tempered and mingled with oil.

@c    7:13. Moreover loaves of leavened bread with the sacrifice of thanks,
@c    which is offered for peace offerings:

@c    7:14. Of which one shall be offered to the Lord for firstfruits, and
@c    shall be the priest's that shall pour out the blood of the victim.

@c    7:15. And the flesh of it shall be eaten the same day:  neither shall
@c    any of it remain until the morning.

@c    7:16. If any man by vow, or of his own accord offer a sacrifice, it
@c    shall in like manner be eaten the same day.  And if any of it remain
@c    until the morrow, it is lawful to eat it.

@c    7:17. But whatsoever shall be found on the third day shall be consumed
@c    with fire.

@c    7:18. If any man eat of the flesh of the victim of peace offerings on
@c    the third day, the oblation shall be of no effect:  neither shall it
@c    profit the offerer.  Yea rather, whatsoever soul shall defile itself
@c    with such meat, shall be guilty of transgression.

@c    7:19. The flesh that hath touched any unclean thing, shall not be
@c    eaten:  but shall be burnt with fire.  He that is clean shall eat of it.

@c    7:20. If any one that is defiled shall eat of the flesh of the
@c    sacrifice of peace offerings, which is offered to the Lord, he shall be
@c    cut off from his people.

@c    7:21. And he that hath touched the uncleanness of man, or of beast, or
@c    of any thing that can defile, and shall eat of such kind of flesh:
@c    shall be cut off from his people.

@c    7:22. And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying:

@c    7:23. Say to the children of Israel:  The fat of a sheep, and of an ox,
@c    and of a goat you shall not eat.

@c    7:24. The fat of a carcass that hath died of itself, and of a beast
@c    that was caught by another beast, you shall have for divers uses.

@c    7:25. If any man eat the fat that should be offered for the burnt
@c    sacrifice of the Lord, he shall perish out of his people.

@c    7:26. Moreover you shall not eat the blood of any creature whatsoever,
@c    whether of birds or beasts.

@c    7:27. Every one that eateth blood, shall perish from among the people.

@c    7:28. And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying:

@c    7:29. Speak to the children of Israel, saying:  He that offereth a
@c    victim of peace offerings to the Lord, let him offer therewith a
@c    sacrifice also, that is, the libations thereof.

@c    7:30. He shall hold in his hands the fat of the victim, and the breast.
@c    And when he hath offered and consecrated both to the Lord, he shall
@c    deliver them to the priest,

@c    7:31. Who shall burn the fat upon the altar.  But the breast shall be
@c    Aaron's and his sons'.

@c    7:32. The right shoulder also of the victim, of peace offerings shall
@c    fall to the priest for firstfruits.

@c    7:33. He among the sons of Aaron, that offereth the blood, and the fat:
@c    he shall have the right shoulder also for his portion.

@c    7:34. For the breast that is elevated and the shoulder that is
@c    separated I have taken of the children of Israel, from off their
@c    victims of peace offerings:  and have given them to Aaron the priest,
@c    and to his sons, by a law for ever, from all the people of Israel.

@c    7:35. This is the anointing of Aaron and his sons, in the ceremonies of
@c    the Lord, in the day when Moses offered them, that they might do the
@c    office of priesthood,

@c    7:36. And the things that the Lord commanded to be given them by the
@c    children of Israel, by a perpetual observance in their generations.

@c    7:37. This is the law of holocaust, and of the sacrifice for sin, and
@c    for trespass, and for consecration, and the victims of peace offerings:

@c    7:38. Which the Lord appointed to Moses in mount Sinai, when he
@c    commanded the children of Israel, that they should offer their
@c    oblations to the Lord in the desert of Sinai.



@c    Leviticus Chapter 8


@c    Moses consecrateth Aaron and his sons.

@c    8:1. And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying:

@c    8:2. Take Aaron with his sons, their vestments, and the oil of unction:
@c    a calf for sin, two rams, a basket with unleavened bread.

@c    8:3. And thou shalt gather together all the congregation to the door of
@c    the tabernacle.

@c    8:4. And Moses did as the Lord had commanded.  And all the multitude
@c    being gathered together before the door of the tabernacle:

@c    8:5. He said:  This is the word that the Lord hath commanded to be done.

@c    8:6. And immediately, he offered Aaron and his sons.  And when he had
@c    washed them,

@c    8:7. He vested the high priest with the strait linen garment, girding
@c    him with the girdle, and putting on him the violet tunick:  and over it
@c    he put the ephod.

@c    8:8. And binding it with the girdle, he fitted it to the rational, on
@c    which was Doctrine and Truth.

@c    8:9. He put also the mitre upon his head:  and upon the mitre over the
@c    forehead, he put the plate of gold, consecrated with sanctification, as
@c    the Lord had commanded him.

@c    8:10. He took also the oil of unction, with which he anointed the
@c    tabernacle, with all the furniture thereof.

@c    8:11. And when he had sanctified and sprinkled the altar seven times,
@c    he anointed it, and all the vessels thereof:  and the laver with the
@c    foot thereof, he sanctified with the oil.

@c    8:12. And he poured it upon Aaron's head:  and he anointed and
@c    consecrated him.

@c    8:13. And after he had offered his sons, he vested them with linen
@c    tunicks, and girded them with girdles:  and put mitres on them as the
@c    Lord had commanded.

@c    8:14. He offered also the calf for sin:  and when Aaron and his sons had
@c    put their hands upon the head thereof,

@c    8:15. He immolated it:  and took the blood, and dipping his finger in
@c    it, he touched the horns of the altar round about.  Which being
@c    expiated, and sanctified, he poured the rest of the blood at the bottom
@c    thereof.

@c    8:16. But the fat that was upon the entrails, and the caul of the
@c    liver, and the two little kidneys, with their fat, he burnt upon the
@c    altar.

@c    8:17. And the calf with the skin, and the flesh and the dung, he burnt
@c    without the camp, as the Lord had commanded.

@c    8:18. He offered also a ram for holocaust.  And when Aaron and his sons
@c    had put their hands upon its head:

@c    8:19. He immolated it, and poured the blood thereof round about the
@c    altar.

@c    8:20. And cutting the ram into pieces, the head thereof, and the
@c    joints, and the fat he burnt in the fire.

@c    8:21. Having first washed the entrails, and the feet, and the whole ram
@c    together he burnt upon the altar:  because it was a holocaust of most
@c    sweet odour to the Lord, as he had commanded him.

@c    8:22. He offered also the second ram, in the consecration of priests:
@c    and Aaron, and his sons put their hands upon the head thereof.

@c    8:23. And when Moses had immolated it, he took of the blood thereof,
@c    and touched the tip of Aaron's right ear, and the thumb of his right
@c    hand, and in like manner also the great toe of his right foot.

@c    8:24. He offered also the sons of Aaron:  and when with the blood of the
@c    ram that was immolated, he had touched the tip of the right ear of
@c    every one of them, and the thumbs of their right hands, and the great
@c    toes of their right feet, the rest he poured on the altar round about.

@c    8:25. But the fat, and the rump, and all the fat that covereth the
@c    entrails, and the caul of the liver, and the two kidneys with their
@c    fat, and with the right shoulder, he separated.

@c    8:26. And taking out of the basket of unleavened bread, which was
@c    before the Lord, a loaf without leaven, and a cake tempered with oil
@c    and a wafer, he put them upon the fat, and the right shoulder:

@c    8:27. Delivering all to Aaron, and to his sons.  Who having lifted them
@c    up before the Lord,

@c    8:28. He took them again from their hands, and burnt them upon the
@c    altar of holocaust:  because it was the oblation of consecration, for a
@c    sweet odour of sacrifice to the Lord.

@c    8:29. And he took of the ram of consecration, the breast for his
@c    portion, elevating it before the Lord, as the Lord had commanded him.

@c    8:30. And taking the ointment, and the blood that was upon the altar,
@c    he sprinkled Aaron, and his vestments, and his sons, and their
@c    vestments with it.

@c    8:31. And when he had sanctified them in their vestments, he commanded
@c    them, saying:  Boil the flesh before the door of the tabernacle, and
@c    there eat it.  Eat ye also the loaves of consecration, that are laid in
@c    the basket, as the Lord commanded me, saying:  Aaron and his sons shall
@c    eat them.

@c    8:32. And whatsoever shall be left of the flesh and the loaves, shall
@c    be consumed with fire.

@c    8:33. And you shall not go out of the door of the tabernacle for seven
@c    days, until the day wherein the time of your consecration shall be
@c    expired.  For in seven days the consecration is finished:

@c    8:34. As at this present it hath been done, that the rite of the
@c    sacrifice might be accomplished.

@c    8:35. Day and night shall you remain in the tabernacle observing the
@c    watches of the Lord, lest you die.  For so it hath been commanded me.

@c    8:36. And Aaron and his sons did all things which the Lord spoke by the
@c    hand of Moses.



@c    Leviticus Chapter 9


@c    Aaron offereth sacrifice for himself and the people.  Fire cometh from
@c    the Lord upon the altar.

@c    9:1. And when the eighth day was come, Moses called Aaron and his sons,
@c    and the ancients of Israel, and said to Aaron:

@c    9:2. Take of the herd a calf for sin, and a ram for a holocaust, both
@c    without blemish, and offer them before the Lord.

@c    9:3. And to the children of Israel thou shalt say:  Take ye a he goat
@c    for sin, and a calf, and a lamb, both of a year old, and without
@c    blemish for a holocaust.

@c    9:4. Also a bullock and a ram for peace offerings.  And immolate them
@c    before the Lord, offering for the sacrifice of every one of them flour
@c    tempered with oil:  for to day the Lord will appear to you.

@c    9:5. They brought therefore all things that Moses had commanded before
@c    the door of the tabernacle:  where when all the multitude stood,

@c    9:6. Moses said:  This is the word, which the Lord hath commanded.  Do
@c    it, and his glory will appear to you.

@c    9:7. And he said to Aaron:  Approach to the altar, and offer sacrifice
@c    for thy sin.  Offer the holocaust, and pray for thyself and for the
@c    people:  and when thou hast slain the people's victim, pray for them, as
@c    the Lord hath commanded.

@c    9:8. And forthwith Aaron, approaching to the altar, immolated the calf
@c    for his sin.

@c    9:9. And his sons brought him the blood of it:  and he dipped his finger
@c    therein, and touched the horns of the altar, and poured the rest at the
@c    foot thereof.

@c    9:10. And the fat, and the little kidneys, and the caul of the liver,
@c    which are for sin, he burnt upon the altar, as the Lord had commanded
@c    Moses.

@c    9:11. But the flesh and skins thereof he burnt with fire without the
@c    camp.

@c    9:12. He immolated also the victim of holocaust:  and his sons brought
@c    him the blood thereof, which he poured round about on the altar.

@c    9:13. And the victim being cut into pieces, they brought to him the
@c    head and all the members:  all which he burnt with fire upon the altar.

@c    9:14. Having first washed the entrails and the feet with water.

@c    9:15. Then offering for the sin of the people, he slew the he goat:  and
@c    expiating the altar,

@c    9:16. He offered the holocaust.

@c    9:17. Adding in the sacrifice the libations, which are offered withal,
@c    and burning them upon the altar, besides the ceremonies of the morning
@c    holocaust.

@c    9:18. He immolated also the bullock and the ram, and peace offerings of
@c    the people:  and his sons brought him the blood, which he poured upon
@c    the altar round about.

@c    9:19. The fat also of the bullock, and the rump of the ram, and the two
@c    little kidneys with their fat, and the caul of the liver,

@c    9:20. They put upon the breasts.  And after the fat was burnt upon the
@c    altar,

@c    9:21. Aaron separated their breasts, and the right shoulders, elevating
@c    them before the Lord, as Moses had commanded.

@c    9:22. And stretching forth his hands to the people, he blessed them.
@c    And so the victims for sin, and the holocausts, and the peace offerings
@c    being finished, he came down.

@c    9:23. And Moses and Aaron went into the tabernacle of the testimony,
@c    and afterwards came forth and blessed the people.  And the glory of the
@c    Lord appeared to all the multitude.

@c    9:24. And, behold, a fire, coming forth from the Lord, devoured the
@c    holocaust, and the fat that was upon the altar:  which when the
@c    multitude saw, they praised the Lord, falling on their faces.



@c    Leviticus Chapter 10


@c    Nadab and Abiu for offering strange fire, are burnt by fire.  Priests
@c    are forbidden to drink wine, when they enter into the tabernacle.  The
@c    law of eating the holy things.

@c    10:1. And Nadab and Abiu, the sons of Aaron, taking their censers, put
@c    fire therein, and incense on it, offering before the Lord strange fire:
@c    which was not commanded them.

@c    10:2. And fire coming out from the Lord destroyed them:  and they died
@c    before the Lord.

@c    10:3. And Moses said to Aaron:  This is what the Lord hath spoken.  I
@c    will be sanctified in them that approach to me:  and I will be glorified
@c    in the sight of all the people.  And when Aaron heard this, he held his
@c    peace.

@c    10:4. And Moses called Misael and Elisaphan, the sons of Oziel, the
@c    uncle of Aaron, and said to them:  Go and take away your brethren from
@c    before the sanctuary, and carry them without the camp.

@c    10:5. And they went forthwith and took them as they lay, vested with
@c    linen tunicks, and cast them forth, as had been commanded them.

@c    10:6. And Moses said to Aaron, and to Eleazar and Ithamar, his sons:
@c    Uncover not your heads, and rend not your garments, lest perhaps you
@c    die, and indignation come upon all the congregation.  Let your brethren,
@c    and all the house of Israel, bewail the burning which the Lord has
@c    kindled.

@c    10:7. But you shall not go out of the door of the tabernacle:  otherwise
@c    you shall perish, for the oil of the holy unction is on you.  And they
@c    did all things according to the precept of Moses.

@c    10:8. The Lord also said to Aaron:

@c    10:9. You shall not drink wine nor any thing that may make drunk, thou
@c    nor thy sons, when you enter into the tabernacle of the testimony, lest
@c    you die.  Because it is an everlasting precept; through your
@c    generations:

@c    10:10. And that you may have knowledge to discern between holy and
@c    unholy, between unclean and clean:

@c    10:11. And may teach the children of Israel all my ordinances which the
@c    Lord hath spoken to them by the hand of Moses.

@c    10:12. And Moses spoke to Aaron, and to Eleazar and Ithamar, his sons
@c    that were left:  Take the sacrifice that is remaining of the oblation of
@c    the Lord, and eat it without leaven beside the altar, because it is
@c    holy of holies.

@c    10:13. And you shall eat it in a holy place:  which is given to thee and
@c    thy sons of the oblations of the Lord, as it hath been commanded me.

@c    10:14. The breast also that is offered, and the shoulder that is
@c    separated, you shall eat in a most clean place, thou and thy sons, and
@c    thy daughters with thee.  For they are set aside for thee and thy
@c    children, of the victims of peace offerings of the children of Israel.

@c    10:15. Because they have elevated before the Lord the shoulder and the
@c    breast, and the fat that is burnt on the altar:  and they belong to thee
@c    and to thy sons by a perpetual law, as the Lord hath commanded.

@c    10:16. While these things were a doing, when Moses sought for the buck
@c    goat, that had been offered for sin, he found it burnt.  And being angry
@c    with Eleazar and Ithamar, the sons of Aaron that were left, he said:

@c    10:17. Why did you not eat in the holy place the sacrifice for sin,
@c    which is most holy, and given to you, that you may bear the iniquity of
@c    the people, and may pray for them in the sight of the Lord.

@c    10:18. Especially, whereas none of the blood thereof hath been carried
@c    within the holy places:  and you ought to have eaten it in the
@c    sanctuary, as was commanded me?

@c    10:19. Aaron answered:  This day hath been offered the victim for sin,
@c    and the holocaust before the Lord:  and to me what thou seest has
@c    happened.  How could I eat it, or please the Lord in the ceremonies,
@c    having a sorrowful heart?

@c    10:20. Which when Moses had heard he was satisfied.



@c    Leviticus Chapter 11


@c    The distinction of clean and unclean animals.

@c    11:1. And the Lord spoke to Moses and Aaron, saying:
11:1. ni'o la .iaves cusku fi la moCES .e la .a'aRON lu

@c    11:2. Say to the children of Israel:  These are the animals which you
@c    are to eat of all the living things of the earth.
11:2. ko cusku fi le panzi be la .isra,EL lu da poi xabju be le tumla be'o
mabru zo'u

@c    Animals which you are to eat, etc. . .The prohibition of so many kinds
@c    of beasts, birds, and fishes, in the law, was ordered, 1st, to exercise
@c    the people in obedience, and temperance; 2ndly, to restrain them from
@c    the vices of which these animals were symbols; 3rdly, because the
@c    things here forbidden were for the most part unwholesome, and not
@c    proper to be eaten; 4thly, that the people of God, by being obliged to
@c    abstain from things corporally unclean, might be trained up to seek a
@c    spiritual cleanness.

@c    11:3. Whatsoever hath the hoof divided, and cheweth the cud among the
@c    beasts, you shall eat.
11:3. ga ge lo sufti be da cu relselpau gi da xejzalvi lo se toltu'o ginai ko
citka da

@c    Hoof divided, and cheweth the cud. . .The dividing of the hoof and
@c    chewing of the cud, signify discretion between good and evil, and
@c    meditating on the law of God; and where either of these is wanting a
@c    man is unclean.  In like manner fishes were reputed unclean that had not
@c    fins and scales:  that is, souls that did not raise themselves up by
@c    prayer and cover themselves with the scales of virtue.

@c    11:4. But whatsoever cheweth indeed the cud, and hath a hoof, but
@c    divideth it not, as the camel, and others:  that you shall not eat, but
@c    shall reckon it among the unclean.
11:4. .iku'i ganai ge da xejyzalvi lo se toltu'o ginai lo sufti be da cu relselpau
tomu'a lo kumte toi gi do na citka da gi'e da toljinsa ga'a do

@c    11:5. The cherogrillus which cheweth the cud, but divideth not the
@c    hoof, is unclean.
11:5. .i ro mabrlxirake cu xejyzalvi lo se toltu'o gi'enai relselpau se sufti
gi'eni'ibo toljinsa ga'a do

@c    The cherogrillus. . .Some suppose it to be the rabbit, others the
@c    hedgehog.  St. Jerome intimates that it is another kind of animal common
@c    in Palestine, which lives in the holes of rocks or in the earth.  We
@c    choose here, as also in the names of several other creatures that
@c    follow (which are little known in this part of the world,) to keep the
@c    Greek or Latin names.

@c    11:6. The hare also:  for that too cheweth the cud, but divideth not the
@c    hoof.
11:6. .i ro ractu cu xejzalvi lo se toltu'o gi'enai relselpau se sufti
gi'eni'ibo toljinsa ga'a do

PIKTCITA. .i ro ractu cu ta'e citka le kalci be vo'a be'o noi pe'a toltu'o

@c    11:7. And the swine, which, though it divideth the hoof, cheweth not
@c    the cud.
11:7. .i ro xarju cu relselpau se sufti gi'enai xejyzalvi lo se toltu'o
gi'eni'ibo toljinsa ga'a do

@c    11:8. The flesh of these you shall not eat, nor shall you touch their
@c    carcasses, because they are unclean to you.
11:8. .i ko na citka citka le rectu be ra .ije ko na pencu le mroxadni be ra
.iku'ibo ra toljinsa ga'a do

@c    11:9. These are the things that breed in the waters, and which it is
@c    lawful to eat.  All that hath fins, and scales, as well in the sea, as
@c    in the rivers, and the pools, you shall eat.
11:9. .i da poi xabju le djacu noi xamsi gi'a rirxe zo'u da se
fipybirka gi'e se kapyplita .ijanai ko citka da

@c    11:10. But whatsoever hath not fins and scales, of those things that
@c    move and live in the waters, shall be an abomination to you,
11:10. .iku'i da poi xabju le xamsi .a le rirxe zo'u da na se fipybirka gi'a na
se kapyplita .inaja ko xebni da
@c ko xebni da: sheqets hem lkhem. Anybody got a better translation of sheqets?

@c    11:11. And detestable.  Their flesh you shall not eat:  and their
@c    carcasses you shall avoid.
11:11. .ijebo ko na citka le rectu be da .ijebo ko xebni le mroxadni be da

@c    11:12. All that have not fins and scales, in the waters, shall be
@c    unclean.
11:12. .i da poi xabju le djacu zo'u da na se fipybirka gi'a na
se kapyplita .inaja ko xebni da

@c    11:13. Of birds these are they which you must not eat, and which are to
@c    be avoided by you:  The eagle, and the griffon, and the osprey.
11:13. .i le cipni zo'u ko xebni gi'enai citka vau ro cipnrxakuila .e ro
vultura .e ro cipnrxalieto
@c Gk. aliaietos. Haliaeetus is the bald eagle genus.

@c    The griffon. . .Not the monster which the painter represent, which hath
@c    no being upon earth; but a bird of the eagle kind, larger than the
@c    common.

@c    11:14. And the kite, and the vulture, according to their kind.
11:14. .e ro cipnrgupa .e ro falkone be da

@c    11:15. And all that is of the raven kind, according to their likeness.
11:15. .e ro cipnrkorvo be da

@c    11:16. The ostrich, and the owl, and the larus, and the hawk according
@c    to its kind.
11:16. .e ro strutione .e ro glauka .e ro cipnrlaro .e ro .akcipitro be da

@c    11:17. The screech owl, and the cormorant, and the ibis.
11:17. .e ro cipnrkosu .e ro flakrokoraka .e ro cipnrjancufu

@c    11:18. And the swan, and the bittern, and the porphyrion.
11:18. .e ro tinceme .e ro fipydaklycpi .e ro cipnrvispreda
@c "tinshemet" is in the reptile list too, so I pointedly did *not* precede it with "cipnr-".
@c I suspect it's an extinct pterosaur or other animal resembling both reptiles and birds.
@c Tinshemet is porphyrion; this verse is rearranged in Douay. -phma

@c    11:19. The heron, and the charadroin according to its kind, the houp
@c    also, and the bat.
11:19. .e ro cipnrkikonia .e ro cipnrxarde'a be da .e ro cipnrpupupa .e ro volmabru

@c    11:20. Of things that fly, whatsoever goeth upon four feet, shall be
@c    abominable to you.

@c    11:21. But whatsoever walketh upon four feet, but hath the legs behind
@c    longer, wherewith it hoppeth upon the earth,

@c    11:22. That you shall eat:  as the bruchus in its kind, the attacus, and
@c    ophimachus, and the locust, every, one according to their kind.

@c    11:23. But of flying things whatsoever hath four feet only, shall be an
@c    abomination to you.

@c    11:24. And whosoever shall touch the carcasses of them, shall be
@c    defiled:  and shall be unclean until the evening:

@c    11:25. And if it be necessary that he carry any of these things when
@c    they are dead:  he shall wash his clothes, and shall be unclean until
@c    the sun set.

@c    11:26. Every beast that hath a hoof, but divideth it not, nor cheweth
@c    the cud shall be unclean:  and he that toucheth it, shall be defiled.

@c    11:27. That which walketh upon hands of all animals which go on all
@c    four, shall be unclean:  he that shall touch their carcasses shall be
@c    defiled until evening.

@c    11:28. And he that shall carry such carcasses, shall wash his clothes,
@c    and shall be unclean until evening:  because all these things are
@c    unclean to you.

@c    11:29. These also shall be reckoned among unclean things, of all that
@c    move upon the earth.  The weasel, and the mouse, and the crocodile,
@c    every one according to their kind:

@c    11:30. The shrew, and the chameleon, and the stellio, and the lizard,
@c    and the mole.

@c    11:31. All these are unclean.  He that toucheth their carcasses shall be
@c    unclean until the evening.

@c    11:32. And upon what thing soever any of their carcasses shall fall, it
@c    shall be defiled, whether it be a vessel of wood, or a garment, or
@c    skins or haircloths:  or any thing in which work is done.  They shall be
@c    dipped in water, and shall be unclean until the evening, and so
@c    afterwards shall be clean.

@c    11:33. But an earthen vessel, into which any of these shall fall, shall
@c    be defiled:  and therefore is to be broken.

@c    11:34. Any meat which you eat, if water from such a vessel be poured
@c    upon it, shall be unclean; and every liquor that is drunk out of any
@c    such vessel, shall be unclean.

@c    11:35. And upon whatsoever thing any of these dead beasts shall fall,
@c    it shall be unclean.  Whether it be oven, or pots with feet, they shall
@c    be destroyed, and shall be unclean.

@c    11:36. But fountains and cisterns, and all gatherings together of
@c    waters shall be clean.  He that toucheth their carcasses shall be
@c    defiled.

@c    11:37. If it fall upon seed corn, it shall not defile it.

@c    11:38. But if any man pour water upon the seed, and afterwards it be
@c    touched by the carcasses, it shall be forthwith defiled.

@c    11:39. If any beast die, of which it is lawful for you to eat, he that
@c    toucheth the carcass thereof, shall be unclean until the evening.

@c    11:40. And he that eateth or carrieth any thing thereof, shall wash his
@c    clothes, and shall be unclean until the evening.

@c    11:41. All that creepeth upon the earth shall be abominable:  neither
@c    shall it be taken for meat.

@c    11:42. Whatsoever goeth upon the breast on four feet, or hath many
@c    feet, or traileth on the earth, you shall not eat, because it is
@c    abominable.

@c    11:43. Do not defile your souls, nor touch aught thereof, lest you be
@c    unclean,

@c    11:44. For I am the Lord your God.  Be holy because I am holy.  Defile
@c    not your souls by any creeping thing, that moveth upon the earth.

@c    11:45. For I am the Lord, who brought you out of the land of Egypt,
@c    that I might be your God.

@c    11:46. You shall be holy, because I am holy.  This is the law of beasts
@c    and fowls, and of every living creature that moveth in the waters, and
@c    creepeth on the earth:

@c    11:47. That you may know the differences of the clean, and unclean, and
@c    know what you ought to eat, and what to refuse.



@c    Leviticus Chapter 12


@c    The purification of women after childbirth.

@c    12:1. And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying:

@c    12:2. Speak to the children of Israel, and thou shalt say to them:  If a
@c    woman having received seed shall bear a man child, she shall be unclean
@c    seven days, according to the days of separation of her flowers.

@c    12:3. And on the eighth day the infant shall be circumcised:

@c    12:4. But she shall remain three and thirty days in the blood of her
@c    purification.  She shall touch no holy thing:  neither shall she enter
@c    into the sanctuary, until the days of her purification, be fulfilled.

@c    12:5. But if she shall bear a maid child, she shall be unclean two
@c    weeks, according to the custom of her monthly courses.  And she shall
@c    remain in the blood of her purification sixty-six days.

@c    12:6. And when the days of her purification are expired, for a son, or
@c    for a daughter, she shall bring to the door of the tabernacle of the
@c    testimony, a lamb of a year old for a holocaust, and a young pigeon or
@c    a turtle for sin:  and shall deliver them to the priest.

@c    12:7. Who shall offer them before the Lord, and shall pray for her:  and
@c    so she shall be cleansed from the issue of her blood.  This is the law
@c    for her that beareth a man child or a maid child.

@c    12:8. And if her hand find not sufficiency, and she is not able to
@c    offer a lamb, she shall take two turtles, or two young pigeons, one for
@c    a holocaust, and another for sin:  and the priest shall pray for her,
@c    and so she shall be cleansed.



@c    Leviticus Chapter 13


@c    The law concerning leprosy in men, and in garments.

@c    13:1. And the Lord spoke to Moses and Aaron, saying:

@c    13:2. The man in whose skin or flesh shall arise a different colour or
@c    a blister, or as it were something shining, that is the stroke of the
@c    leprosy, shall be brought to Aaron the priest, or any or of his sons.

@c    13:3. And if he see the leprosy in his skin, and the hair turned white
@c    and the place where the leprosy appears lower than the skin and the
@c    rest of the flesh:  it is the stroke of the leprosy, and upon his
@c    judgment he shall be separated.

@c    13:4. But if there be a shining whiteness in the skin, and not lower
@c    than the other flesh, and the hair be of the former colour, the priest
@c    shall shut him up seven days.

@c    13:5. And the seventh day he shall look on him:  and if the leprosy be
@c    grown no farther, and hath not spread itself in the skin, he shall shut
@c    him up again other seven days.

@c    13:6. And on the seventh day, he shall look on him.  If the leprosy be
@c    somewhat obscure, and not spread in the skin, he shall declare him
@c    clean, because it is but a scab:  and the man shall wash his clothes,
@c    and shall be clean.

@c    13:7. But, if the leprosy grow again, after he was seen by the priest
@c    and restored to cleanness, he shall be brought to him:

@c    13:8. And shall be condemned of uncleanness.

@c    13:9. If the stroke of the leprosy be in a man, he shall be brought to
@c    the priest:

@c    13:10. And he shall view him.  And when there shall be a white colour in
@c    the skin, and it shall have changed the look of the hair, and the
@c    living flesh itself shall appear:

@c    13:11. It shall be judged an inveterate leprosy, and grown into the
@c    skin.  The priest therefore shall declare him unclean:  and shall not
@c    shut him up, because he is evidently unclean.

@c    13:12. But if the leprosy spring out running about in the skin, and
@c    cover all the skin from the head to the feet, whatsoever falleth under
@c    the sight of the eyes:

@c    13:13. The priest shall view him, and shall judge that the leprosy
@c    which he has is very clean:  because it is all turned into whiteness,
@c    and therefore the man shall be clean.

@c    13:14. But when the live flesh shall appear in him:

@c    13:15. Then by the judgment of the priest he shall be defiled, and
@c    shall be reckoned among the unclean.  For live flesh, if it be spotted
@c    with leprosy, is unclean.

@c    13:16. And if again it be turned into whiteness, and cover all the man:

@c    13:17. The priest shall view him, and shall judge him to be clean.

@c    13:18. When also there has been an ulcer in the flesh and the skin, and
@c    it has been healed:

@c    13:19. And in the place of the ulcer, there appeareth a white scar, or
@c    somewhat red, the man shall be brought to the priest.

@c    13:20. And when he shall see the place of the leprosy lower than the
@c    other flesh, and the hair turned white:  he shall declare him unclean,
@c    for the plague of leprosy is broken out in the ulcer.

@c    13:21. But if the hair be of the former colour, and the scar somewhat
@c    obscure, and be not lower than the flesh that is near it:  he shall shut
@c    him up seven days.

@c    13:22. And if it spread, he shall judge him to have the leprosy:

@c    13:23. But if it stay in its place, it is but the scar of an ulcer:  and
@c    the man shall be clean.

@c    13:24. The flesh also and skin that hath been burnt, and after it is
@c    healed hath a white or a red scar:

@c    13:25. The priest shall view it, and if he see it turned white, and the
@c    place thereof is lower than the other skin:  he shall declare him
@c    unclean, because the evil of leprosy is broken out in the scar.

@c    13:26. But if the colour of the hair be not changed, nor the blemish
@c    lower than the other flesh, and the appearance of the leprosy be
@c    somewhat obscure:  he shall shut him up seven days,

@c    13:27. And on the seventh day he shall view him.  If the leprosy be
@c    grown farther in the skin, he shall declare him unclean.

@c    13:28. But if the whiteness stay in its place, and be not very clear,
@c    it is the sore of a burning:  and therefore he shall be cleansed,
@c    because it is only the scar of a burning.

@c    13:29. If the leprosy break out in the head or the beard of a man or
@c    woman, the priest shall see them,

@c    13:30. And if the place be lower than the other flesh, and the hair
@c    yellow, and thinner than usual:  he shall declare them unclean, because
@c    it is the leprosy of the head and the beard;

@c    13:31. But if he perceive the place of the spot is equal with the flesh
@c    that is near it, and the hair black:  he shall shut him up seven days,

@c    13:32. And on the seventh day he shall look upon it.  If the spot be not
@c    grown, and the hair keep its colour, and the place of the blemish be
@c    even with the other flesh:

@c    13:33. The man shall be shaven all but the place of the spot:  and he
@c    shall be shut up other seven days.

@c    13:34. If on the seventh day the evil seem to have stayed in its place,
@c    and not lower than the other flesh, he shall cleanse him:  and his
@c    clothes being washed he shall be clean.

@c    13:35. But if after his cleansing the spot spread again in the skin:

@c    13:36. He shall seek no more whether the hair be turned yellow, because
@c    he is evidently unclean.

@c    13:37. But if the spot be stayed, and the hair be black, let him know
@c    that the man is healed:  and let him confidently pronounce him clean.

@c    13:38. If a whiteness appear in the skin of a man or a woman,

@c    13:39. The priest shall view them.  If he find that a darkish whiteness
@c    shineth in the skin, let him know that it is not the leprosy, but a
@c    white blemish, and that the man is clean.

@c    13:40. The man whose hair falleth off from his head, he is bald and
@c    clean:

@c    13:41. And if the hair fall from his forehead, he is bald before and
@c    clean.

@c    13:42. But if in the bald head or in the bald forehead there be risen a
@c    white or reddish colour:

@c    13:43. And the priest perceive this, he shall condemn him undoubtedly
@c    of leprosy which is risen in the bald part.

@c    13:44. Now whosoever shall be defiled with the leprosy, and is
@c    separated by the judgment of the priest:

@c    13:45. Shall have his clothes hanging loose, his head bare, his mouth
@c    covered with a cloth:  and he shall cry out that he is defiled and
@c    unclean.

@c    13:46. All the time that he is a leper and unclean he shall dwell alone
@c    without the camp.

@c    13:47. A woollen or linen garment that shall have the leprosy

@c    13:48. In the warp, and the woof:  or skin, or whatsoever is made of a
@c    skin:

@c    13:49. If it be infected with a white or red spot, it shall be
@c    accounted the leprosy, and shall be shewn to the priest.

@c    13:50. And he shall look upon it and shall shut it up seven days.

@c    13:51. And on the seventh day when he looketh on it again, if he find
@c    that it is grown, it is a fixed leprosy.  He shall judge the garment
@c    unclean, and every thing wherein it shall be found.

@c    13:52. And therefore it shall be burnt with fire.

@c    13:53. But if he see that it is not grown,

@c    13:54. He shall give orders, and they shall wash that part wherein the
@c    leprosy is:  and he shall shut it up other seven days.

@c    13:55. And when he shall see that the former colour is not returned,
@c    nor yet the leprosy spread, he shall judge it unclean:  and shall burn
@c    it with fire, for the leprosy has taken hold of the outside of the
@c    garment, or through the whole.

@c    13:56. But if the place of the leprosy be somewhat dark, after the
@c    garment is washed, he shall tear it off, and divide it from that which
@c    is sound.

@c    13:57. And if after this there appear in those places that before were
@c    without spot, a flying and wandering leprosy:  it must be burnt with
@c    fire.

@c    13:58. If it cease, he shall wash with water the parts that are pure,
@c    the second time:  and they shall be clean.

@c    13:59. This is the law touching the leprosy of any woollen or linen
@c    garment, either in the warp or woof, or any thing of skins:  how it
@c    ought to be cleaned, or pronounced unclean.



@c    Leviticus Chapter 14


@c    The rites of sacrifices in cleansing the leprosy.  Leprosy in houses.

@c    14:1. And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying:

@c    14:2. This is the rite of a leper, when he is to be cleansed.  He shall
@c    be brought to the priest:

@c    14:3. Who going out of the camp, when he shall find that the leprosy is
@c    cleansed,

@c    14:4. Shall command him that is to be purified, to offer for himself
@c    two living sparrows, which it is lawful to eat, and cedar wood, and
@c    scarlet, and hyssop.

@c    14:5. And he shall command one of the sparrows to be immolated in an
@c    earthen vessel over living waters.

@c    Living waters. . .That is, waters taken from a spring, brook, or river.

@c    14:6. But the other that is alive, he shall dip, with the cedar wood,
@c    and the scarlet and the hyssop, in the blood of the sparrow that is
@c    immolated:

@c    14:7. Wherewith he shall sprinkle him that is to be cleansed seven
@c    times, that he may be rightly purified.  And he shall let go the living
@c    sparrow, that it may fly into the field.

@c    14:8. And when the man hath washed his clothes, he shall shave all the
@c    hair of his body, and shall be washed with water:  and being purified he
@c    shall enter into the camp, yet so that he tarry without his own tent
@c    seven days.

@c    14:9. And on the seventh day he shall shave the hair of his head, and
@c    his beard and his eyebrows, and the hair of all his body.  And having
@c    washed again his clothes, and his body,

@c    14:10. On the eighth day, he shall take two lambs without blemish, and
@c    an ewe of a year old without blemish, and three tenths of flour
@c    tempered with oil for a sacrifice, and a sextary of oil apart.

@c    A sextary. . .Heb. log:  a measure of liquids, which was the twelfth part
@c    of a hin; and held about as much as six eggs.

@c    14:11. And when the priest that purifieth the man, hath presented him,
@c    and all these things before the Lord, at the door of the tabernacle of
@c    the testimony:

@c    14:12. He shall take a lamb, and offer it for a trespass offering with
@c    the sextary of oil.  And having offered all before the Lord,

@c    14:13. He shall immolate the lamb, where the victim for sin is wont to
@c    be immolated, and the holocaust, that is, in the holy place.  For as
@c    that which is for sin, so also the victim for a trespass offering
@c    pertaineth to the priest:  it is holy of holies.

@c    14:14. And the priest taking of the blood of the victim that was
@c    immolated for trespass, shall put it upon the tip of the right ear of
@c    him that is cleansed, and upon the thumb of his right hand and the
@c    great toe of his right foot.

@c    Taking of the blood, etc. . .These ceremonies used in the cleansing of a
@c    leper, were mysterious and very significative.  The sprinkling seven
@c    times with the blood of the little bird, the washing himself and his
@c    clothes, the shaving his hair and his beard, signify the means which
@c    are to be used in the reconciliation of a sinner, and the steps by
@c    which he is to return to God, viz., by the repeated application of the
@c    blood of Christ:  the washing his conscience with the waters of
@c    compunction:  and retrenching all vanities and superfluities, by
@c    employing all that is over and above what is necessary in alms deeds.
@c    The sin offering, and the holocaust or burnt offering, which he was to
@c    offer at his cleansing, signify the sacrifice of a contrite and humble
@c    heart, and that of adoration in spirit and truth, with gratitude and
@c    thankfulness, for the forgiveness of sins, with which we are ever to
@c    appear before the Almighty.  The touching the right ear, the thumb of
@c    the right hand, and the great toe of the right foot, first with the
@c    blood of the victim, and then with the remainder of the oil, which had
@c    been sprinkled seven times before the Lord, signify the application of
@c    the blood of Christ, and the unction of the sevenfold grace of the Holy
@c    Ghost; to the sinner's right ear, that he may duly hearken to and obey
@c    the law of God; and to his right hand and foot, that the works of his
@c    hands, and all the steps or affections of his soul, signified by the
@c    feet, may be rightly directed to God.

@c    14:15. And he shall pour of the sextary of oil into his own left hand,

@c    14:16. And shall dip his right finger in it, and sprinkle it before the
@c    Lord seven times.

@c    14:17. And the rest of the oil in his left hand, he shall pour upon the
@c    tip of the right ear of him that is cleansed, and upon the thumb of his
@c    right hand and the great toe of his right foot, and upon the blood that
@c    was shed for trespass:

@c    14:18. And upon his head.

@c    14:19. And he shall pray for him before the Lord, and shall offer the
@c    sacrifice for sin.  Then shall he immolate the holocaust.

@c    14:20. And put it on the altar with the libations thereof:  and the man
@c    shall be rightly cleansed.

@c    14:21. But if he be poor, and his hand cannot find the things
@c    aforesaid:  he shall take a lamb for an offering for trespass, that the
@c    priest may pray for him, and a tenth part of flour tempered with oil
@c    for a sacrifice, and a sextary of oil:

@c    14:22. And two turtles or two young pigeons, of which one may be for
@c    sin, and the other for a holocaust.

@c    14:23. And he shall offer them on the eighth day of his purification to
@c    the priest, at the door of the tabernacle of the testimony before the
@c    Lord.

@c    14:24. And the priest receiving the lamb for trespass, and the sextary
@c    of oil, shall elevate them together.

@c    14:25. And the lamb being immolated, he shall put of the blood thereof
@c    upon the tip of the right ear of him that is cleansed, and upon the
@c    thumb of his right hand, and the great toe of his right foot.

@c    14:26. But he shall pour part of the oil into his own left hand,

@c    14:27. And dipping the finger of his right hand in it, he shall
@c    sprinkle it seven times before the Lord.

@c    14:28. And he shall touch the tip of the right ear of him that is
@c    cleansed, and the thumb of his right hand and the great toe of his
@c    right foot, in the place of the blood that was shed for trespass.

@c    14:29. And the other part of the oil that is in his left hand, he shall
@c    pour upon the head of the purified person, that he may appease the Lord
@c    for him.

@c    14:30. And he shall offer a turtle, or young pigeon:

@c    14:31. One for trespass, and the other for a holocaust, with their
@c    libations.

@c    14:32. This is the sacrifice of a leper, that is not able to have all
@c    things that appertain to his cleansing.

@c    14:33. And the Lord spoke to Moses and Aaron, saying:

@c    14:34. When you shall come into the land of Chanaan, which I will give
@c    you for a possession, if there be the plague or leprosy in a house:

@c    14:35. He whose house it is, shall go and tell the priest, saying:  It
@c    seemeth to me, that there is the plague of leprosy in my house,

@c    14:36. And he shall command, that they carry forth all things out of
@c    the house, before he go into it, and see whether it have the leprosy,
@c    let all things become unclean that are in the house.  And afterwards he
@c    shall go in to view the leprosy of the house.

@c    14:37. And if he see in the walls thereof as it were little dints,
@c    disfigured with paleness or redness, and lower than all he rest:

@c    14:38. He shall go out of the door of the house, and forthwith shut it
@c    up seven days,

@c    14:39. And returning on the seventh day, he shall look upon it.  If he
@c    find that the leprosy is spread,

@c    14:40. He shall command, that the stones wherein the leprosy is, be
@c    taken out, and cast without the city into an unclean place:

@c    14:41. And that the house be scraped on the inside round about, and the
@c    dust of the scrapings be scattered without the city into an unclean
@c    place:

@c    14:42. And that other stones be laid in the place of them that were
@c    taken away, and the house be plastered with other mortar.

@c    14:43. But if after the stones be taken out, and the dust scraped off,
@c    and it be plastered with other earth.

@c    14:44. The priest going in perceive that the leprosy is returned, and
@c    the walls full of spots, it is a lasting leprosy, and the house is
@c    unclean.

@c    14:45. And they shall destroy it forthwith, and shall cast the stones
@c    and timber thereof, and all the dust without the town into an unclean
@c    place.

@c    14:46. He that entereth into the house when it is shut, shall be
@c    unclean until evening,

@c    14:47. And he that sleepeth in it, and eateth any thing, shall wash his
@c    clothes.

@c    14:48. But if the priest going in perceive that the leprosy is not
@c    spread in the house, after it was plastered again, he shall purify it,
@c    it being cured.

@c    14:49. And for the purification thereof he shall take two sparrows, and
@c    cedar wood, and scarlet, and hyssop.

@c    14:50. And having immolated one sparrow in an earthen vessel, over
@c    living waters,

@c    14:51. He shall take the cedar wood, and the hyssop, and the scarlet,
@c    and the living sparrow, and shall dip all in the blood of the sparrow
@c    that is immolated, and in the living water:  and he shall sprinkle the
@c    house seven times.

@c    14:52. And shall purify it as well with the blood of the sparrow, as
@c    with the living water, and with the living sparrow, and with the cedar
@c    wood, and the hyssop, and the scarlet.

@c    14:53. And when he hath let go the sparrow to fly freely away into the
@c    field, he shall pray for the house:  and it shall be rightly cleansed.

@c    14:54. This is the law of every kind of leprosy and stroke.

@c    14:55. Of the leprosy of garments and houses,

@c    14:56. Of a scar and of blisters breaking out of a shining spot, and
@c    when the colours are diversely changed:

@c    14:57. That it may be known when a thing is clean or unclean.



@c    Leviticus Chapter 15


@c    Other legal uncleannesses.

@c    15:1. And the Lord spoke to Moses and Aaron, saying:

@c    15:2. Speak to the children of Israel, and say to them:  The man that
@c    hath an issue of seed, shall be unclean.

@c    Issue of seed shall be unclean. . .These legal uncleannesses were
@c    instituted in order to give the people a horror of carnal impurities.

@c    15:3. And then shall he be judged subject to this evil, when a filthy
@c    humour, at every moment, cleaveth to his flesh, and gathereth there.

@c    15:4. Every bed on which he sleepeth, shall be unclean, and every place
@c    on which he sitteth.

@c    15:5. If any man touch his bed, he shall wash his clothes and being
@c    washed with water, he shall be unclean until the evening.

@c    15:6. If a man sit where that man hath sitten, he also shall wash his
@c    clothes:  and being washed with water, shall be unclean until the
@c    evening.

@c    15:7. He that toucheth his flesh, shall wash his clothes:  and being
@c    himself washed with water shall be unclean until the evening.

@c    15:8. If such a man cast his spittle upon him that is clean, he shall
@c    wash his clothes:  and being washed with water, he shall be unclean
@c    until the evening.

@c    15:9. The saddle on which he hath sitten shall be unclean.

@c    15:10. And whatsoever has been under him that hath the issue of seed,
@c    shall be unclean until the evening.  He that carrieth any of these
@c    things, shall wash his clothes:  and being washed with water, he shall
@c    be unclean until the evening.

@c    15:11. Every person whom such a one shall touch, not having washed his
@c    hands before, shall wash his clothes:  and being washed with water,
@c    shall be unclean until the evening.

@c    15:12. If he touch a vessel of earth, it shall be broken:  but if a
@c    vessel of wood, it shall be washed with water.

@c    15:13. If he who suffereth this disease be healed, he shall number
@c    seven days after his cleansing:  and having washed his clothes, and all
@c    his body in living water, he shall be clean.

@c    15:14. And on the eighth day he shall take two turtles, or two young
@c    pigeons, and he shall come before the Lord, to the door of the
@c    tabernacle of the testimony, and shall give them to the priest.

@c    15:15. Who shall offer one for sin, and the other for a holocaust:  and
@c    he shall pray for him before the Lord, that he may be cleansed of the
@c    issue of his seed.

@c    15:16. The man from whom the seed of copulation goeth out, shall wash
@c    all his body with water:  and he shall be unclean until the evening.

@c    15:17. The garment or skin that he weareth, he shall wash with water:
@c    and it shall be unclean until the evening.

@c    15:18. The woman, with whom he copulateth, shall be washed with water:
@c    and shall be unclean until the evening.

@c    15:19. The woman, who at the return of the month, hath her issue of
@c    blood, shall be separated seven days.

@c    15:20. Every one that toucheth her, shall be unclean until the evening.

@c    15:21. And every thing that she sleepeth on, or that she sitteth on in
@c    the days of her separation, shall be defiled.

@c    15:22. He that toucheth her bed shall wash his clothes:  and being
@c    himself washed with water, shall be unclean until the evening.

@c    15:23. Whosoever shall touch any vessel on which she sitteth, shall
@c    wash his clothes:  and himself being washed with water, shall be defiled
@c    until the evening.

@c    15:24. If a man copulateth with her in the time of her flowers, he
@c    shall be unclean seven days:  and every bed on which he shall sleep,
@c    shall be defiled.

@c    15:25. The woman that hath still issue of blood many days out of her
@c    ordinary time, or that ceaseth not to flow after the monthly courses,
@c    as long as she is subject to this disease, shall be unclean, in the
@c    same manner as if she were in her flowers.

@c    15:26. Every bed on which she sleepeth, and every vessel on which she
@c    sitteth, shall be defiled.

@c    15:27. Whosoever toucheth them shall wash his clothes:  and himself
@c    being washed with water, shall be unclean until the evening.

@c    15:28. If the blood stop and cease to run, she shall count seven days
@c    of her purification:

@c    15:29. And on the eighth day she shall offer for herself to the priest,
@c    two turtles, or two young pigeons, at the door of the tabernacle of the
@c    testimony:

@c    15:30. And he shall offer one for sin, and the other for a holocaust,
@c    and he shall pray for her before the Lord, and for the issue of her
@c    uncleanness.

@c    15:31. You shall teach therefore the children of Israel to take heed of
@c    uncleanness, that they may not die in their filth, when they shall have
@c    defiled my tabernacle that is among them.

@c    15:32. This is the law of him that hath the issue of seed, and that is
@c    defiled by copulation.

@c    15:33. And of the woman that is separated in her monthly times, or that
@c    hath a continual issue of blood, and of the man that sleepeth with her.



@c    Leviticus Chapter 16


@c    When and how the high priest must enter into the sanctuary.  The feast
@c    of expiation.

@c    16:1. And the Lord spoke to Moses, after the death of the two sons of
@c    Aaron when they were slain upon their offering strange fire:

@c    16:2. And he commanded him, saying:  Speak to Aaron thy brother, that he
@c    enter not at all into the sanctuary, which is within the veil before
@c    the propitiatory, with which the ark is covered, lest he die, (for I
@c    will appear in a cloud over the oracle),

@c    Enter not. . .No one but the high priest, and he but once a year, could
@c    enter into the sanctuary; to signify that no one could enter into the
@c    sanctuary of heaven, till Christ our high priest opened it by his
@c    passion.  Heb. 10.8.

@c    16:3. Unless he first do these things.  He shall offer a calf for sin,
@c    and a ram for a holocaust.

@c    16:4. He shall be vested with a linen tunick:  he shall cover his
@c    nakedness with linen breeches:  he shall be girded with a linen girdle,
@c    and he shall put a linen mitre upon his head.  For these are holy
@c    vestments:  all which he shall put on, after he is washed.

@c    16:5. And he shall receive from the whole multitude of the children of
@c    Israel two buck goats for sin, and one ram for a holocaust.

@c    16:6. And when he hath offered the cattle and prayed for himself and
@c    for his own house:

@c    16:7. He shall make the two buck goats to stand before the Lord in the
@c    door of the tabernacle of the testimony.

@c    16:8. And casting lots upon them both, one to be offered to the Lord,
@c    and the other to be the emissary goat:

@c    16:9. That whose lot fell to be offered to the Lord, he shall offer for
@c    sin.

@c    16:10. But that whose lot was to be the emissary goat, he shall present
@c    before the Lord, that he may pour prayers upon him, and let him go into
@c    the wilderness.

@c    16:11. After these things are duly celebrated, he shall offer the calf:
@c    and praying for himself and for his own house, he shall immolate it.

@c    16:12. And taking the censer, which he hath filled with the burning
@c    coals of the altar, and taking up with his hands the compounded perfume
@c    for incense, he shall go in within the veil into the holy place:

@c    16:13. That when the perfumes are put upon the fire, the cloud and
@c    vapour thereof may cover the oracle, which is over the testimony, and
@c    he may not die.

@c    16:14. He shall take also of the blood of the calf, and sprinkle with
@c    his finger seven times towards the propitiatory to the east.

@c    16:15. And when he hath killed the buck goat for the sin of the people,
@c    he shall carry in the blood thereof within the veil, as he was
@c    commanded to do with the blood of the calf, that he may sprinkle it
@c    over against the oracle:

@c    16:16. And may expiate the sanctuary from the uncleanness of the
@c    children of Israel, and from their transgressions, and all their sins.
@c    According to this rite shall he do to the tabernacle of the testimony,
@c    which is fixed among them in the midst of the filth of their
@c    habitation.

@c    16:17. Let no man be in the tabernacle when the high priest goeth into
@c    the sanctuary, to pray for himself and his house, and for the whole
@c    congregation of Israel, until he come out.

@c    16:18. And when he is come out to the altar that is before the Lord,
@c    let him pray for himself:  and taking the blood of the calf, and of the
@c    buck goat, let him pour it upon the horns thereof round about.

@c    16:19. And sprinkling with his finger seven times, let him expiate, and
@c    sanctify it from the uncleanness of the children of Israel.

@c    16:20. After he hath cleaned the sanctuary, and the tabernacle, and the
@c    altar, then let him offer the living goat.

@c    16:21. And putting both hands upon his head, let him confess all the
@c    iniquities of the children of Israel, and all their offences and sins.
@c    And praying that they may light on its head, he shall turn him out by a
@c    man ready for it, into the desert.

@c    16:22. And when the goat hath carried all their iniquities into an
@c    uninhabited land, and shall be let go into the desert:

@c    16:23. Aaron shall return into the tabernacle of the testimony, and
@c    putting off the vestments, which he had on him before when he entered
@c    into the sanctuary, and leaving them there,

@c    16:24. He shall wash his flesh in the holy place, and shall put on his
@c    own garments.  And after that he is come out and hath offered his own
@c    holocaust, and that of the people, he shall pray both for himself, and
@c    for the people.

@c    16:25. And the fat that is offered for sins, he shall burn on the
@c    altar.

@c    16:26. But he that hath let go the emissary goat, shall wash his
@c    clothes, and his body with water, and so shall enter into the camp.

@c    16:27. But the calf and the buck goat, that were sacrificed for sin,
@c    and whose blood was carried into the sanctuary, to accomplish the
@c    atonement, they shall carry forth without the camp, and shall burn with
@c    fire:  their skins and their flesh, and their dung.

@c    16:28. And whosoever burneth them shall wash his clothes, and flesh
@c    with water:  and so shall enter into the camp.

@c    16:29. And this shall be to you an everlasting ordinance.  The seventh
@c    month, the tenth day of the month, you shall afflict your souls, and
@c    shall do no work, whether it be one of your own country, or a stranger
@c    that sojourneth among you.

@c    16:30. Upon this day shall be the expiation for you, and the cleansing
@c    from all your sins.  You shall be cleansed before the Lord.

@c    16:31. For it is a sabbath of rest:  and you shall afflict your souls by
@c    a perpetual religion.

@c    16:32. And the priest that is anointed, and whose hands are consecrated
@c    to do the office of the priesthood in his father's stead, shall make
@c    atonement.  And he shall be vested with the linen robe and the holy
@c    vestments.

@c    16:33. And he shall expiate the sanctuary and the tabernacle of the
@c    testimony and the altar:  the priest also and all the people.

@c    16:34. And this shall be an ordinance for ever, that you pray for the
@c    children of Israel, and for all their sins once a year.  He did
@c    therefore as the Lord had commanded Moses.



@c    Leviticus Chapter 17


@c    No sacrifices to be offered but at the door of the tabernacle:  a
@c    prohibition of blood.

@c    17:1. And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying:

@c    17:2. Speak to Aaron and his sons, and to all the children of Israel,
@c    saying to them:  This is the word, which the Lord hath commanded,
@c    saying:

@c    17:3. Any man whosoever of the house of Israel, if he kill an ox, or a
@c    sheep, or a goat in the camp, or without the camp,

@c    If he kill, etc. . .That is, in order to sacrifice.  The law of God
@c    forbids sacrifices to be offered in any other place but at the
@c    tabernacle or temple of the Lord; to signify that no sacrifice would be
@c    acceptable to God, out of his true temple, the one holy, catholic,
@c    apostolic church.

@c    17:4. And offer it not at the door of the tabernacle an oblation to the
@c    Lord, shall be guilty of blood.  As if he had shed blood, so shall he
@c    perish from the midst of his people.

@c    17:5. Therefore the children of Israel shall bring to the priest their
@c    victims, which they kill in the field, that they may be sanctified to
@c    the Lord before the door of the tabernacle of the testimony:  and they
@c    may sacrifice them for peace offerings to the Lord.

@c    17:6. And the priest shall pour the blood upon the altar of the Lord,
@c    at the door of the tabernacle of the testimony:  and shall burn the fat
@c    for a sweet odour to the Lord.

@c    17:7. And they shall no more sacrifice their victims to devils, with
@c    whom they have committed fornication.  It shall be an ordinance for ever
@c    to them and to their posterity.

@c    17:8. And thou shalt say to them:  The man of the house of Israel, and
@c    of the strangers who sojourn among you, that offereth a holocaust or a
@c    victim,

@c    17:9. And bringeth it not to the door of the tabernacle of the
@c    testimony, that it may be offered to the Lord, shall perish from among
@c    his people.

@c    17:10. If any man whosoever of the house of Israel, and of the
@c    strangers that sojourn among them, eat blood, I will set my face
@c    against his soul, and will cut him off from among his people.

@c    Eat blood. . .To eat blood was forbidden in the law; partly, because God
@c    reserved it to himself, to be offered in sacrifices on the altar, as to
@c    the Lord of life and death; and as a figure of the blood of Christ; and
@c    partly, to give men a horror of shedding blood.  Gen. 9.4, 5, 6.

@c    17:11. Because the life of the flesh is in the blood:  and I have given
@c    it to you, that you may make atonement with it upon the altar for your
@c    souls, and the blood may be for an expiation of the soul.

@c    17:12. Therefore I have said to the children of Israel:  No soul of you,
@c    nor of the strangers that sojourn among you, shall eat blood.

@c    17:13. Any man whosoever of the children of Israel, and of the
@c    strangers that sojourn among you, if by hunting or fowling, he take a
@c    wild beast or a bird, which is lawful to eat, let him pour out its
@c    blood, and cover it with earth.

@c    17:14. For the life of all flesh is in the blood.  Therefore I said to
@c    the children of Israel:  you shall not eat the blood of any flesh at
@c    all, because the life of the flesh is in the blood, and whosoever
@c    eateth it, shall be cut off.

@c    17:15. The soul that eateth that which died of itself, or has been
@c    caught by a beast, whether he be one of your own country or a stranger,
@c    shall wash his clothes and himself with water, and shall be defiled
@c    until the evening:  and in this manner he shall be made clean.

@c    17:16. But if he do not wash his clothes, and his body, he shall bear
@c    his iniquity.



@c    Leviticus Chapter 18


@c    Marriage is prohibited in certain degrees of kindred:  Anda all
@c    unnatural lusts.

@c    18:1. And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying:

@c    18:2. Speak to the children of Israel, and thou shalt say to them:  I am
@c    the Lord your God.

@c    18:3. You shall not do according to the custom of the land of Egypt, in
@c    which you dwelt:  neither shall you act according to the manner of the
@c    country of Chanaan, into which I will bring you.  Nor shall you walk in
@c    their ordinances.

@c    18:4. You shall do my judgments, and shall observe my precepts, and
@c    shall walk in them.  I am the Lord your God.

@c    18:5. Keep my laws and my judgments:  which if a man do, he shall live
@c    in them, I am the Lord.

@c    18:6. No man shall approach to her that is near of kin to him, to
@c    uncover her nakedness.  I am the Lord.

@c    18:7. Thou shalt not uncover the nakedness of thy father, or the
@c    nakedness of thy mother:  she is thy mother, thou shalt not uncover her
@c    nakedness.

@c    18:8. Thou shalt not uncover the nakedness of thy father's wife:  for it
@c    is the nakedness of thy father.

@c    18:9. Thou shalt not uncover the nakedness of thy sister by father or
@c    by mother:  whether born at home or abroad.

@c    18:10. Thou shalt not uncover the nakedness of thy son's daughter, or
@c    thy daughter's daughter:  because it is thy own nakedness.

@c    18:11. Thou shalt not uncover the nakedness of thy father's wife's
@c    daughter, whom she bore to thy father:  and who is thy sister.

@c    18:12. Thou shalt not uncover the nakedness of thy father's sister:
@c    because she is the flesh of thy father.

@c    18:13. Thou shalt not uncover the nakedness of thy mother's sister:
@c    because she is thy mother's flesh.

@c    18:14. Thou shalt not uncover the nakedness of thy father's brother:
@c    neither shalt thou approach to his wife, who is joined to thee by
@c    affinity.

@c    18:15. Thou shalt not uncover the nakedness of thy daughter in law:
@c    because she is thy son's wife, neither shalt thou discover her shame.

@c    18:16. Thou shalt not uncover the nakedness of thy brother's wife:
@c    because it is the nakedness of thy brother.

@c    18:17. Thou shalt not uncover the nakedness of thy wife and her
@c    daughter.  Thou shalt not take her son's daughter or her daughter's
@c    daughter, to discover her shame:  because they are her flesh, and such
@c    copulation is incest.

@c    18:18. Thou shalt not take thy wife's sister for a harlot, to rival
@c    her:  neither shalt thou discover her nakedness, while she is yet
@c    living.

@c    18:19. Thou shalt not approach to a woman having her flowers:  neither
@c    shalt thou uncover her nakedness.

@c    18:20. Thou shalt not lie with thy neighbour's wife:  nor be defiled
@c    with mingling of seed.

@c    18:21. Thou shalt not give any of thy seed to be consecrated to the
@c    idol Moloch, nor defile the name of thy God.  I am the Lord.

@c    18:22. Thou shalt not lie with mankind as with womankind:  because it is
@c    an abomination.

@c    18:23. Thou shalt not copulate with any beast:  neither shalt thou be
@c    defiled with it.  A woman shall not lie down to a beast, nor copulate
@c    with it:  because it is a heinous crime.

@c    Because it is a heinous crime. . .In Hebrew, this word heinous crime is
@c    expressed by the word confusion, signifying the shamefulness and
@c    baseness of this abominable sin.

@c    18:24. Defile not yourselves with any of these things with which all
@c    the nations have been defiled, which I will cast out before you,

@c    18:25. And with which the land is defiled:  the abominations of which I
@c    will visit, that it may vomit out its inhabitants.

@c    18:26. Keep ye my ordinances and my judgments:  and do not any of these
@c    abominations.  Neither any of your own nation, nor any stranger that
@c    sojourneth among you.

@c    18:27. For all these detestable things the inhabitants of the land have
@c    done, that were before you, and have defiled it.

@c    18:28. Beware then, lest in like manner, it vomit you also out, if you
@c    do the like things:  as it vomited out the nation that was before you.

@c    18:29. Every soul that shall commit any of these abominations, shall
@c    perish from the midst of his people.

@c    18:30. Keep my commandments.  Do not the things which they have done,
@c    that have been before you:  and be not defiled therein.  I am the Lord
@c    your God.



@c    Leviticus Chapter 19


@c    Divers ordinances, partly moral, partly ceremonial or judicial.

@c    19:1. The Lord spoke to Moses, saying:

@c    19:2. Speak to all the congregation of the children of Israel.  And thou
@c    shalt say to them:  Be ye holy, because I the Lord your God am holy.

@c    19:3. Let every one fear his father, and his mother.  Keep my sabbaths.
@c    I am the Lord your God.

@c    19:4. Turn ye not to idols:  nor make to yourselves molten gods.  I am
@c    the Lord your God.

@c    19:5. If ye offer in sacrifice a peace offering to the Lord, that he
@c    may be favourable:

@c    19:6. You shall eat it on the same day it was offered, and the next
@c    day.  And whatsoever shall be left until the third day, you shall burn
@c    with fire.

@c    19:7. If after two days any man eat thereof, he shall be profane and
@c    guilty of impiety:

@c    19:8. And shall bear his iniquity, because he hath defiled the holy
@c    thing of the Lord.  And that soul shall perish from among his people.

@c    19:9. When thou reapest the corn of thy land, thou shalt not cut down
@c    all that is on the face of the earth to the very ground:  nor shalt thou
@c    gather the ears that remain.

@c    19:10. Neither shalt thou gather the bunches and grapes that fall down
@c    in thy vineyard:  but shalt leave them to the poor and the strangers to
@c    take.  I am the Lord your God.

@c    19:11. You shall not steal.  You shall not lie:  neither shall any man
@c    deceive his neighbour.

@c    19:12. Thou shalt not swear falsely by my name, nor profane the name of
@c    thy God.  I am the Lord.

@c    19:13. Thou shalt not calumniate thy neighbour, nor oppress him by
@c    violence.  The wages of him that hath been hired by thee shall not abide
@c    with thee until the morning.

@c    19:14. Thou shalt not speak evil of the deaf, nor put a stumbling block
@c    before the blind:  but thou shalt fear the Lord thy God, because I am
@c    the Lord.

@c    19:15. Thou shalt not do that which is unjust, nor judge unjustly.
@c    Respect not the person of the poor:  nor honour the countenance of the
@c    mighty.  But judge thy neighbour according to justice.

@c    19:16. Thou shalt not be a detractor nor a whisperer among the people.
@c    Thou shalt not stand against the blood of thy neighbour.  I am the Lord.

@c    19:17. Thou shalt not hate thy brother in thy heart:  But reprove him
@c    openly, lest thou incur sin through him.

@c    19:18. Seek not revenge, nor be mindful of the injury of thy citizens.
@c    Thou shalt love thy friend as thyself.  I am the Lord.

@c    19:19. Keep ye my laws.  Thou shalt not make thy cattle to gender with
@c    beasts of any other kind.  Thou shalt not sow thy field with different
@c    seeds.  Thou shalt not wear a garment that is woven of two sorts.

@c    Different seeds, etc. . .This law tends to recommend simplicity and
@c    plain dealing in all things, and to teach the people not to join any
@c    false worship or heresy with the worship of the true God.

@c    19:20. If a man carnally lie with a woman that is a bondservant and
@c    marriageable, and yet not redeemed with a price, nor made free:  they
@c    both shall be scourged:  and they shall not be put to death, because she
@c    was not a free woman.

@c    19:21. And for his trespass he shall offer a ram to the Lord, at the
@c    door of the tabernacle of the testimony.

@c    19:22. And the priest shall pray for him:  and for his sin before the
@c    Lord:  and he shall have mercy on him, and the sin shall be forgiven.

@c    19:23. When you shall be come into the land, and shall have planted in
@c    it fruit trees, you shall take away the firstfruits of them.  The fruit
@c    that comes forth shall be unclean to you:  neither shall you eat of
@c    them.

@c    Firstfruits. . .Proeputia, literally, their foreskins; it alludes to
@c    circumcision, and signifies that for the first three years the trees
@c    were to be as uncircumcised, and their fruit unclean:  till in the
@c    fourth year their increase was sanctified and given to the Lord, that
@c    is, to the priests.

@c    19:24. But in the fourth year, all their fruit shall be sanctified, to
@c    the praise of the Lord.

@c    19:25. And in the fifth year you shall eat the fruits thereof,
@c    gathering the increase thereof.  I am the Lord your God.

@c    19:26. You shall not eat with blood.  You shall not divine nor observe
@c    dreams.

@c    19:27. Nor shall you cut your hair roundwise:  nor shave your beard.

@c    19:28. You shall not make any cuttings in your flesh, for the dead:
@c    neither shall you make in yourselves any figures or marks.  I am the
@c    Lord.

@c    19:29. Make not thy daughter a common strumpet, lest the land be
@c    defiled, and filled with wickedness.

@c    19:30. Keep ye my sabbaths, and reverence my sanctuary.  I am the Lord.

@c    19:31. Go not aside after wizards:  neither ask any thing of
@c    soothsayers, to be defiled by them.  I am the Lord your God.

@c    19:32. Rise up before the hoary head, and honour the person of the aged
@c    man:  and fear the Lord thy God.  I am the Lord.

@c    19:33. If a stranger dwell in your land, and abide among you, do not
@c    upbraid hin:

@c    19:34. But let him be among you as one of the same country.  And you
@c    shall love him as yourselves:  for you were strangers in the land of
@c    Egypt.  I am the Lord your God.

@c    19:35. Do not any unjust thing in judgment, in rule, in weight, or in
@c    measure.

@c    19:36. Let the balance be just and the weights equal, the bushel just,
@c    and the sextary equal.  I am the Lord your God, that brought you out of
@c    the land of Egypt.

@c    19:37. Keep all my precepts, and all my judgments:  and do them.  I am
@c    the Lord.



@c    Leviticus Chapter 20


@c    Divers crimes to be punished with death.

@c    20:1. And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying:

@c    20:2. Thus shalt thou say to the children of Israel:  If any man of the
@c    children Israel, or of the strangers that dwell in Israel, give of his
@c    seed to the idol Moloch, dying let him die.  The people of the land
@c    shall stone him.

@c    20:3. And I will set my face against him:  and I will cut him off from
@c    the midst of his people, because he hath given of his seed to Moloch,
@c    and hath defiled my sanctuary, and profaned my holy name.

@c    20:4. And if the people of the land neglecting, and as it were little
@c    regarding my commandment, let alone the man that hath given of his seed
@c    to Moloch, and will not kill him:

@c    20:5. I will set my face against that man, and his kindred, and will
@c    cut off both him and all that consented with him, to commit fornication
@c    with Moloch, out of the midst of their people.

@c    20:6. The soul that shall go aside after magicians, and soothsayers,
@c    and shall commit fornication with them:  I will set my face against that
@c    soul, and destroy it out of the midst of its people.

@c    20:7. Sanctify yourselves, and be ye holy:  because I am the Lord your
@c    God.

@c    20:8. Keep my precepts, and do them.  I am the Lord that sanctify you.

@c    20:9. He that curseth his father, or mother, dying let him die.  He hath
@c    cursed his father, and mother:  let his blood be upon him.

@c    20:10. If any man commit adultery with the wife of another, and defile
@c    his neighbour's wife:  let them be put to death, both the adulterer and
@c    the adulteress.

@c    20:11. If a man lie with his stepmother, and discover the nakedness of
@c    his father, let them both be put to death:  their blood be upon them.

@c    20:12. If any man lie with his daughter in law:  let both die, because
@c    they have done a heinous crime.  Their blood be upon them.

@c    20:13. If any one lie with a man as with a woman, both have committed
@c    an abomination:  let them be put to death.  Their blood be upon them.

@c    20:14. If any man after marrying the daughter, marry her mother, he
@c    hath done a heinous crime.  He shall be burnt alive with them:  neither
@c    shall so great an abomination remain in the midst of you.

@c    20:15. He that shall copulate with any beast or cattle, dying let him
@c    die:  the beast also ye shall kill.

@c    The beast also ye shall kill. . .The killing of the beast was for the
@c    greater horror of the crime, and to prevent the remembrance of such
@c    abomination.

@c    20:16. The woman that shall lie under any beast, shall be killed
@c    together with the same.  Their blood be upon them.

@c    20:17. If any man take his sister, the daughter of his father, or the
@c    daughter of his mother, and see her nakedness, and she behold her
@c    brother's shame:  they have committed a crime.  They shall be slain, in
@c    the sight of their people, because they have discovered one another's
@c    nakedness.  And they shall bear their iniquity.

@c    20:18. If any man lie with a woman in her flowers, and uncover her
@c    nakedness, and she open the fountain of her blood:  both shall be
@c    destroyed out of the midst of their people.

@c    20:19. Thou shalt not uncover the nakedness of thy aunt by thy mother,
@c    and of thy aunt by thy father.  He that doth this, hath uncovered the
@c    shame of his own flesh:  both shall bear their iniquity.

@c    20:20. If any man lie with the wife of his uncle by the father, or of
@c    his uncle by the mother, and uncover the shame of his near akin, both
@c    shall bear their sin.  They shall die without children.

@c    20:21. He that marrieth his brother's wife, doth an unlawful thing:  he
@c    hath uncovered his brother's nakedness.  They shall be without children.

@c    20:22. Keep my laws and my judgments, and do them:  lest the land into
@c    which you are to enter to dwell therein, vomit you also out.

@c    20:23. Walk not after the laws of the nations, which I will cast out
@c    before you.  For they have done all these things:  and therefore I
@c    abhorred them.

@c    20:24. But to you I say:  Possess their land which I will give you for
@c    an inheritance, a land flowing with milk and honey.  I am the Lord your
@c    God, who have separated you from other people.

@c    20:25. Therefore do you also separate the clean beast from the unclean,
@c    and the clean fowl from the unclean.  Defile not your souls with beasts,
@c    or birds, or any things that move on the earth, and which I have shewn
@c    you to be unclean:

@c    20:26. You shall be holy unto me, because I the Lord am holy:  and I
@c    have separated you from other people, that you should be mine.

@c    20:27. A man, or woman, in whom there is a pythonical or divining
@c    spirit, dying let them die.  They shall stone them.  Their blood be upon
@c    them.



@c    Leviticus Chapter 21


@c    Ordinances relating to the priests.

@c    21:1. The Lord said also to Moses:  Speak to the priests the sons of
@c    Aaron, and thou shalt say for them:  Let not a priest incur an
@c    uncleanness at the death of his citizens.

@c    An uncleanness. . .Viz., such as was contracted in laying out the dead
@c    body, or touching it; or in going into the house, or assisting at the
@c    funeral, etc.

@c    21:2. But only for his kin, such as are near in blood:  that is to say,
@c    for his father and for his mother, and for his son, and for his
@c    daughter, for his brother also:

@c    21:3. And for a maiden sister, who hath had no husband.

@c    21:4. But not even for the prince of his people shall he do any thing
@c    that may make him unclean.

@c    21:5. Neither shall they shave their head, nor their beard, nor make
@c    incisions in their flesh.

@c    21:6. They shall be holy to their God, and shall not profane his name.
@c    For they offer the burnt offering of the Lord, and the bread of their
@c    God:  and therefore they shall be holy.

@c    21:7. They shall not take to wife a harlot or a vile prostitute, nor
@c    one that has been put away from her husband:  because they are
@c    consecrated to their God,

@c    21:8. And offer the loaves of proposition.  Let them therefore be holy
@c    because I also am holy:  the Lord, who sanctify them.

@c    21:9. If the daughter of a priest be taken in whoredom and dishonour
@c    the name of her father, she shall be burnt with fire.

@c    21:10. The high priest, that is to say, the priest who is the greatest
@c    among his brethren, upon whose head the oil of unction hath been
@c    poured; and whose hands have been consecrated for the priesthood; and
@c    who hath been vested with the holy vestments.  He shall not uncover his
@c    head:  he shall not rend his garments.

@c    21:11. Nor shall he go in at all to any dead person:  not even for his
@c    father, or his mother, shall he be defiled.

@c    21:12. Neither shall he go out of the holy places, lest he defile the
@c    sanctuary of the Lord:  because the oil of the holy unction of his God
@c    is upon him.  I am the Lord.

@c    21:13. He shall take a virgin unto his wife.

@c    21:14. But a widow or one that is divorced, or defied, or a harlot, he
@c    shall not take:  but a maid of his own people.

@c    21:15. He shall not mingle the stock of his kindred with the common
@c    people of this nation:  for I am the Lord who sanctify him.

@c    21:16. And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying:

@c    21:17. Say to Aaron:  Whosoever of thy seed throughout their families,
@c    hath a blemish, he shall not offer bread to his God.

@c    21:18. Neither shall he approach to minister to him:  If he be blind; if
@c    he be lame; if he have a little, or a great, or a crooked nose;

@c    21:19. If his foot, or if his hand be broken;

@c    21:20. If he be crookbacked; or blear eyed; or have a pearl in his eye,
@c    or a continual scab, or a dry scurf in his body, or a rupture.

@c    21:21. Whosoever of the seed of Aaron the priest hath a blemish:  he
@c    shall not approach to offer sacrifices to the Lord, nor bread to his
@c    God.

@c    21:22. He shall eat nevertheless of the loaves that are offered in the
@c    sanctuary.

@c    21:23. Yet so that he enter not within the veil, nor approach to the
@c    altar:  because he hath a blemish, and he must not defile my sanctuary.
@c    I am the Lord who sanctify them.

@c    21:24. Moses, therefore spoke to Aaron, and to his sons and to all
@c    Israel, all the things that had been commanded him.



@c    Leviticus Chapter 22


@c    Who may eat the holy things:  and what things may be offered.

@c    22:1. And the Lord spoke to Moses saying:

@c    22:2. Speak to Aaron and to his sons, that they beware of those things
@c    that are consecrated of the children of Israel:  and defile not the name
@c    of the things sanctified to me, which they offer.  I am the Lord.

@c    22:3. Say to them and to their posterity:  Every man of your race, that
@c    approacheth to those things that are consecrated, and which the
@c    children of Israel have offered to the Lord, in whom there is
@c    uncleanness, shall perish before the Lord.  I am the Lord.

@c    Approacheth, etc. . .This is to give us to understand, with what purity
@c    of soul we are to approach to the blessed sacrament of which these
@c    meats that had been offered in sacrifice were a figure.

@c    22:4. The man of the seed of Aaron, that is a leper, or that suffereth
@c    a running of the seed, shall not eat of those things that are
@c    sanctified to me, until he be healed.  He that toucheth any thing
@c    unclean by occasion of the dead:  and he whose seed goeth from him as in
@c    generation:

@c    22:5. And he that toucheth a creeping thing, or any unclean thing, the
@c    touching of which is defiling:

@c    22:6. Shall be unclean until the evening, and shall not eat those
@c    things that are sanctified.  But when he hath washed his flesh with
@c    water,

@c    22:7. And the sun is down, then being purified, he shall eat of the
@c    sanctified things, because it is his meat.

@c    22:8. That which dieth of itself, and that which was taken by a beast,
@c    they shall not eat, nor be defiled therewith.  I am the Lord.

@c    22:9. Let them keep my precepts, that they may not fall into sin, and
@c    die in the sanctuary, when they shall have defiled it.  I am the Lord
@c    who sanctify them.

@c    22:10. No stranger shall eat of the sanctified things:  a sojourner of
@c    the priests, or a hired servant, shall not eat of them.

@c    22:11. But he whom the priest hath bought, and he that is his servant,
@c    born in his house, these shall eat of them.

@c    22:12. If the daughter of a priest be married to any of the people, she
@c    shall not eat of those things that are sanctified nor of the
@c    firstfruits.

@c    22:13. But if she be a widow, or divorced, and having no children
@c    return to her father's house, she shall eat of her father's meats, as
@c    she was wont to do when she was a maid.  No stranger hath leave to eat
@c    of them.

@c    22:14. He that eateth of the sanctified things through ignorance, shall
@c    add the fifth part with that which he ate, and shall give it to the
@c    priest into the sanctuary.

@c    22:15. And they shall not profane the sanctified things of the children
@c    of Israel, which they offer to the Lord:

@c    22:16. Lest perhaps they bear the iniquity of their trespass, when they
@c    shall have eaten the sanctified things.  I am the Lord who sanctify
@c    them.

@c    22:17. And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying:

@c    22:18. Speak to Aaron, and to his sons, and to all the children of
@c    Israel, and thou shalt say to them:  The man of the house of Israel, and
@c    of the strangers who dwell with you, that offereth his oblation, either
@c    paying his vows, or offering of his own accord, whatsoever it be which
@c    he presenteth for a holocaust of the Lord,

@c    22:19. To be offered by you:  it shall be a male without blemish of the
@c    beeves, or of the sheep, or of the goats.

@c    22:20. If it have a blemish you shall not offer it:  neither shall it be
@c    acceptable.

@c    22:21. The man that offereth a victim of peace offerings to the Lord,
@c    either paying his vows, or offering of his own accord, whether of
@c    beeves or of sheep, shall offer it without blemish, that it may be
@c    acceptable.  There shall be no blemish in it.

@c    22:22. If it be blind, or broken, or have a scar or blisters, or a
@c    scab, or a dry scurf:  you shall not offer them to the Lord, nor burn
@c    any thing of them upon the Lord's altar.

@c    22:23. An ox or a sheep, that hath the ear and the tail cut off, thou
@c    mayst offer voluntarily:  but a vow may not be paid with them.

@c    22:24. you shall not offer to the Lord any beast that hath the
@c    testicles bruised, or crushed, or cut and taken away:  neither shall you
@c    do any such things in your land.

@c    22:25. you shall not offer bread to your God, from the hand of a
@c    stranger, nor any other thing that he would give:  because they are all
@c    corrupted, and defiled.  You shall not receive them.

@c    22:26. And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying:

@c    22:27. When a bullock, or a sheep, or a goat, is brought forth, they
@c    shall be seven days under the udder of their dam:  but the eighth day,
@c    and thenceforth, they may be offered to the Lord.

@c    22:28. Whether it be a cow, or a sheep, they shall not be sacrificed
@c    the same day with their young ones.

@c    22:29. If you immolate a victim for thanksgiving to the Lord, that he
@c    may be favourable,

@c    22:30. You shall eat it the same day.  There shall not any of it remain
@c    until the morning of the next day.  I am the Lord.

@c    22:31. Keep my commandments, and do them.  I am the Lord.

@c    22:32. Profane not my holy name, that I may be sanctified in the midst
@c    of the children of Israel.  I am the Lord who sanctify you:

@c    22:33. And who brought you out of the land of Egypt, that I might be
@c    your God.  I am the Lord.



@c    Leviticus Chapter 23


@c    Holy days to be kept.

@c    23:1. And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying:

@c    23:2. Speak to the children of Israel, and thou shalt say to them:
@c    These are the feasts of the Lord, which you shall call holy.

@c    23:3. Six days shall ye do work:  the seventh day, because it is the
@c    rest of the sabbath, shall be called holy.  You shall do no work on that
@c    day:  it is the sabbath of the Lord in all your habitations.

@c    23:4. These also are the holy days of the Lord, which you must
@c    celebrate in their seasons.

@c    23:5. The first month, the fourteenth day of the month at evening, is
@c    the phase of the Lord.

@c    23:6. And the fifteenth day of the same month is the solemnity of the
@c    unleavened bread of the Lord.  Seven days shall you eat unleavened
@c    bread.

@c    23:7. The first day shall be most solemn unto you, and holy:  you shall
@c    do no servile work therein.

@c    23:8. But you shall offer sacrifice in fire to the Lord seven days.  And
@c    the seventh day shall be more solemn, and more holy:  and you shall do
@c    no servile work therein.

@c    23:9. And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying:

@c    23:10. Speak to the children of Israel, and thou shalt say to them:
@c    When you shall have entered into the land which I will give you, and
@c    shall reap your corn, you shall bring sheaves of ears, the firstfruits
@c    of your harvest to the priest.

@c    23:11. Who shall lift up the sheaf before the Lord, the next day after
@c    the sabbath, that it may be acceptable for you, and shall sanctify it.

@c    23:12. And on the same day that the sheaf is consecrated, a lamb
@c    without blemish of the first year shall be killed for a holocaust of
@c    the Lord.

@c    23:13. And the libations shall be offered with it:  two tenths of flour
@c    tempered with oil, for a burnt offering of the Lord, and a most sweet
@c    odour.  Libations also of wine, the fourth part of a hin.

@c    23:14. You shall not eat either bread, or parched corn, or frumenty or
@c    the harvest, until the day that you shall offer thereof to your God.  It
@c    is a precept for ever throughout your generations, and all your
@c    dwellings.

@c    23:15. You shall count therefore from the morrow after the sabbath,
@c    wherein you offered the sheaf of firstfruits, seven full weeks.

@c    23:16. Even unto the morrow after the seventh week be expired, that is
@c    to say, fifty days:  and so you shall offer a new sacrifice to the Lord.

@c    23:17. Out of all your dwellings, two loaves of the firstfruits, of two
@c    tenths of flour leavened, which you shall bake for the firstfruits of
@c    the Lord.

@c    23:18. And you shall offer with the loaves seven lambs without blemish
@c    of the first year, and one calf from the herd, and they shall be for a
@c    holocaust with their two rams:  and they shall be for a holocaust with
@c    their libations for a most sweet odour to the Lord.

@c    23:19. You shall offer also a buck goat for sin, and two lambs of the
@c    first year for sacrifices of peace offerings.

@c    23:20. And when the priest hath lifted them up with the loaves of the
@c    firstfruits before the Lord, they shall fall to his use.

@c    23:21. And you shall call this day most solemn, and most holy.  You
@c    shall do no servile work therein.  It shall be an everlasting ordinance
@c    in all your dwellings and generations.

@c    23:22. And when you reap the corn of your land, you shall not cut it to
@c    the very ground:  neither shall you gather the ears that remain.  But you
@c    shall leave them for the poor and for the strangers.  I am the Lord your
@c    God.

@c    23:23. And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying:

@c    23:24. Say to the children of Israel:  The seventh month, on the first
@c    day of the month, you shall keep a sabbath, a memorial, with the sound
@c    of trumpets, and it shall be called holy.

@c    23:25. You shall do no servile work therein, and you shall offer a
@c    holocaust to the Lord.

@c    23:26. And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying:

@c    23:27. Upon the tenth day of this seventh month shall be the day of
@c    atonement.  It shall be most solemn, and shall be called holy:  and you
@c    shall await your souls on that day, and shall offer a holocaust to the
@c    Lord.

@c    23:28. You shall do no servile work in the time of this day:  because it
@c    is a day of propitiation, that the Lord your God may be merciful unto
@c    you.

@c    23:29. Every soul that is not afflicted on this day, shall perish from
@c    among his people.

@c    23:30. And every soul that shall do any work, the same will I destroy
@c    from among his people.

@c    23:31. You shall do no work therefore on that day:  it shall be an
@c    everlasting ordinance unto you in all your generations, and dwellings.

@c    23:32. It is a sabbath of rest, and you shall afflict your souls
@c    beginning on the ninth day of the month.  From evening until evening you
@c    shall celebrate your sabbaths.

@c    23:33. And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying:

@c    23:34. Say to the children of Israel:  From the fifteenth day of this
@c    same seventh month, shall be kept the feast of tabernacles, seven days
@c    to the Lord.

@c    23:35. The first day shall be called most solemn and most holy:  you
@c    shall do no servile work therein.  And seven days you shall offer
@c    holocausts to the Lord.

@c    23:36. The eighth day also shall be most solemn and most holy:  and you
@c    shall offer holocausts to the Lord.  For it is the day of assembly and
@c    congregation.  You shall do no servile work therein.

@c    23:37. These are the feasts of the Lord which you shall call most
@c    solemn and most holy, and shall offer on them oblations to the Lord:
@c    holocausts and libations according to the rite of every day.

@c    23:38. Besides the sabbaths of the Lord, and your gifts, and those
@c    things that you offer by vow, or which you shall give to the Lord
@c    voluntarily.

@c    23:39. So from the fifteenth day of the seventh month, when you shall
@c    have gathered in all the fruits of your land, you shall celebrate the
@c    feast of the Lord seven days.  On the first day and the eighth shall be
@c    a sabbath:  that is a day of rest.

@c    23:40. And you shall take to you on the first day the fruits of the
@c    fairest tree, and branches of palm trees, and boughs of thick trees,
@c    and willows of the brook:  And you shall rejoice before the Lord your
@c    God.

@c    23:41. And you shall keep the solemnity thereof seven days in the year.
@c    It shall be an everlasting ordinance in your generations.  In the
@c    seventh month shall you celebrate this feast.

@c    23:42. And you shall dwell in bowers seven days.  Every one that is of
@c    the race of Israel, shall dwell in tabernacles:

@c    23:43. That your posterity may know, that I made the children of Israel
@c    to dwell in tabernacles, when I brought them out of the land of Egypt.
@c    I am the Lord your God.

@c    23:44. And Moses spoke concerning the feasts of the Lord to the
@c    children of Israel.



@c    Leviticus Chapter 24


@c    The oil for the lamps.  The loaves of proposition.  The punishment of
@c    blasphemy.

@c    24:1. And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying:

@c    24:2. Command the children of Israel, that they bring unto thee the
@c    finest and clearest oil of olives, to furnish the lamps continually,

@c    24:3. Without the veil of the testimony in the tabernacle of the
@c    covenant.  And Aaron shall set them from evening until morning before
@c    the Lord, by a perpetual service and rite in your generations.

@c    24:4. They shall be set upon the most pure candlestick before the Lord
@c    continually.

@c    24:5. Thou shalt take also fine flour, and shalt bake twelve loaves
@c    thereof, two tenths shall be in every loaf.

@c    24:6. And thou shalt set them six and six, one against another, upon
@c    the most clean table before the Lord.

@c    24:7. And thou shalt put upon them the clearest frankincense, that the
@c    bread may be for a memorial of the oblation of the Lord.

@c    24:8. Every sabbath they shall be changed before the Lord:  being
@c    received of the children of Israel by an everlasting covenant.

@c    24:9. And they shall be Aaron's and his sons', that they may eat them
@c    in the holy place:  because it is most holy of the sacrifices of the
@c    Lord by a perpetual right.

@c    24:10. And behold there went out the son of a woman of Israel, whom she
@c    had of an Egyptian, among the children of Israel:  and fell at words in
@c    the camp with a man of Israel.

@c    24:11. And when he had blasphemed the name, and had cursed it, he was
@c    brought to Moses.  (Now his mother was called Salumith, the daughter of
@c    Dabri, of the tribe of Dan.)

@c    24:12. And they put him into prison, till they might know what the Lord
@c    would command.

@c    24:13. And the Lord spoke to Moses,

@c    24:14. Saying:  Bring forth the blasphemer without the camp:  and let
@c    them that heard him, put their hands upon his head:  and let all the
@c    people stone him.

@c    24:15. And thou shalt speak to the children of Israel:  The man that
@c    curseth his God, shall bear his sin:

@c    24:16. And he that blasphemeth the name of the Lord, dying let him die.
@c    All the multitude shall stone him, whether he be a native or a
@c    stranger.  He that blasphemeth the name of the Lord, dying let him die.

@c    24:17. He that striketh and killeth a man:  dying let him die.

@c    24:18. He that killeth a beast, shall make it good that is to say,
@c    shall give beast for beast.

@c    24:19. He that giveth a blemish to any of his neighbours:  as he hath
@c    done, so shall it be done to him:

@c    24:20. Breach for breach, eye for ere, tooth for tooth, shall he
@c    restore.  What blemish he gave, the like shall he be compelled to
@c    suffer.

@c    24:21. He that striketh a beast, shall render another.  He that striketh
@c    a man shall be punished.

@c    24:22. Let there be equal judgment among you, whether he be a stranger,
@c    or a native that offends:  because I am the Lord your God.

@c    24:23. And Moses spoke to the children of Israel.  And they brought
@c    forth him that had blasphemed, without the camp:  and they stoned him.
@c    And the children of Israel did as the Lord had commanded Moses.



@c    Leviticus Chapter 25


@c    The law of the seventh and of the fiftieth year of jubilee.

@c    25:1. And the Lord spoke to Moses in mount Sinai, saying:

@c    25:2. Speak to the children of Israel, and thou shalt say to them:  When
@c    you shall have entered into the land which I will give you, observe the
@c    rest of the sabbath of the Lord.

@c    25:3. Six years thou shalt sow thy field and six years thou shalt prune
@c    thy vineyard, and shalt gather the fruits thereof.

@c    25:4. But in the seventh year there shall be a sabbath to the land, of
@c    the resting of the Lord.  Thou shalt not sow thy field, nor prune thy
@c    vineyard.

@c    25:5. What the ground shall bring forth of itself, thou shalt not reap:
@c    neither shalt thou gather the grapes or the firstfruits as a vintage.
@c    For it is a year of rest to the land.

@c    25:6. But they shall be unto you for meat, to thee and to thy
@c    manservant, to thy maidservant and thy hireling, and to the strangers
@c    that sojourn with thee.

@c    25:7. All things that grow shall be meat to thy beasts and to thy
@c    cattle.

@c    25:8. Thou shalt also number to thee seven weeks of years:  that is to
@c    say, seven times seven, which together make forty-nine years.

@c    25:9. And thou shalt sound the trumpet in the seventh month, the tenth
@c    day of the month, in the time of the expiation in all your land.

@c    25:10. And thou shalt sanctify the fiftieth year, and shalt proclaim
@c    remission to all the inhabitants of thy land:  for it is the year of
@c    jubilee.  Every man shall return to his possession, and every one shall
@c    go back to his former family:

@c    Remission. . .That is, a general release and discharge from debts and
@c    bondage, and a reinstating of every man in his former possessions.

@c    25:11. Because it is the jubilee and the fiftieth year.  You shall not
@c    sow, nor reap the things that grow in the field of their own accord,
@c    neither shall you gather the firstfruits of the vines,

@c    25:12. Because of the sanctification of the jubilee.  But as they grow
@c    you shall presently eat them.

@c    25:13. In the year of the jubilee all shall return to their
@c    possessions.

@c    25:14. When thou shalt sell any thing to thy neighbour, or shalt buy of
@c    him:  grieve not thy brother.  But thou shalt buy of him according to the
@c    number of years from the jubilee.

@c    25:15. And he shall sell to thee according to the computation of the
@c    fruits.

@c    25:16. The more years remain after the jubilee, the more shall the
@c    price increase:  and the less time is counted, so much the less shall
@c    the purchase cost.  For he shall sell to thee the time of the fruits.

@c    25:17. Do not afflict your countrymen:  but let every one fear his God.
@c    Because I am the Lord your God.

@c    25:18. Do my precepts, and keep my judgments, and fulfil them:  that you
@c    may dwell in the land without any fear.

@c    25:19. And the ground may yield you its fruits, of which you may eat
@c    your fill, fearing no man's invasion.

@c    25:20. But if you say:  What shall we eat the seventh year, if we sow
@c    not, nor gather our fruits?

@c    25:21. I will give you my blessing the sixth year:  and it shall yield
@c    the fruits of three years.

@c    25:22. And the eighth year you shall sow, and shall eat of the old
@c    fruits, until the ninth year:  till new grow up, you shall eat the old
@c    store.

@c    25:23. The land also shall not be sold for ever:  because it is mine,
@c    and you are strangers and sojourners with me.

@c    25:24. For which cause all the country of your possession shall be
@c    under the condition of redemption.

@c    25:25. If thy brother being impoverished sell his little possession,
@c    and his kinsman will:  he may redeem what he had sold.

@c    25:26. But if he have no kinsman, and he himself can find the price to
@c    redeem it:

@c    25:27. The value of the fruits shall be counted from that time when he
@c    sold it.  And the overplus he shall restore to the buyer, and so shall
@c    receive his possession again.

@c    25:28. But if his hands find not the means to repay the price, the
@c    buyer shall have what he bought, until the year of the jubilee.  For in
@c    that year all that is sold shall return to the owner, and to the
@c    ancient possessor.

@c    25:29. He that selleth a house within the walls of a city, shall have
@c    the liberty to redeem it, until one year be expired.

@c    25:30. If he redeem it not, and the whole year be fully out, the buyer
@c    shall possess it, and his posterity for ever, and it cannot be
@c    redeemed, not even in the jubilee.

@c    25:31. But if the house be in a village, that hath no walls, it shall
@c    be sold according to the same law as the fields.  If it be not redeemed
@c    before, in the jubilee it shall return to the owner.

@c    25:32. The houses of Levites, which are in cities, may always be
@c    redeemed.

@c    25:33. If they be not redeemed, in the jubilee they shall all return to
@c    the owners:  because the houses of the cities of the Levites are for
@c    their possessions among the children of Israel.

@c    25:34. But let not their suburbs be sold, because it is a perpetual
@c    possession.

@c    25:35. If thy brother be impoverished, and weak of hand, and thou
@c    receive him as a stranger and sojourner, and he live with thee:

@c    25:36. Take not usury of him nor more than thou gavest.  Fear thy God,
@c    that thy brother may live with thee.

@c    25:37. Thou shalt not give him thy money upon usury:  nor exact of him
@c    any increase of fruits.

@c    25:38. I am the Lord your God, who brought you out of the land of
@c    Egypt, that I might give you the land of Chanaan, and might be your
@c    God.

@c    25:39. If thy brother constrained by poverty, sell himself to thee:
@c    thou shalt not oppress him with the service of bondservants.

@c    25:40. But he shall be as a hireling, and a sojourner:  he shall work
@c    with thee until the year of the jubilee.

@c    25:41. And afterwards he shall go out with his children:  and shall
@c    return to his kindred and to the possession of his fathers.

@c    25:42. For they are my servants, and I brought them out of the land of
@c    Egypt:  let them not be sold as bondmen.

@c    25:43. Afflict him not by might:  but fear thy God.

@c    25:44. Let your bondmen, and your bondwomen, be of the nations that are
@c    round about you:

@c    25:45. And of the strangers that sojourn among you, or that were born
@c    of them in your land.  These you shall have for servants:

@c    25:46. And by right of inheritance shall leave them to your posterity,
@c    and shall possess them for ever.  But oppress not your brethren the
@c    children of Israel by might.

@c    25:47. If the hand of a stranger or a sojourner grow strong among you,
@c    and thy brother being impoverished sell himself to him, or to any of
@c    his race:

@c    25:48. After the sale he may be redeemed.  He that will of his brethren
@c    shall redeem him:

@c    25:49. Either his uncle, or his uncle's son, or his kinsman, by blood,
@c    or by affinity.  But if he himself be able also, he shall redeem
@c    himself:

@c    25:50. Counting only the years from the time of his selling unto the
@c    year of the jubilee:  and counting the money that he was sold for,
@c    according to the number of the years and the reckoning of a hired
@c    servant.

@c    25:51. If there be many years that remain until the jubilee, according
@c    to them shall he also repay the price.

@c    25:52. If few, he shall make the reckoning with him according to the
@c    number of the years:  and shall repay to the buyer of what remaineth of
@c    the years.

@c    25:53. His wages being allowed for which he served before:  he shall not
@c    afflict him violently in thy sight.

@c    25:54. And if by these means he cannot be redeemed, in the year of the
@c    jubilee he shall go out with his children.

@c    25:55. For the children of Israel are my servants, whom I brought forth
@c    out of the land of Egypt.



@c    Leviticus Chapter 26


@c    God's promises to them that keep his commandments.  And the many
@c    punishments with which he threatens transgressors.

@c    26:1. I am the Lord your God.  You shall not make to yourselves any idol
@c    or graven thing:  neither shall you erect pillars, nor set up a
@c    remarkable stone in your land, to adore it.  For I am the Lord your God.

@c    26:2. Keep my sabbaths, and reverence my sanctuary.  I am the Lord.

@c    26:3. If you walk in my precepts, and keep my commandments, and do
@c    them, I will give you rain in due seasons.

@c    26:4. And the ground shall bring forth its increase:  and the trees
@c    shall be filled with fruit.

@c    26:5. The threshing of your harvest shall reach unto the vintage, and
@c    the vintage shall reach unto the sowing time:  and you shall eat your
@c    bread to the full, and dwell in your land without fear.

@c    26:6. I will give peace in your coasts:  you shall sleep, and there
@c    shall be none to make you afraid.  I will take away evil beasts:  and the
@c    sword shall not pass through your quarters.

@c    26:7. You shall pursue your enemies:  and they shall fall before you.

@c    26:8. Five of yours shall pursue a hundred others:  and a hundred of you
@c    ten thousand.  Your enemies shall fall before you by the sword.

@c    26:9. I will look on you, and make you increase:  you shall be
@c    multiplied, and I will establish my covenant with you.

@c    26:10. You shall eat the oldest of the old store:  and, new coming on,
@c    you shall cast away the old.

@c    26:11. I will set my tabernacle in the midst of you:  and my soul shall
@c    not cast you off.

@c    26:12. I will walk among you, and will be your God:  and you shall be my
@c    people.

@c    26:13. I am the Lord your God:  who have brought you out of the land of
@c    the Egyptians, that you should not serve them:  and who have broken the
@c    chains of your necks, that you might go upright.

@c    26:14. But if you will not hear me, nor do all my commandments:

@c    26:15. If you despise my laws, and contemn my judgments so as not to do
@c    those things which are appointed by me, and to make void my covenant:

@c    26:16. I also will do these things to you.  I will quickly visit you
@c    with poverty, and burning heat, which shall waste your eyes, and
@c    consume your lives.  You shall sow your seed in vain, which shall be
@c    devoured by your enemies.

@c    26:17. I will set my face against you, and you shall fall down before
@c    your enemies:  and shall be made subject to them that hate you.  You
@c    shall flee when no man pursueth you.

@c    26:18. But if you will not yet for all this obey me:  I will chastise
@c    you seven times more for your sins.

@c    26:19. And I will break the pride of your stubbornness:  and I will make
@c    to you the heaven above as iron, and the earth as brass.

@c    26:20. Your labour shall be spent in vain:  the ground shall not bring
@c    forth her increase:  nor the trees yield their fruit.

@c    26:21. If you walk contrary to me, and will not hearken to me, I will
@c    bring seven times more plagues upon you for your sins.

@c    26:22. And I will send in upon you the beasts of the field, to destroy
@c    you and your cattle, and make you few in number:  and that your highways
@c    may be desolate.

@c    26:23. And if even so you will not amend, but will walk contrary to me:

@c    26:24. I also will walk contrary to you, and will strike you seven
@c    times for your sins.

@c    26:25. And I will bring in upon you the sword that shall avenge my
@c    covenant.  And when you shall flee into the cities, I will send the
@c    pestilence in the midst of you.  And you shall be delivered into the
@c    hands of your enemies,

@c    26:26. After I shall have broken the staff of your bread:  so that ten
@c    women shall bake your bread in one oven, and give it out by weight:  and
@c    you shall eat, and shall not be filled,

@c    26:27. But if you will not for all this hearken to me, but will walk
@c    against me

@c    26:28. I will also go against you with opposite fury:  and I will
@c    chastise you with seven plagues for your sins,

@c    26:29. So that you shall eat the flesh of your sons and of your
@c    daughters.

@c    26:30. I will destroy your high places, and break your idols.  You shall
@c    fall among the ruins of your idols, and my soul shall abhor you.

@c    26:31. Insomuch that I will bring your cities to be a wilderness:  and I
@c    will make your sanctuaries desolate:  and will receive no more your
@c    sweet odours.

@c    26:32. And I will destroy your land:  and your enemies shall be
@c    astonished at it, when they shall be the inhabitants thereof.

@c    26:33. And I will scatter you among the Gentiles:  and I will draw out
@c    the sword after you.  And your land shall be desert, and your cities
@c    destroyed.

@c    26:34. Then shall the land enjoy her sabbaths all the days of her
@c    desolation.  When you shall be

@c    26:35. In the enemy's land, she shall keep a sabbath, and rest in the
@c    sabbaths of her desolation:  because she did not rest in your sabbaths,
@c    when you dwelt therein.

@c    26:36. And as to them that shall remain of you I will send fear in
@c    their hearts in the countries of their enemies.  The sound of a flying
@c    leaf shall terrify them:  and they shall flee as it were from the sword.
@c    They shall fall, when no man pursueth them.

@c    26:37. And they shall every one fall upon their brethren as fleeing
@c    from wars:  none of you shall dare to resist your enemies.

@c    26:38. You shall perish among the Gentiles:  and an enemy's land shall
@c    consume you.

@c    26:39. And if of them also some remain, they shall pine away in their
@c    iniquities, in the land of their enemies:  and they shall be afflicted
@c    for the sins of their fathers, and their own.

@c    26:40. Until they confess their iniquities, and the iniquities of their
@c    ancestors, whereby they have transgressed against me, and walked
@c    contrary unto me.

@c    26:41. Therefore I also will walk against them, and bring them into
@c    their enemies' land until their uncircumcised mind be ashamed.  Then
@c    shall they pray for their sins.

@c    26:42. And I will remember my covenant, that I made with Jacob, and
@c    Isaac, and Abraham.  I will remember also the land:

@c    26:43. Which when she shall be left by them, shall enjoy her sabbaths,
@c    being desolate for them.  But they shall pray for their sins, because
@c    they rejected my judgments, and despised my laws.

@c    26:44. And yet for all that when they were in the land of their
@c    enemies, I did not cast them off altogether.  Neither did I so despise
@c    them that they should be quite consumed:  and I should make void my
@c    covenant with them.  For I am the Lord their God.

@c    26:45. And I will remember my former covenant, when I brought them out
@c    of the land of Egypt, in the sight of the Gentiles, to be their God.  I
@c    am the Lord.  These are the judgments, and precepts, and laws, which the
@c    Lord gave between him and the children of Israel, in mount Sinai, by
@c    the hand of Moses.



@c    Leviticus Chapter 27


@c    Of vows and tithes.

@c    27:1. And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying:

@c    27:2. Speak to the children of Israel, and thou shalt say to them:  The
@c    man that shall have made a vow, and promised his soul to God, shall
@c    give the price according to estimation.

@c    27:3. If it be a man from twenty years old unto sixty years old, he
@c    shall give fifty sicles of silver, after the weight of the sanctuary:

@c    27:4. If a woman, thirty.

@c    27:5. But from the fifth year until the twentieth, a man shall give
@c    twenty sicles:  a woman ten.

@c    27:6. From one month until the fifth year, for a male shall be given
@c    five sicles:  for a female three.

@c    27:7. A man that is sixty years old or upward, shall give fifteen
@c    sicles:  a woman ten.

@c    27:8. If he be poor, and not able to pay the estimation, he shall stand
@c    before the priest:  and as much as he shall value him at, and see him
@c    able to pay, so much shall he give.

@c    27:9. But a beast that may be sacrificed to the Lord, if any one shall
@c    vow, shall be holy,

@c    27:10. And cannot be changed:  that is to say, neither a better for a
@c    worse, nor a worse for a better.  And if he shall change it:  both that
@c    which was changed, and that for which it was changed, shall be
@c    consecrated to the Lord.

@c    27:11. An unclean beast, which cannot be sacrificed to the Lord, if any
@c    man shall vow, shall be brought before the priest:

@c    27:12. Who judging whether it be good or bad, shall set the price.

@c    27:13. Which, if he that offereth it will give, he shall add above the
@c    estimation the fifth part.

@c    27:14. If a man shall vow his house, and sanctify it to the Lord, the
@c    priest shall consider it, whether it be good or bad:  and it shall be
@c    sold according to the price, which he shall appoint.

@c    27:15. But if he that vowed, will redeem it, he shall give the fifth
@c    part of the estimation over and above:  and shall have the house.

@c    27:16. And if he vow the field of his possession, and consecrate it to
@c    the Lord, the price shall be rated according to the measure of the
@c    seed.  If the ground be sown with thirty bushels of barley, let it be
@c    sold for fifty sicles of silver.

@c    27:17. If he vow his field immediately from the year of jubilee that is
@c    beginning:  as much as it may be worth, at so much it shall be rated.

@c    27:18. But if some time after, the priest shall reckon the money
@c    according to the number of years that remain until the jubilee, and the
@c    price shall be abated.

@c    27:19. And if he that had vowed, will redeem his field, he shall add
@c    the fifth part of the money of the estimation, and shall possess it.

@c    27:20. And if he will not redeem it, but it be sold to any other man,
@c    he that vowed it, may not redeem it any more.

@c    27:21. For when the day of jubilee cometh, it shall be sanctified to
@c    the Lord, and as a possession consecrated, pertaineth to the right of
@c    the priest.

@c    27:22. If a field that was bought, and not of a man's ancestors'
@c    possession, be sanctified to the Lord:

@c    27:23. The priest shall reckon the price according to the number of
@c    years, unto the jubilee.  And he that had vowed, shall give that to the
@c    Lord.

@c    27:24. But in the jubilee, it shall return to the former owner, who had
@c    sold it, and had it in the lot of his possession.

@c    27:25. All estimation shall be made according to the sicle of the
@c    sanctuary.  A sicle hath twenty obols.

@c    27:26. The firstborn, which belong to the Lord, no man may sanctify and
@c    vow:  whether it be bullock, or sheep, they are the Lord's.

@c    27:27. And if it be an unclean beast, he that offereth it shall redeem
@c    it, according to thy estimation, and shall add the fifth part of the
@c    price.  If he will not redeem it, it shall be sold to another for how
@c    much soever it was estimated by thee.

@c    27:28. Any thing that is devoted to the Lord, whether it be man, or
@c    beast, or field, shall not be sold:  neither may it be redeemed.
@c    Whatsoever is once consecrated shall be holy of holies to the Lord.

@c    27:29. And any consecration that is offered by man, shall not be
@c    redeemed, but dying shall die.

@c    27:30. All tithes of the land, whether of corn, or of the fruits of
@c    trees, are the Lord's, and are sanctified to him.

@c    27:31. And if any man will redeem his tithes, he shall add the fifth
@c    part of them.

@c    27:32. Of all the tithes of oxen, and sheep, and goats, that pass under
@c    the shepherd's rod, every tenth that cometh shall be sanctified to the
@c    Lord.

@c    27:33. It shall not be chosen neither good nor bad, neither shall it be
@c    changed for another.  If any man change it:  both that which was changed,
@c    and that for which it was changed, shall be sanctified to the Lord, and
@c    shall not be redeemed.

@c    27:34. These are the precepts which the Lord commanded Moses for the
@c    children of Israel in mount Sinai.
