@c    THE LAMENTATIONS OF JEREMIAS



@c    In these JEREMIAS laments in a most pathetical manner the miseries of
@c    his people, and the destruction of JERUSALEM and the temple, in Hebrew
@c    verses, beginning with different letters according to the order of the
@c    Hebrew alphabet.



@c    Lamentations Chapter 1


@c    PREFACE:  And it came to pass, after Israel was carried into captivity,
@c    and Jerusalem was desolate, that Jeremias the prophet sat weeping, and
@c    mourned with this lamentation over Jerusalem, and with a sorrowful
@c    mind, sighing and moaning, he said:

@c    And it came to pass, etc. . .This preface was not written by Jeremias,
@c    but was added by the seventy interpreters, to give the reader to
@c    understand upon what occasion the Lamentations were published.

@c    1:1. Aleph.  How doth the city sit solitary that was full of people! how
@c    is the mistress of the Gentiles become as a widow:  the princes of
@c    provinces made tributary!

@c    1:2. Beth.  Weeping, she hath wept in the night, and her tears are on
@c    her cheeks:  there is none to comfort her among all them that were dear
@c    to her:  all her friends have despised her, and are become her enemies.

@c    1:3. Ghimel.  Juda hath removed her dwelling place, because of her
@c    affliction, and the greatness of her bondage; she hath dwelt among the
@c    nations, and she hath found no rest; all her persecutors have taken her
@c    in the midst of straits.

@c    1:4. Daleth.  The ways of Sion mourn, because there are none that come
@c    to the solemn feast:  all her gates are broken down; her priests sigh;
@c    her virgins are in affliction; and she is oppressed with bitterness.

@c    1:5. He.  Her adversaries are become her lords; her enemies are
@c    enriched; because the Lord hath spoken against her for the multitude of
@c    her iniquities; her children are led into captivity, before the face of
@c    the oppressor.

@c    1:6. Vau.  And from the daughter of Sion, all her beauty is departed;
@c    her princes are become like rams that find no pastures; and they are
@c    gone away without strength before the face of the pursuer.

@c    1:7. Zain.  Jerusalem hath remembered the days of her affliction, and
@c    prevarication of all her desirable things which she had from the days
@c    of old, when her people fell in the enemy's hand, and there was no
@c    helper; the enemies have seen her, and have mocked at her sabbaths.

@c    1:8. Heth.  Jerusalem hath grievously sinned, therefore is she become
@c    unstable; all that honoured her, have despised her, because they have
@c    seen her shame; but she sighed, and turned backward.

@c    1:9. Teth.  Her filthiness is on her feet, and she hath not remembered
@c    her end; she is wonderfully cast down, not having a comforter:  behold,
@c    O Lord, my affliction, because the enemy is lifted up.

@c    1:10. Jod.  The enemy hath put out his hand to all her desirable things:
@c    for she hath seen the Gentiles enter into her sanctuary, of whom thou
@c    gavest commandment that they should not enter into thy church.

@c    1:11. Caph.  All her people sigh, they seek bread:  they have given all
@c    their precious things for food to relieve the soul:  see, O Lord, and
@c    consider, for I am become vile.

@c    1:12. Lamed.  O all ye that pass by the way, attend, and see if there be
@c    any sorrow like to my sorrow:  for he hath made a vintage of me, as the
@c    Lord spoke in the day of his fierce anger.

@c    1:13. Mem.  From above he hath sent fire into my bones, and hath
@c    chastised me:  he hath spread a net for my feet, he hath turned me back:
@c    he hath made me desolate, wasted with sorrow all the day long.

@c    1:14. Nun.  The yoke of my iniquities hath watched:  they are folded
@c    together in his hand, and put upon my neck:  my strength is weakened:
@c    the Lord hath delivered me into a hand, out of which I am not able to
@c    rise.

@c    1:15. Samech.  The Lord hath taken away all my mighty men out of the
@c    midst of me:  he hath called against me the time, to destroy my chosen
@c    men:  the Lord hath trodden the winepress for the virgin daughter of
@c    Juda.

@c    1:16. Ain.  Therefore do I weep, and my eyes run down with water:
@c    because the comforter, the relief of my soul, is far from me:  my
@c    children are desolate because the enemy hath prevailed.

@c    1:17. Phe.  Sion hath spread forth her hands, there is none to comfort
@c    her:  the Lord hath commanded against Jacob, his enemies are round about
@c    him:  Jerusalem is as a menstruous woman among them.

@c    1:18. Sade.  The Lord is just, for I have provoked his mouth to wrath:
@c    hear, I pray you, all ye people, and see my sorrow:  my virgins, and my
@c    young men are gone into captivity.

@c    1:19. Coph.  I called for my friends, but they deceived me:  my priests
@c    and my ancients pined away in the city:  while they sought their food,
@c    to relieve their souls.

@c    1:20. Res.  Behold, O Lord, for I am in distress, my bowels are
@c    troubled:  my heart is turned within me, for I am full of bitterness:
@c    abroad the sword destroyeth and at home there is death alike.

@c    1:21. Sin.  They have heard that I sigh, and there is none to comfort
@c    me:  all my enemies have heard of my evil, they have rejoiced that thou
@c    hast done it:  thou hast brought a day of consolation, and they shall be
@c    like unto me.

@c    1:22. Thau.  Let all their evil be present before thee:  and make vintage
@c    of them, as thou hast made vintage of me for all my iniquities:  for my
@c    sighs are many, and my heart is sorrowful.



@c    Lamentations Chapter 2


@c    2:1. Aleph.  How hath the Lord covered with obscurity the daughter of
@c    Sion in his wrath! how hath he cast down from heaven to the earth the
@c    glorious one of Israel, and hath not remembered his footstool in the
@c    day of his anger.

@c    2:2. Beth.  The Lord hath cast down headlong, and hath not spared, all
@c    that was beautiful in Jacob:  he hath destroyed in his wrath the strong
@c    holds of the virgin of Juda, and brought them down to the ground:  he
@c    hath made the kingdom unclean, and the princes thereof.

@c    2:3. Ghimel.  He hath broken in his fierce anger all the horn of Israel:
@c    he hath drawn back his right hand from before the enemy:  and he hath
@c    kindled in Jacob as it were a flaming fire devouring round about.

@c    2:4. Daleth.  He hath bent his bow as an enemy, he hath fixed his right
@c    hand as an adversary:  and he hath killed all that was fair to behold in
@c    the tabernacle of the daughter of Sion, he hath poured out his
@c    indignation like fire.

@c    2:5. He.  The Lord is become as an enemy:  he hath cast down Israel
@c    headlong, he hath overthrown all the walls thereof:  he hath destroyed
@c    his strong holds, and hath multiplied in the daughter of Juda the
@c    afflicted, both men and women.

@c    2:6. Vau.  And he hath destroyed his tent as a garden, he hath thrown
@c    down his tabernacle:  the Lord hath caused feasts and sabbaths to be
@c    forgotten in Sion:  and hath delivered up king and priest to reproach,
@c    and to the indignation of his wrath.

@c    2:7. Zain.  The Lord hath cast off his altar, he hath cursed his
@c    sanctuary:  he hath delivered the walls of the towers thereof into the
@c    hand of the enemy:  they have made a noise in the house of the Lord, as
@c    in the day of a solemn feast.

@c    He hath cursed his sanctuary. . .That is, he permitted his sanctuary to
@c    be destroyed, as if it had not been consecrated, but execrable.

@c    2:8. Heth.  The Lord hath purposed to destroy the wall of the daughter
@c    of Sion:  he hath stretched out his line, and hath not withdrawn his
@c    hand from destroying:  and the bulwark hath mourned, and the wall hath
@c    been destroyed together.

@c    2:9. Teth.  Her gates are sunk into the ground:  he hath destroyed, and
@c    broken her bars:  her king and her princes are among the Gentiles:  the
@c    law is no more, and her prophets have found no vision from the Lord.

@c    2:10. Jod.  The ancients of the daughter of Sion sit upon the ground,
@c    they have held their peace:  they have sprinkled their heads with dust,
@c    they are girded with haircloth, the virgins of Jerusalem hang down
@c    their heads to the ground.

@c    2:11. Caph.  My eyes have failed with weeping, my bowels are troubled:
@c    my liver is poured out upon the earth, for the destruction of the
@c    daughter of my people, when the children, and the sucklings, fainted
@c    away in the streets of the city.

@c    2:12. Lamed.  They said to their mothers:  Where is corn and wine?  when
@c    they fainted away as the wounded in the streets of the city:  when they
@c    breathed out their souls in the bosoms of their mothers.

@c    2:13. Mem.  To what shall I compare thee?  or to what shall I liken thee,
@c    O daughter of Jerusalem?  to what shall I equal thee, that I may comfort
@c    thee, O virgin daughter of Sion?  for great as the sea is thy
@c    destruction:  who shall heal thee?

@c    2:14. Nun.  Thy prophets have seen false and foolish things for thee:
@c    and they have not laid open thy iniquity, to excite thee to penance:
@c    but they have seen for thee false revelations and banishments.

@c    2:15. Samech.  All they that passed by the way have clapped their hands
@c    at thee:  they have hissed, and wagged their heads at the daughter of
@c    Jerusalem, saying:  Is this the city of perfect beauty, the joy of all
@c    the earth?

@c    2:16. Phe.  All thy enemies have opened their month against thee:  they
@c    have hissed, and gnashed with the teeth, and have said:  We will swallow
@c    her up:  lo, this is the day which we looked for:  we have found it, we
@c    have seen it.

@c    2:17. Ain.  The Lord hath done that which he purposed, he hath fulfilled
@c    his word, which he commanded in the days of old:  he hath destroyed, and
@c    hath not spared, and he hath caused the enemy to rejoice over thee, and
@c    hath set up the horn of thy adversaries.

@c    2:18. Sade.  Their heart cried to the Lord upon the walls of the
@c    daughter of Sion:  Let tears run down like a torrent day and night:  give
@c    thyself no rest, and let not the apple of thy eye cease.

@c    2:19. Coph.  Arise, give praise in the night, in the beginning of the
@c    watches:  pour out thy heart like water, before the face of the Lord:
@c    lift up thy hands to him for the life of thy little children, that have
@c    fainted for hunger at the top of all the streets.

@c    2:20. Res.  Behold, O Lord, and consider whom thou hast thus dealt with:
@c    shall women then eat their own fruit, their children of a span long?
@c    shall the priest and the prophet be slain in the sanctuary of the Lord?

@c    2:21. Sin.  The child and the old man lie without on the ground:  my
@c    virgins and my young men are fallen by the sword:  thou hast slain them
@c    in the day of thy wrath:  thou hast killed, and shewn them no pity.

@c    2:22. Thau.  Thou hast called as to a festival, those that should
@c    terrify me round about, and there was none in the day of the wrath of
@c    the Lord that escaped and was left:  those that I brought up, and
@c    nourished, my enemy hath consumed them.



@c    Lamentations Chapter 3


@c    3:1. Aleph.  I am the man that see my poverty by the rod of his
@c    indignation.

@c    3:2. Aleph.  He hath led me, and brought me into darkness, and not into
@c    light.

@c    3:3. Aleph.  Only against me he hath turned, and turned again his hand
@c    all the day.

@c    3:4. Beth.  My skin and my flesh he hath made old, he hath broken my
@c    bones.

@c    3:5. Beth.  He hath built round about me, and he hath compassed me with
@c    gall, and labour.

@c    3:6. Beth.  He hath set me in dark places as those that are dead for
@c    ever.

@c    3:7. Ghimel.  He hath built against me round about, that I may not get
@c    out:  he hath made my fetters heavy.

@c    3:8. Ghimel.  Yea, and when I cry, and entreat, he hath shut out my
@c    prayer.

@c    3:9. Ghimel.  He hath shut up my ways with square stones, he hath turned
@c    my paths upside down.

@c    3:10. Daleth.  He is become to me as a bear lying in wait:  as a lion in
@c    secret places.

@c    3:11. Daleth.  He hath turned aside my paths, and hath broken me in
@c    pieces, he hath made me desolate.

@c    3:12. Daleth.  He hath bent his bow, and set me as a mark for his
@c    arrows.

@c    3:13. He.  He hath shot into my reins the daughters of his quiver.

@c    3:14. He.  I am made a derision to all my people, their song all the day
@c    long.

@c    3:15. He.  He hath filled me with bitterness, he hath inebriated me with
@c    wormwood.

@c    3:16. Vau.  And he hath broken my teeth one by one, he hath fed me with
@c    ashes.

@c    3:17. Vau.  And my soul is removed far off from peace, I have forgotten
@c    good things.

@c    3:18. Vau.  And I said:  My end and my hope is perished from the Lord.

@c    3:19. Zain.  Remember my poverty, and transgression, the wormwood and
@c    the gall.

@c    3:20. Zain.  I will be mindful and remember, and my soul shall languish
@c    within me.

@c    3:21. Zain.  These things I shall think over in my heart, therefore will
@c    I hope.

@c    3:22. Heth.  The mercies of the Lord that we are not consumed:  because
@c    his commiserations have not failed.

@c    3:23. Heth.  They are new every morning, great is thy faithfulness.

@c    3:24. Heth.  The Lord is my portion, said my soul:  therefore will I wait
@c    for him.

@c    3:25. Teth.  The Lord is good to them that hope in him, to the soul that
@c    seeketh him.

@c    3:26. Teth.  It is good to wait with silence for the salvation of God.

@c    3:27. Teth.  It is good for a man, when he hath borne the yoke from his
@c    youth.

@c    3:28. Jod.  He shall sit solitary, and hold his peace:  because he hath
@c    taken it up upon himself.

@c    3:29. Jod.  He shall put his mouth in the dust, if so be there may be
@c    hope.

@c    3:30. Jod.  He shall give his cheek to him that striketh him, he shall
@c    be filled with reproaches.

@c    3:31. Caph.  For the Lord will not cast off for ever.

@c    3:32. Caph.  For if he hath cast off, he will also have mercy, according
@c    to the multitude of his mercies.

@c    3:33. Caph.  For he hath not willingly afflicted, nor cast off the
@c    children of men.

@c    3:34. Lamed.  To crush under his feet all the prisoners of the land,

@c    3:35. Lamed.  To turn aside the judgment of a man before the face of the
@c    most High,

@c    3:36. Lamed.  To destroy a man wrongfully in his judgment, the Lord hath
@c    not approved.

@c    3:37. Mem.  Who is he that hath commanded a thing to be done, when the
@c    Lord commandeth it not?

@c    3:38. Mem.  Shall not both evil and good proceed out of the mouth of the
@c    Highest?

@c    3:39. Mem.  Why hath a living man murmured, man suffering for his sins?

@c    3:40. Nun.  Let us search our ways, and seek, and return to the Lord.

@c    3:41. Nun.  Let us lift up our hearts with our hands to the Lord in the
@c    heavens.

@c    3:42. Nun.  We have done wickedly, and provoked thee to wrath:  therefore
@c    thou art inexorable.

@c    3:43. Samech.  Thou hast covered in thy wrath, and hast struck us:  thou
@c    hast killed and hast not spared.

@c    3:44. Samech.  Thou hast set a cloud before thee, that our prayer may
@c    not pass through.

@c    3:45. Samech.  Thou hast made me as an outcast, and refuse in the midst
@c    of the people.

@c    3:46. Phe.  All our enemies have opened their mouths against us.

@c    3:47. Phe.  Prophecy is become to us a fear, and a snare, and
@c    destruction.

@c    3:48. Phe.  My eye hath run down with streams of water, for the
@c    destruction of the daughter of my people.

@c    3:49. Ain.  My eye is afflicted, and hath not been quiet, because there
@c    was no rest:

@c    3:50. Ain.  Till the Lord regarded and looked down from the heavens.

@c    3:51. Ain.  My eye hath wasted my soul because of all the daughters of
@c    my city.

@c    3:52. Sade.  My enemies have chased me and caught me like a bird,
@c    without cause.

@c    3:53. Sade.  My life is fallen into the pit, and they have laid a stone
@c    over me.

@c    3:54. Sade.  Waters have flowed over my head:  I said:  I am cut off.

@c    3:55. Coph.  I have called upon thy name, O Lord, from the lowest pit.

@c    3:56. Coph.  Thou hast heard my voice:  turn not away thy ear from my
@c    sighs, and cries.

@c    3:57. Coph.  Thou drewest near in the day, when I called upon thee, thou
@c    saidst:  Fear not.

@c    3:58. Res.  Thou hast judged, O Lord, the cause of my soul, thou the
@c    Redeemer of my life.

@c    3:59. Res.  Thou hast seen, O Lord, their iniquity against me:  judge
@c    thou my judgment.

@c    3:60. Res.  Thou hast seen all their fury, and all their thoughts
@c    against me.

@c    3:61. Sin.  Thou hast heard their reproach, O Lord, all their
@c    imaginations against me.

@c    3:62. Sin.  The lips of them that rise up against me:  and their devices
@c    against me all the day.

@c    3:63. Sin.  Behold their sitting down, and their rising up, I am their
@c    song.

@c    3:64. Thau.  Thou shalt render them a recompense, O Lord, according to
@c    the works of their hands.

@c    3:65. Thau.  Thou shalt give them a buckler of heart, thy labour.

@c    3:66. Thau.  Thou shalt persecute them in anger, and shalt destroy them
@c    from under the heavens, O Lord.



@c    Lamentations Chapter 4


@c    4:1. Aleph.  How is the gold become dim, the finest colour is changed,
@c    the stones of the sanctuary are scattered in the top of every street?

@c    4:2. Beth.  The noble sons of Sion, and they that were clothed with the
@c    best gold:  how are they esteemed as earthen vessels, the work of the
@c    potter's hands?

@c    4:3. Ghimel.  Even the sea monsters have drawn out the breast, they have
@c    given suck to their young:  the daughter of my people is cruel, like the
@c    ostrich in the desert.

@c    4:4. Daleth.  The tongue of the sucking child hath stuck to the roof of
@c    his mouth for thirst:  the little ones have asked for bread, and there
@c    was none to break it unto them.

@c    4:5. He.  They that were fed delicately have died in the streets:  they
@c    that were brought up in scarlet have embraced the dung.

@c    4:6. Vau.  And the iniquity of the daughter of my people is made greater
@c    than the sin of Sodom, which was overthrown in a moment, and hands took
@c    nothing in her.

@c    4:7. Zain.  Her Nazarites were whiter than snow, purer than milk, more
@c    ruddy than the old ivory, fairer than the sapphire.

@c    4:8. Heth.  Their face is now made blacker than coals, and they are not
@c    known in the streets:  their skin hath stuck to their bones, it is
@c    withered, and is become like wood.

@c    4:9. Teth.  It was better with them that were slain by the sword, than
@c    with them that died with hunger:  for these pined away being consumed
@c    for want of the fruits of the earth.

@c    4:10. Jod.  The hands of the pitiful women have sodden their own
@c    children:  they were their meat in the destruction of the daughter of my
@c    people.

@c    4:11. Caph.  The Lord hath accomplished his wrath, he hath poured out
@c    his fierce anger:  and he hath kindled a fire in Sion, and it hath
@c    devoured the foundations thereof.

@c    4:12. Lamed.  The kings of the earth, and all the inhabitants of the
@c    world would not have believed, that the adversary and the enemy should
@c    enter in by the gates of Jerusalem.

@c    4:13. Mem.  For the sins of her prophets, and the iniquities of her
@c    priests, that have shed the blood of the just in the midst of her.

@c    4:14. Nun.  They have wandered as blind men in the streets, they were
@c    defiled with blood:  and when they could not help walking in it, they
@c    held up their skirts.

@c    4:15. Samech.  Depart you that are defiled, they cried out to them:
@c    Depart, get ye hence, touch not:  for they quarrelled, and being
@c    removed, they said among the Gentiles:  He will no more dwell among
@c    them.

@c    4:16. Phe.  The face of the Lord hath divided them, he will no more
@c    regard them:  they respected not the persons of the priests, neither had
@c    they pity on the ancient.

@c    4:17. Ain.  While we were yet standing, our eyes failed, expecting help
@c    for us in vain, when we looked attentively towards a nation that was
@c    not able to save.

@c    4:18. Sade.  Our steps have slipped in the way of our streets, our end
@c    draweth near:  our days are fulfilled, for our end is come.

@c    4:19. Coph.  Our persecutors were swifter than the eagles of the air:
@c    they pursued us upon the mountains, they lay in wait for us in the
@c    wilderness.

@c    4:20. Res.  The breath of our mouth, Christ the Lord, is taken in our
@c    sins:  to whom we said:  Under thy shadow we shall live among the
@c    Gentiles.

@c    Christ, etc. . .This, according to the letter, is spoken of their king,
@c    who is called the Christ, that is, the Anointed of the Lord.  But it
@c    also relates, in the spiritual sense, to Christ our Lord, suffering for
@c    our sins.

@c    4:21. Sin.  Rejoice, and be glad, O daughter of Edom, that dwellest in
@c    the land of Hus:  to thee also shall the cup come, thou shalt be made
@c    drunk, and naked.

@c    4:22. Thau.  Thy iniquity is accomplished, O daughter of Sion, he will
@c    no more carry thee away into captivity:  he hath visited thy iniquity, O
@c    daughter of Edom, he hath discovered thy sins.

@c    THE PRAYER OF JEREMIAS THE PROPHET



@c    Lamentations Chapter 5


@c    5:1. Remember, O Lord, what is come upon us:  consider and behold our
@c    reproach.

@c    5:2. Our inheritance is turned to aliens:  our houses to strangers.

@c    5:3. We are become orphans without a father:  our mothers are as widows.

@c    5:4. We have drunk our water for money:  we have bought our wood.

@c    5:6. We were dragged by the necks, we were weary and no rest was given
@c    us.

@c    5:6. We have given our hand to Egypt, and to the Assyrians, that we
@c    might be satisfied with bread.

@c    5:7. Our fathers have sinned, and are not:  and we have borne their
@c    iniquities.

@c    5:8. Servants have ruled over us:  there was none to redeem us out of
@c    their hand.

@c    5:9. We fetched our bread at the peril of our lives, because of the
@c    sword in the desert.

@c    5:10. Our skin was burnt as an oven, by reason of the violence of the
@c    famine.

@c    5:11. They oppressed the women in Sion, and the virgins in the cities
@c    of Juda.

@c    5:12. The princes were hanged up by their hand:  they did not respect
@c    the persons of the ancients.

@c    5:13. They abused the young men indecently:  and the children fell under
@c    the wood.

@c    5:14. The ancients have ceased from the gates:  the young men from the
@c    choir of the singers.

@c    5:15. The joy of our heart is ceased, our dancing is turned into
@c    mourning.

@c    5:16. The crown is fallen from our head:  woe to us, because we have
@c    sinned.

@c    5:17. Therefore is our heart sorrowful, therefore are our eyes become
@c    dim.

@c    5:18. For mount Sion, because it is destroyed, foxes have walked upon
@c    it.

@c    5:19. But thou, O Lord, shalt remain for ever, thy throne from
@c    generation to generation.

@c    5:20. Why wilt thou forget us for ever?  why wilt thou forsake us for a
@c    long time?

@c    5:21. Convert us, O Lord, to thee, and we shall be converted:  renew our
@c    days, as from the beginning.

@c    5:22. But thou hast utterly rejected us, thou art exceedingly angry
@c    with us.
