@c    THE PROPHECY OF MALACHIAS



@c    MALACHIAS, whose name signifies The Angel of the Lord, was contemporary
@c    with NEHEMIAS, and by some is believed to have been the same person as
@c    ESDRAS.  He was the last of the prophets, in the order of time, and
@c    flourished about four hundred years before Christ.  He foretells the
@c    coming of Christ; the reprobation of the Jews and their sacrifices; and
@c    the calling of the Gentiles, who shall offer up to God in every place
@c    an acceptable sacrifice.



@c    Malachias Chapter 1


@c    God reproaches the Jews with their ingratitude:  and the priests for not
@c    offering pure sacrifices.  He will accept of the sacrifice that shall be
@c    offered in every place among the Gentiles.

@c    1:1. The burden of the word of the Lord to Israel by the hand of
@c    Malachias.

@c    1:2. I have loved you, saith the Lord:  and you have said:  Wherein hast
@c    thou loved us?  Was not Esau brother to Jacob, saith the Lord, and I
@c    have loved Jacob,

@c    I have loved Jacob, etc. . .I have preferred his posterity, to make them
@c    my chosen people, and to lead them with my blessings, without any merit
@c    on their part, and though they have been always ungrateful; whilst I
@c    have rejected Esau, and executed severe judgments upon his posterity.
@c    Not that God punished Esau, or his posterity, beyond their desert:  but
@c    that by his free election and grace he loved Jacob, and favoured his
@c    posterity above their deserts.  See the annotations upon Rom. 9.

@c    1:3. But have hated Esau?  and I have made his mountains a wilderness,
@c    and given his inheritance to the dragons of the desert.

@c    1:4. But if Edom shall say:  We are destroyed, but we will return and
@c    build up what hath been destroyed:  thus saith the Lord of hosts:  They
@c    shall build up, and I will throw down:  and they shall be called the
@c    borders of wickedness, and the people with whom the Lord is angry for
@c    ever.

@c    1:5. And your eyes shall see:  and you shall say:  The Lord be magnified
@c    upon the border of Israel.

@c    1:6. The son honoureth the father, and the servant his master:  if then
@c    I be a father, where is my honour?  and if I be a master, where is my
@c    fear:  saith the Lord of hosts.

@c    1:7. To you, O priests, that despise my name, and have said:  Wherein
@c    have we despised thy name?  You offer polluted bread upon my altar, and
@c    you say:  Wherein have we polluted thee?  In that you say:  The table of
@c    the Lord is contemptible.

@c    1:8. If you offer the blind for sacrifice, is it not evil?  and if you
@c    offer the lame and the sick, is it not evil?  offer it to thy prince, if
@c    he will be pleased with it, or if he will regard thy face, saith the
@c    Lord of hosts.

@c    1:9. And now beseech ye the face of God, that he may have mercy on you,
@c    (for by your hand hath this been done,) if by any means he will receive
@c    your faces, saith the Lord of hosts.

@c    1:10. Who is there among you, that will shut the doors, and will kindle
@c    the fire on my altar gratis?  I have no pleasure in you, saith the Lord
@c    of hosts:  and I will not receive a gift of your hand.

@c    1:11. For from the rising of the sun even to the going down, my name is
@c    great among the Gentiles, and in every place there is sacrifice, and
@c    there is offered to my name a clean oblation:  for my name is great
@c    among the Gentiles, saith the Lord of hosts.

@c    A clean oblation. . .Viz., the precious body and blood of Christ in the
@c    eucharistic sacrifice.

@c    1:12. And you have profaned it in that you say:  The table of the Lord
@c    is defiled:  and that which is laid thereupon is contemptible with the
@c    fire that devoureth it.

@c    1:13. And you have said:  Behold of our labour, and you puffed it away,
@c    saith the Lord of hosts, and you brought in of rapine the lame, and the
@c    sick, and brought in an offering:  shall I accept it at your hands,
@c    saith the Lord?

@c    Behold of our labour, etc. . .You pretended labour and weariness, when
@c    you brought your offering; and so made it of no value, by offering it
@c    with an evil mind.  Moreover, what you offered was both defective in
@c    itself, and gotten by rapine and extortion.

@c    1:14. Cursed is the deceitful man that hath in his flock a male, and
@c    making a vow offereth in sacrifice that which is feeble to the Lord:
@c    for I am a great King, saith the Lord of hosts, and my name is dreadful
@c    among the Gentiles.



@c    Malachias Chapter 2


@c    The priests are sharply reproved for neglecting their covenant.  The
@c    evil of marrying with idolaters:  and too easily putting away their
@c    wives.

@c    2:1. And now, O ye priests, this commandment is to you.

@c    2:2. If you will not hear, and if you will not lay it to heart, to give
@c    glory to my name, saith the Lord of hosts:  I will send poverty upon
@c    you, and will curse your blessings, yea I will curse them, because you
@c    have not laid it to heart.

@c    2:3. Behold, I will cast the shoulder to you, and will scatter upon
@c    your face the dung of your solemnities, and it shall take you away with
@c    it.

@c    I will cast the shoulder to you. . .I will cast away the shoulder, which
@c    in the law was appointed to be your portion, and fling it at you in my
@c    anger:  and will reject both you and your festivals like dung.

@c    2:4. And you shall know that I sent you this commandment, that my
@c    covenant might be with Levi, saith the Lord of hosts.

@c    2:5. My covenant was with him of life and peace:  and I gave him fear:
@c    and he feared me, and he was afraid before my name.

@c    2:6. The law of truth was in his mouth, and iniquity was not found in
@c    his lips:  he walked with me in peace, and in equity, and turned many
@c    away from iniquity.

@c    2:7. For the lips of the priests shall keep knowledge, and they shall
@c    seek the law at his mouth:  because he is the angel of the Lord of
@c    hosts.

@c    The angel. . .Viz., the minister and messenger.

@c    2:8. But you have departed out of the way, and have caused many to
@c    stumble at the law:  you have made void the covenant of Levi, saith the
@c    Lord of hosts.

@c    2:9. Therefore have I also made you contemptible, and base before all
@c    people, as you have not kept my ways, and have accepted persons in the
@c    law.

@c    2:10. Have we not all one father?  hath not one God created us?  why then
@c    doth every one of us despise his brother, violating the covenant of our
@c    fathers?

@c    2:11. Juda hath transgressed, and abomination hath been committed in
@c    Israel, and in Jerusalem:  for Juda hath profaned the holiness of the
@c    Lord, which he loved, and hath married the daughter of a strange god.

@c    2:12. The Lord will cut off the man that hath done this, both the
@c    master, and the scholar, out of the tabernacles of Jacob, and him that
@c    offereth an offering to the Lord of hosts.

@c    2:13. And this again have you done, you have covered the altar of the
@c    Lord with tears, with weeping, and bellowing, so that I have no more a
@c    regard to sacrifice, neither do I accept any atonement at your hands.

@c    With tears. . .Viz., by occasion of your wives, whom you have put away:
@c    and who came to weep and lament before the altar.

@c    2:14. And you have said:  For what cause?  Because the Lord hath been
@c    witness between thee, and the wife of thy youth, whom thou hast
@c    despised:  yet she was thy partner, and the wife of thy covenant.

@c    2:15. Did not one make her, and she is the residue of his spirit?  And
@c    what doth one seek, but the seed of God?  Keep then your spirit, and
@c    despise not the wife of thy youth.

@c    2:16. When thou shalt hate her put her away, saith the Lord, the God of
@c    Israel:  but iniquity shalt cover his garment, saith the Lord of hosts,
@c    keep your spirit, and despise not.

@c    Iniquity shall cover his garment. . .Viz., of every man that putteth
@c    away his wife without just cause; notwithstanding that God permitted it
@c    in the law, to prevent the evil of murder.

@c    2:17. You have wearied the Lord with your words, and you said:  Wherein
@c    have we wearied him?  In that you say:  Every one that doth evil, is good
@c    in the sight of the Lord, and such please him:  or surely where is the
@c    God of judgment?



@c    Malachias Chapter 3


@c    Christ shall come to his temple, and purify the priesthood.  They that
@c    continue in their evil ways shall be punished:  but true penitents shall
@c    receive a blessing.

@c    3:1. Behold I send my angel, and he shall prepare the way before my
@c    face.  And presently the Lord, whom you seek, and the angel of the
@c    testament, whom you desire, shall come to his temple.  Behold, he
@c    cometh, saith the Lord of hosts.

@c    My angel. . .Viz., John the Baptist, the messenger of God, and
@c    forerunner of Christ.

@c    3:2. And who shall be able to think of the day of his coming?  and who
@c    shall stand to see him?  for he is like a refining fire, and like the
@c    fuller's herb:

@c    3:3. And he shall sit refining and cleansing the silver, and he shall
@c    purify the sons of Levi, and shall refine them as gold, and as silver,
@c    and they shall offer sacrifices to the Lord in justice.

@c    3:4. And the sacrifice of Juda and of Jerusalem shall please the Lord,
@c    as in the days of old, and in the ancient years.

@c    3:5. And I will come to you in judgment, and will be a speedy witness
@c    against sorcerers, and adulterers, and false swearers, and them that
@c    oppress the hireling in his wages, the widows, and the fatherless:  and
@c    oppress the stranger, and have not feared me, saith the Lord of hosts.

@c    3:6. For I am the Lord, and I change not:  and you the sons of Jacob are
@c    not consumed.

@c    3:7. For from the days of your fathers you have departed from my
@c    ordinances, and have not kept them:  Return to me, and I will return to
@c    you, saith the Lord of hosts.  And you have said:  Wherein shall we
@c    return?

@c    3:8. Shall a man afflict God, for you afflict me.  And you have said:
@c    Wherein do we afflict thee?  in tithes and in firstfruits.

@c    3:9. And you are cursed with want, and you afflict me, even the whole
@c    nation of you.

@c    3:10. Bring all the tithes into the storehouse, that there may be meat
@c    in my house, and try me in this, saith the Lord:  if I open not unto you
@c    the flood-gates of heaven, and pour you out a blessing even to
@c    abundance.

@c    3:11. And I will rebuke for your sakes the devourer, and he shall not
@c    spoil the fruit of your land:  neither shall the vine in the field be
@c    barren, saith the Lord of hosts.

@c    3:12. And all nations shall call you blessed:  for you shall be a
@c    delightful land, saith the Lord of hosts.

@c    3:13. Your words have been unsufferable to me, saith the Lord.

@c    3:14. And you have said:  What have we spoken against thee?  You have
@c    said:  He laboureth in vain that serveth God, and what profit is it that
@c    we have kept his ordinances, and that we have walked sorrowful before
@c    the Lord of hosts?

@c    3:15. Wherefore now we call the proud people happy, for they that work
@c    wickedness are built up, and they have tempted God and are preserved.

@c    3:16. Then they that feared the Lord, spoke every one with his
@c    neighbour:  and the Lord gave ear, and heard it:  and a book of
@c    remembrance was written before him for them that fear the Lord, and
@c    think on his name.

@c    3:17. And they shall be my special possession, saith the Lord of hosts,
@c    in the day that I do judgment:  and I will spare them, as a man spareth
@c    his son that serveth him.

@c    3:18. And you shall return, and shall see the difference between the
@c    just and the wicked:  and between him that serveth God, and him that
@c    serveth him not.



@c    Malachias Chapter 4


@c    The judgment of the wicked, and reward of the just.  An exhortation to
@c    observe the law.  Elias shall come for the conversion of the Jews.

@c    4:1. For behold the day shall come kindled as a furnace:  and all the
@c    proud, and all that do wickedly shall be stubble:  and the day that
@c    cometh shall set them on fire, saith the Lord of hosts, it shall not
@c    leave them root, nor branch.

@c    4:2. But unto you that fear my name, the Sun of justice shall arise,
@c    and health in his wings:  and you shall go forth, and shall leap like
@c    calves of the herd.

@c    4:3. And you shall tread down the wicked when they shall be ashes under
@c    the sole of your feet in the day that I do this, saith the Lord of
@c    hosts.

@c    4:4. Remember the law of Moses my servant, which I commanded him in
@c    Horeb for all Israel, the precepts, and judgments.

@c    4:5. Behold, I will send you Elias the prophet, before the coming of
@c    the great and dreadful day of the Lord.

@c    4:6. And he shall turn the heart of the fathers to the children, and
@c    the heart of the children to their fathers:  lest I come, and strike the
@c    earth with anathema.

@c    He shall turn the heart, etc. . .By bringing over the Jews to the faith
@c    of Christ, he shall reconcile them to their fathers, viz., the
@c    partiarchs and prophets; whose hearts for many ages have been turned
@c    away from them, because of their refusing to believe in Christ.--Ibid.
@c    With anathema. . .In the Hebrew, Cherem, that is, with utter
@c    destruction.
