@c    THE PROPHECY OF MICHEAS



@c    MICHEAS, of Morasti, a little town in the tribe of JUDA, was
@c    contemporary with the prophet ISAIAS:  whom he resembles both in his
@c    spirit and his style.  He is different from the prophet MICHEAS
@c    mentioned in the third book of Kings, chap. 22.  For that MICHEAS lived
@c    in the days of king ACHAB, one hundred and fifty years before the time
@c    of EZECHIAS, under whom this MICHEAS prophesied.



@c    Micheas Chapter 1


@c    Samaria for her sins shall be destroyed by the Assyrians; they shall
@c    also invade Juda and Jerusalem.

@c    1:1. The word of the Lord, that came to Micheas, the Morasthite, in the
@c    days of Joathan, Achaz, and Ezechias, kings of Juda:  which he saw
@c    concerning Samaria and Jerusalem.

@c    1:2. Hear, all ye people:  and let the earth give ear, and all that is
@c    therein:  and let the Lord God be a witness to you, the Lord from his
@c    holy temple.

@c    1:3. For behold the Lord will come forth out of his place:  and he will
@c    come down, and will tread upon the high places of the earth.

@c    1:4. And the mountains shall be melted under him:  and the valleys shall
@c    be cleft, as wax before the fire, and as waters that run down a steep
@c    place.

@c    1:5. For the wickedness of Jacob is all this, and for the sins of the
@c    house of Israel.  What is the wickedness of Jacob?  is it not Samaria?
@c    and what are the high places of Juda?  are they not Jerusalem?

@c    1:6. And I will make Samaria as a heap of stones in the field when a
@c    vineyard is planted:  and I will bring down the stones thereof into the
@c    valley, and will lay her foundations bare.

@c    1:7. And all her graven things shall be cut in pieces, and all her
@c    wages shall be burnt with fire, and I will bring to destruction all her
@c    idols:  for they were gathered together of the hire of a harlot, and
@c    unto the hire of a harlot they shall return.

@c    Her wages. . .That is, her donaries or presents offered to her idols:  or
@c    the hire of all her traffic and labour.--Ibid.  Of the hire of a harlot,
@c    etc. . .They were gathered together by one idolatrous city, viz.,
@c    Samaria:  and they shall be carried away to another idolatrous city,
@c    viz., Ninive.

@c    1:8. Therefore will I lament, and howl:  I will go stript and naked:  I
@c    will make a wailing like the dragons, and a mourning like the
@c    ostriches.

@c    1:9. Because her wound is desperate, because it is come even to Juda,
@c    it hath touched the gate of my people, even to Jerusalem.

@c    It hath touched the gate, etc. . .That is, the destruction of Samaria
@c    shall be followed by the invasion of my people of Juda, and the
@c    Assyrians shall come and lay all waste even to the confines of
@c    Jerusalem.

@c    1:10. Declare ye it not in Geth, weep ye not with tears:  in the house
@c    of Dust sprinkle yourselves with dust.

@c    Declare ye it not in Geth. . .Viz., amongst the Philistines, lest they
@c    rejoice at your calamity.--Ibid.  Weep ye not, etc. . .Keep in your
@c    tears, that you may not give your enemies an occasion of insulting over
@c    you; but in your own houses, or in your house of dust, your earthly
@c    habitation, sprinkle yourselves with dust, and put on the habit of
@c    penitents.  Some take the house of dust (in Hebrew, Aphrah) to be the
@c    proper name of a city.

@c    1:11. And pass away, O thou that dwellest in the beautiful place,
@c    covered with thy shame:  she went not forth that dwelleth in the
@c    confines:  the house adjoining shall receive mourning from you, which
@c    stood by herself.

@c    Thou that dwellest in the Beautiful place, viz., in Samaria.  In the
@c    Hebrew the Beautiful place is expressed by the word Sapir, which some
@c    take for the proper name of a city.--Ibid.  She went not forth,
@c    etc. . .that is, they that dwelt in the confines came not forth, but kept
@c    themselves within, for fear.--Ibid.  The house adjoining, etc. . .Viz.,
@c    Judea and Jerusalem, neighbours to Samaria, and partners in her sins,
@c    shall share also in her mourning and calamity; though they have
@c    pretended to stand by themselves, trusting in their strength.

@c    1:12. For she is become weak unto good that dwelleth in bitterness:  for
@c    evil is come down from the Lord into the gate of Jerusalem.

@c    She is become weak, etc. . .Jerusalem is become weak unto any good;
@c    because she dwells in the bitterness of sin.

@c    1:13. A tumult of chariots hath astonished the inhabitants of Lachis:
@c    it is the beginning of sin to the daughter of Sion for in thee were
@c    found the crimes of Israel.

@c    It is the beginning, etc. . .That is, Lachis was the first city of Juda
@c    that learned from Samaria the worship of idols, and communicated it to
@c    Jerusalem.

@c    1:14. Therefore shall she send messengers to the inheritance of Geth:
@c    the houses of lying to deceive the kings of Israel.

@c    Therefore shall she send, etc. . .Lachis shall send to Geth for help:
@c    but in vain:  for Geth, instead of helping, shall be found to be a house
@c    of lying and deceit to Israel.

@c    1:15. Yet will I bring an heir to thee that dwellest in Maresa:  even to
@c    Odollam shall the glory of Israel come.

@c    An heir, etc. . .Maresa (which was the name of a city of Juda) signifies
@c    inheritance:  but here God by his prophet tells the Jews, that he will
@c    bring them an heir to take possession of their inheritance:  and that
@c    the glory of Israel shall be obliged to give place, and to retire even
@c    to Odollam, a city in the extremity of their dominions.  And therefore
@c    he exhorts them to penance in the following verse.

@c    1:16. Make thee bald, and be polled for thy delicate children:  enlarge
@c    thy baldness as the eagle:  for they are carried into captivity from
@c    thee.



@c    Micheas Chapter 2


@c    The Israelites by their crying injustices provoke God to punish them.
@c    He shall at last restore Jacob.

@c    2:1. Woe to you that devise that which is unprofitable, and work evil
@c    in your beds:  in the morning light they execute it, because their hand
@c    is against God.

@c    2:2. And they have coveted fields, and taken them by violence, and
@c    houses they have forcibly taken away:  and oppressed a man and his
@c    house, a man and his inheritance.

@c    2:3. Therefore thus saith the Lord:  Behold I devise an evil against
@c    this family:  from which you shall not withdraw your necks, and you
@c    shall not walk haughtily, for this is a very evil time.

@c    2:4. In that day a parable shall be taken up upon you, and a song shall
@c    be sung with melody by them that say:  We are laid waste and spoiled:
@c    the portion of my people is changed:  how shall he depart from me,
@c    whereas he is returning that will divide our land?

@c    How shall he depart, etc. . .How do you pretend to say that the Assyrian
@c    is departing; when indeed he is coming to divide our lands amongst his
@c    subjects?

@c    2:5. Therefore thou shalt have none that shall cast the cord of a lot
@c    in the assembly of the Lord.

@c    Thou shalt have none, etc. . .Thou shalt have no longer any lot or
@c    inheritance in the land of the people of the Lord.

@c    2:6. Speak ye not, saying:  It shall not drop upon these, confusion
@c    shall not take them.

@c    It shall not drop, etc. . .That is, the prophecy shall not come upon
@c    these.  Such were the sentiments of the people that were unwilling to
@c    believe the threats of the prophets.

@c    2:7. The house of Jacob saith:  Is the Spirit of the Lord straitened or
@c    are these his thoughts?  Are not my words good to him that walketh
@c    uprightly?

@c    2:8. But my people, on the contrary, are risen up as an enemy:  you have
@c    taken away the cloak off from the coat:  and them that passed harmless
@c    you have turned to war.

@c    You have taken away, etc. . .You have even stripped people of their
@c    necessary garments:  and have treated such as were innocently passing on
@c    the way, as if they were at war with you.

@c    2:9. You have cast out the women of my people from their houses, in
@c    which they took delight:  you have taken my praise forever from their
@c    children.

@c    You have cast out, etc. . .either by depriving them of their houses:  or,
@c    by your crimes, given occasion to their being carried away captives,
@c    and their children, by that means, never learning to praise the Lord.

@c    2:10. Arise ye, and depart, for there is no rest here for you.  For that
@c    uncleanness of the land, it shall be corrupted with a grievous
@c    corruption.

@c    2:11. Would God I were not a man that hath the spirit, and that I
@c    rather spoke a lie:  I will let drop to thee of wine, and of
@c    drunkenness:  and it shall be this people upon whom it shall drop.

@c    Would God, etc. . .The prophet could have wished, out of his love to his
@c    people, that he might be deceived in denouncing to them these evils
@c    that were to fall upon them:  but by conforming himself to the will of
@c    God, he declares to them, that he is sent to prophesy, literally to let
@c    drop upon them, the wine of God's indignation, with which they should
@c    be made drunk; that is, stupified and cast down.

@c    2:12. I will assemble and gather together all of thee, O Jacob:  I will
@c    bring together the remnant of Israel, I will put them together as a
@c    flock in the fold, as sheep in the midst of the sheepcotes, they shall
@c    make a tumult by reason of the multitude of men.

@c    2:13. For he shall go up that shall open the way before them:  they
@c    shall divide and pass through the gate, and shall come in by it:  and
@c    their king shall pass before them, and the Lord at the head of them.



@c    Micheas Chapter 3


@c    For the sins of the rich oppressing the poor, of false prophets
@c    flattering for lucre, and of judges perverting justice, Jerusalem and
@c    the temple shall be destroyed.

@c    3:1. And I said:  Hear, O ye princes of Jacob, and ye chiefs of the
@c    house of Israel:  Is it not your part to know judgment,

@c    3:2. You that hate good, and love evil:  that violently pluck off their
@c    skins from them and their flesh from their bones?

@c    3:3. Who have eaten the flesh of my people, and have flayed their skin
@c    off them:  and have broken, and chopped their bones as for the kettle,
@c    and as flesh in the midst of the pot.

@c    3:4. Then shall they cry to the Lord, and he will not hear them:  and he
@c    will hide his face from them at that time, as they have behaved
@c    wickedly in their devices.

@c    3:5. Thus saith the Lord concerning the prophets that make my people
@c    err:  that bite with their teeth, and preach peace:  and if a man give
@c    not something into their mouth, they prepare war against him.

@c    3:6. Therefore night shall be to you instead of vision, and darkness to
@c    you instead of divination:  and the sun shall go down upon the prophets,
@c    and the day shall be darkened over them.

@c    3:7. And they shall be confounded that see visions, and the diviners
@c    shall be confounded:  and they shall all cover their faces, because
@c    there is no answer of God.

@c    3:8. But yet I am filled with the strength of the spirit of the Lord,
@c    with judgment and power:  to declare unto Jacob his wickedness and to
@c    Israel his sin.

@c    3:9. Hear this, ye princes of the house of Jacob, and ye judges of the
@c    house of Israel:  you that abhor judgment and pervert all that is right.

@c    3:10. You that build up Sion with blood, and Jerusalem with iniquity.

@c    3:11. Her princes have judged for bribes:  and her priests have taught
@c    for hire, and her prophets divined for money:  and they leaned upon the
@c    Lord, saying:  Is not the Lord in the midst of us?  no evil shall come
@c    among us.

@c    3:12. Therefore because of you, Sion shall be ploughed as a field, and
@c    Jerusalem shall be as a heap of stones, and the mountain of the temple
@c    as the high places of the forests.



@c    Micheas Chapter 4


@c    The glory of the church of Christ, by the conversion of the Gentiles.
@c    The Jews shall be carried captives to Babylon, and be delivered again.

@c    4:1. And it shall come to pass in the last days, that the mountain of
@c    the house of the Lord shall be prepared in the top of the mountains,
@c    and high above the hills:  and people shall flow to it.

@c    4:2. And many nations shall come in haste, and say:  Come, let us go up
@c    to the mountain of the Lord, and to the house of the God of Jacob:  and
@c    he will teach us of his ways, and we will walk in his paths:  for the
@c    law shall go forth out of Sion, and the word of the Lord out of
@c    Jerusalem.

@c    4:3. And he shall judge among many people, and rebuke strong nations
@c    afar off:  and they shall beat their swords into ploughshares, and their
@c    spears into spades:  nation shall not take sword against nation:  neither
@c    shall they learn war anymore.

@c    Neither shall they learn, etc. . .The law of Christ is a law of peace;
@c    and all his true subjects, as much as lies in them love and keep peace
@c    with all the world.

@c    4:4. And every man shall sit under his vine, and under his fig tree,
@c    and there shall be none to make them afraid, for the mouth of the Lord
@c    of hosts hath spoken.

@c    4:5. For all people will walk every one in the name of his god:  but we
@c    will walk in the name of the Lord, our God, for ever and ever.

@c    4:6. In that day, saith the Lord, I will gather up her that halteth:
@c    and her that I had cast out, I will gather up:  and her whom I had
@c    afflicted.

@c    4:7. And I will make her that halted, a remnant:  and her that had been
@c    afflicted, a mighty nation:  and the Lord will reign over them in Mount
@c    Sion, from this time now and forever.

@c    4:8. And thou, O cloudy tower of the flock, of the daughter of Sion,
@c    unto thee shall it come:  yea the first power shall come, the kingdom to
@c    the daughter of Jerusalem.

@c    4:9. Now, why art thou drawn together with grief?  Hast thou no king in
@c    thee, or is thy counselor perished, because sorrow hath taken thee as a
@c    woman in labour.

@c    4:10. Be in pain and labour, O daughter of Sion, as a woman that
@c    bringeth forth:  for now shalt thou go out of the city, and shalt dwell
@c    in the country, and shalt come even to Babylon, there thou shalt be
@c    delivered:  there the Lord will redeem thee out of the hand of thy
@c    enemies.

@c    4:11. And now many nations are gathered together against thee, and they
@c    say:  Let her be stoned:  and let our eye look upon Sion.

@c    4:12. But they have not known the thoughts of the Lord, and have not
@c    understood his counsel:  because he hath gathered them together as the
@c    hay of the floor.

@c    4:13. Arise, and tread, O daughter of Sion:  for I will make thy horn
@c    iron, and thy hoofs I will make brass:  and thou shalt beat in pieces
@c    many peoples, and shalt immolate the spoils of them to the Lord, and
@c    their strength to the Lord of the whole earth.



@c    Micheas Chapter 5


@c    The birth of Christ in Bethlehem:  his reign and spiritual conquests.

@c    5:1. Now shalt thou be laid waste, O daughter of the robber:  they have
@c    laid siege against us, with a rod shall they strike the cheek of the
@c    judge of Israel.

@c    Daughter of the robber. . .Some understand this of Babylon; which robbed
@c    and pillaged the temple of God:  others understand it of Jerusalem; by
@c    reason of the many rapines and oppressions committed there.

@c    5:2. And thou Bethlehem Ephrata, art a little one among the thousands
@c    of Juda, out of thee shall he come forth unto me that is to be the
@c    ruler in Israel:  and his going forth is from the beginning, from the
@c    days of eternity.

@c    His going forth, etc. . .That is, he who as man shall be born in thee,
@c    as God was born of his Father from all eternity.

@c    5:3. Therefore will he give them up even till the time wherein she that
@c    travaileth shall bring forth:  and the remnant of his brethren shall be
@c    converted to the children of Israel.

@c    5:4. And he shall stand, and feed in the strength of the Lord, in the
@c    height of the name of the Lord, his God:  and they shall be converted,
@c    for now shall he be magnified even to the ends of the earth.

@c    5:5. And this man shall be our peace, when the Assyrian shall come into
@c    our land, and when he shall set his foot in our houses:  and we shall
@c    raise against him seven shepherds, and eight principal men.

@c    The Assyrian. . .That is, the persecutors of the church:  who are here
@c    called Assyrians by the prophet:  because the Assyrians were at that
@c    time the chief enemies and persecutors of the people of God.--Ibid.
@c    Seven shepherds, etc. . .Viz., the pastors of God's church, and the
@c    defenders of the faith.  The number seven in scripture is taken to
@c    signify many:  and when eight is joined with it, we are to understand
@c    that the number will be very great.

@c    5:6. And they shall feed the land of Assyria with the sword, and the
@c    land of Nemrod with the spears thereof:  and he shall deliver us from
@c    the Assyrian when he shall come into our land, and when he shall tread
@c    in our borders.

@c    They shall feed, etc. . .They shall make spiritual conquests in the
@c    lands of their persecutors, with the word of the spirit, which is the
@c    word of God.  Eph. 6.17.

@c    5:7. And the remnant of Jacob shall be in the midst of many peoples, as
@c    a dew from the Lord, and as drops upon the grass, which waiteth not for
@c    man, nor tarrieth for the children of men.

@c    The remnant of Jacob. . .Viz., the apostles, and the first preachers of
@c    the Jewish nation; whose doctrine, like dew, shall make the plants of
@c    the converted Gentiles grow up, without waiting for any man to
@c    cultivate them by human learning.

@c    5:8. And the remnant of Jacob shall be among the Gentiles, in the midst
@c    of many peoples, as a lion among the beasts of the forests, and as a
@c    young lion among the flocks of sheep:  who, when he shall go through,
@c    and tread down, and take there is none to deliver.

@c    As a lion, etc. . .This denotes the fortitude of these first preachers;
@c    and their success in their spiritual enterprises.

@c    5:9. Thy hand shall be lifted up over thy enemies, and all thy enemies
@c    shall be cut off.

@c    5:10. And it shall come to pass in that day, saith the Lord, that I
@c    will take away thy horses out of the midst of thee, and will destroy
@c    thy chariots.

@c    I will take away thy horses, etc. . .Some understand this, and all that
@c    follows to the end of the chapter, as addressed to the enemies of the
@c    church.  But it may as well be understood of the converts to the church:
@c    who should no longer put their trust in any of these things.

@c    5:11. And I will destroy the cities of thy land, and will throw down
@c    all thy strong holds, and I will take away sorceries out of thy hand,
@c    and there shall be no divinations in thee.

@c    5:12. And I will destroy thy graven things, and thy statues, out of the
@c    midst of thee:  and thou shalt no more adore the works of thy hands.

@c    5:13. And I will pluck up thy groves out of the midst of thee:  and will
@c    crush thy cities.

@c    5:14. And I will execute vengeance in wrath, and in indignation, among
@c    all the nations that have not given ear.



@c    Micheas Chapter 6


@c    God expostulates with the Jews for their ingratitude and sins:  for
@c    which they shall be punished.

@c    6:1. Hear ye what the Lord saith:  Arise, contend thou in judgment
@c    against the mountains, and let the hills hear thy voice.

@c    The mountains, etc. . .That is, the great ones, the princes of the
@c    people.

@c    6:2. Let the mountains hear the judgment of the Lord, and the strong
@c    foundations of the earth:  for the Lord will enter into judgment with
@c    his people, and he will plead against Israel.

@c    6:3. O my people, what have I done to thee, or in what have I molested
@c    thee?  answer thou me.

@c    6:4. For I brought thee up out of the land of Egypt, and delivered thee
@c    out of the house of slaves:  and I sent before thy face Moses, and
@c    Aaron, and Mary.

@c    6:5. O my people, remember, I pray thee, what Balach, the king of Moab,
@c    purposed:  and what Balaam, the son of Beor, answered him, from Setim to
@c    Galgal, that thou mightest know the justice of the Lord.

@c    From Setim to Galgal. . .He puts them in mind of the favour he did them,
@c    in not suffering them to be quite destroyed by the evil purpose of
@c    Balach, and the wicked counsel of Balaam:  and then gives them a hint of
@c    the wonders he wrought, in order to bring them into the land of
@c    Promise, by stopping the course of the Jordan, in their march from
@c    Setim to Galgal.

@c    6:6. What shall I offer to the Lord that is worthy?  wherewith shall I
@c    kneel before the high God?  shall I offer holocausts unto him, and
@c    calves of a year old?

@c    What shall I offer, etc. . .This is spoken in the person of the people,
@c    desiring to be informed what they are to do to please God.

@c    6:7. May the Lord be appeased with thousands of rams, or with many
@c    thousands of fat he goats?  shall I give my firstborn for my wickedness,
@c    the fruit of my body for the sin of my soul?

@c    6:8. I will shew thee, O man, what is good, and what the Lord requireth
@c    of thee:  Verily to do judgment, and to love mercy, and to walk
@c    solicitous with thy God.

@c    6:9. The voice of the Lord crieth to the city, and salvation shall be
@c    to them that fear thy name:  hear O ye tribes, and who shall approve it?

@c    6:10. As yet there is a fire in the house of the wicked, the treasures
@c    of iniquity, and a scant measure full of wrath.

@c    Full of wrath, etc. . .That is, highly provoking in the sight of God.

@c    6:11. Shall I justify wicked balances, and the deceitful weights of the
@c    bag?

@c    6:12. By which her rich men were filled with iniquity, and the
@c    inhabitants thereof have spoken lies, and their tongue was deceitful in
@c    their mouth.

@c    6:13. And I therefore began to strike thee with desolation for thy
@c    sins.

@c    6:14. Thou shalt eat, but shalt not be filled:  and thy humiliation
@c    shall be in the midst of thee:  and thou shalt take hold, but shalt not
@c    save:  and those whom thou shalt save, I will give up to the sword.

@c    6:15. Thou shalt sow, but shalt not reap:  thou shalt tread the olives,
@c    but shalt not be anointed with oil:  and the new wine, but shalt not
@c    drink the wine.

@c    6:16. For thou hast kept the statutes of Amri, and all the works of the
@c    house of Achab:  and thou hast walked according their wills, that I
@c    should make thee a desolation, and the inhabitants thereof a hissing,
@c    and you shall bear the reproach of my people.

@c    The statutes of Amri, etc. . .The wicked ways of Amri and Achab,
@c    idolatrous kings.



@c    Micheas Chapter 7


@c    The prophet laments, that notwithstanding all his preaching, the
@c    generality are still corrupt in their manners:  therefore their
@c    desolation is at hand:  but they shall be restored again and prosper;
@c    and all mankind shall be redeemed by Christ.

@c    7:1. Woe is me, for I am become as one that gleaneth in autumn the
@c    grapes of the vintage:  there is no cluster to eat, my soul desired the
@c    first ripe figs.

@c    7:2. The holy man is perished out of the earth, and there is none
@c    upright among men:  they all lie in wait for blood, every one hunteth
@c    his brother to death.

@c    7:3. The evil of their hands they call good:  the prince requireth, and
@c    the judge is for giving:  and the great man hath uttered the desire of
@c    his soul, and they have troubled it.

@c    7:4. He that is best among them, is as a brier, and he that is
@c    righteous, as the thorn of the hedge.  The day of thy inspection, thy
@c    visitation cometh:  now shall be their destruction.

@c    7:5. Believe not a friend, and trust not in a prince:  keep the doors of
@c    thy mouth from her that sleepeth in thy bosom.

@c    7:6. For the son dishonoureth the father, and the daughter riseth up
@c    against her mother, the daughter in law against her mother in law:  and
@c    a man's enemies are they of his own household.

@c    7:7. But I will look towards the Lord, I will wait for God, my saviour:
@c    my God will hear me.

@c    7:8. Rejoice not, thou my enemy, over me, because I am fallen:  I shall
@c    arise, when I sit in darkness, the Lord is my light.

@c    7:9. I will bear the wrath of the Lord, because I have sinned against
@c    him:  until he judge my cause, and execute judgement for me:  he will
@c    bring me forth into the light, I shall behold his justice.

@c    7:10. And my enemy shall behold, and she shall be covered with shame,
@c    who saith to me:  Where is the Lord thy God?  my eyes shall look down
@c    upon her:  now shall she be trodden under foot as the mire of the
@c    streets.

@c    She shall be covered, etc. . .Viz., Babylon my enemy.

@c    7:11. The day shall come, that thy walls may be built up:  in that day
@c    shall the law be far removed.

@c    The law. . .Viz., of thy enemies, who have tyrannized over thee.

@c    7:12. In that day they shall come even from Assyria to thee, and to the
@c    fortified cities:  and from the fortified cities even to the river, and
@c    from sea to sea, and from mountain to mountain.

@c    7:13. And the land shall be made desolate because of the inhabitants
@c    thereof, and for the fruit of their devices.

@c    The land, etc. . .Viz., of Babylon.

@c    7:14. Feed thy people with thy rod, the flock of thy inheritance, them
@c    that dwell alone in the forest, in the midst of Carmel:  they shall feed
@c    in Basan and Galaad, according to the days of old.

@c    7:15. According to the days of thy coming out of the land of Egypt, I
@c    will shew him wonders.

@c    7:16. The nations shall see, and shall be confounded at all their
@c    strength:  they shall put the hand upon the mouth, their ears shall be
@c    deaf.

@c    7:17. They shall lick the dust like serpents, as the creeping things of
@c    the earth, they shall be disturbed in their houses:  they shall dread
@c    the Lord, our God, and shall fear thee.

@c    7:18. Who is a God like to thee, who takest away iniquity, and passest
@c    by the sin of the remnant of thy inheritance?  he will send his fury in
@c    no more, because he delighteth in mercy.

@c    7:19. He will turn again, and have mercy on us:  he will put away our
@c    iniquities:  and he will cast all our sins into the bottom of the sea.

@c    7:20. Thou wilt perform the truth to Jacob, the mercy to Abraham:  which
@c    thou hast sworn to our fathers from the days of old.
