@c    THE PROPHECY OF NAHUM



@c    NAHUM, whose name signifies A COMFORTER, was a native of Elcese, or
@c    Elcesai, supposed to be a little town in Galilee.  He prophesied, after
@c    the ten tribes were carried into captivity, and foretold the utter
@c    destruction of Ninive, by the Babylonians and Medes:  which happened in
@c    the reign of JOSIAS.



@c    Nahum Chapter 1


@c    The majesty of God, his goodness to his people, and severity to his
@c    enemies.

@c    1:1. The burden of Ninive.  The book of the vision of Nahum, the
@c    Elcesite.

@c    1:2. The Lord is a jealous God, and a revenger:  the Lord is a revenger,
@c    and hath wrath:  the Lord taketh vengeance on his adversaries, and he is
@c    angry with his enemies.

@c    1:3. The Lord is patient, and great in power, and will not cleanse and
@c    acquit the guilty.  The Lord's ways are in a tempest, and a whirlwind,
@c    and clouds are the dust of his feet.

@c    1:4. He rebuketh the sea and drieth it up:  and bringeth all the rivers
@c    to be a desert.  Basan languisheth and Carmel:  and the flower of Libanus
@c    fadeth away.

@c    1:5. The mountains tremble at him, and the hills are made desolate:  and
@c    the earth hath quaked at his presence, and the world, and all that
@c    dwell therein.

@c    1:6. Who can stand before the face of his indignation?  and who shall
@c    resist in the fierceness of his anger?  his indignation is poured out
@c    like fire:  and the rocks are melted by him.

@c    1:7. The Lord is good, and giveth strength in the day of trouble:  and
@c    knoweth them that hope in him.

@c    1:8. But with a flood that passeth by, he will make an utter end of the
@c    place thereof:  and darkness shall pursue his enemies.

@c    Of the place thereof. . .Viz., of Ninive.

@c    1:9. What do ye devise against the Lord?  he will make an utter end:
@c    there shall not rise a double affliction.

@c    1:10. For as thorns embrace one another:  so while they are feasting and
@c    drinking together, they shall be consumed as stubble that is fully dry.

@c    1:11. Out of thee shall come forth one that imagineth evil against the
@c    Lord, contriving treachery in his mind.

@c    Shall come forth one, etc. . .Some understand this of Sennacherib.  But
@c    as his attempt against the people seems to have been prior to the
@c    prophecy of Nahum, we may better understand it of Holofernes.

@c    1:12. Thus saith the Lord:  Though they were perfect:  and many of them
@c    so, yet thus shall they be cut off, and he shall pass:  I have afflicted
@c    thee, and I will afflict thee no more.

@c    Though they were perfect, etc. . .That is, however strong or numerous
@c    their forces may be, they shall be cut off; and their prince or leader
@c    shall pass away and disappear.

@c    1:13. And now I will break in pieces his rod with which he struck thy
@c    back, and I will burst thy bonds asunder.

@c    1:14. And the Lord will give a commandment concerning thee, that no
@c    more of thy name shall be sown:  I will destroy the graven and molten
@c    thing out of the house of thy God, I will make it thy grave, for thou
@c    art disgraced.

@c    Will give a commandment. . .That is, a decree, concerning thee, O king
@c    of Ninive, thy seed shall fail, etc.

@c    1:15. Behold upon the mountains the feet of him that bringeth good
@c    tidings, and that preacheth peace:  O Juda, keep thy festivals, and pay
@c    thy vows:  for Belial shall no more pass through thee again, he is
@c    utterly cut off.

@c    Belial. . .The wicked one, viz., the Assyrian.



@c    Nahum Chapter 2


@c    God sends his armies against Ninive to destroy it.

@c    2:1. He is come up that shall destroy before thy face, that shall keep
@c    the siege:  watch the way, fortify thy loins, strengthen thy power
@c    exceedingly.

@c    2:2. For the Lord hath rendered the pride of Jacob, as the pride of
@c    Israel:  because the spoilers have laid them waste, and have marred
@c    their vine branches.

@c    Hath rendered the pride of Jacob, etc. . .He hath punished Jacob for his
@c    pride; and therefore Ninive must not expect to escape.  Or else,
@c    rendering the pride of Jacob means rewarding, that is, punishing Ninive
@c    for the pride they exercised against Jacob.

@c    2:3. The shield of his mighty men is like fire, the men of the army are
@c    clad in scarlet, the reins of the chariot are flaming in the day of his
@c    preparation, and the drivers are stupefied.

@c    Of his mighty men, etc. . .He speaks of the Chaldeans and Medes sent to
@c    destroy Ninive.--Ibid.  Stupefied. . .consopiti.  That is, they drive on
@c    furiously like men intoxicated with wine.

@c    2:4. They are in confusion in the ways, the chariots jostle one against
@c    another in the streets:  their looks are like torches, like lightning
@c    running to and fro.

@c    2:5. He will muster up his valiant men, they shall stumble in their
@c    march:  they shall quickly get upon the walls thereof:  and a covering
@c    shall be prepared.

@c    Stumble in their march. . .By running hastily on.

@c    2:6. The gates of the rivers are opened, and the temple is thrown down
@c    to the ground.

@c    2:7. And the soldier is led away captive:  and her bondwomen were led
@c    away mourning as doves, murmuring in their hearts.

@c    2:8. And as for Ninive, her waters are like a great pool:  but the men
@c    flee away.  They cry:  Stand, stand, but there is none that will return
@c    back.

@c    2:9. Take ye the spoil of the silver, take the spoil of the gold:  for
@c    there is no end of the riches of all the precious furniture.

@c    2:10. She is destroyed, and rent, and torn:  the heart melteth, and the
@c    knees fail, and all the loins lose their strength:  and the faces of
@c    them all are as the blackness of a kettle.

@c    2:11. Where is now the dwelling of the lions, and the feeding place of
@c    the young lions, to which the lion went, to enter in thither, the young
@c    lion, and there was none to make them afraid?

@c    2:12. The lion caught enough for his whelps, and killed for his
@c    lionesses:  and he filled his holes with prey, and his den with rapine.

@c    2:13. Behold I come against thee, saith the Lord of hosts, and I will
@c    burn thy chariots even to smoke, and the sword shall devour thy young
@c    lions:  and I will cut off thy prey out of the land, and the voice of
@c    thy messengers shall be heard no more.



@c    Nahum Chapter 3


@c    The miserable destruction of Ninive.

@c    3:1. Woe to thee, O city of blood, all full of lies and violence:
@c    rapine shall not depart from thee.

@c    3:2. The noise of the whip, and the noise of the rattling of the
@c    wheels, and of the neighing horse; and of the running chariot, and of
@c    the horsemen coming up,

@c    3:3. And of the shining sword, and of the glittering spear, and of a
@c    multitude slain, and of a grievous destruction:  and there is no end of
@c    carcasses, and they shall fall down on their dead bodies.

@c    3:4. Because of the multitude of the fornications of the harlot that
@c    was beautiful and agreeable, and that made use of witchcraft, that sold
@c    nations through her fornications, and families through her witchcrafts.

@c    3:5. Behold I come against thee, saith the Lord of hosts:  and I will
@c    discover thy shame to thy face, and will shew thy nakedness to the
@c    nations, and thy shame to kingdoms.

@c    3:6. And I will cast abominations upon thee, and will disgrace thee,
@c    and will make an example of thee.

@c    3:7. And it shall come to pass that every one that shall see thee,
@c    shall flee from thee, and shall say:  Ninive is laid waste:  who shall
@c    bemoan thee?  whence shall I seek a comforter for thee?

@c    3:8. Art thou better than the populous Alexandria, that dwelleth among
@c    the rivers?  waters are round about it:  the sea is its riches:  the
@c    waters are its walls.

@c    Populous Alexandria. . .No-Ammon.  A populous city of Egypt destroyed by
@c    the Chaldeans, and afterwards rebuilt by Alexander, and called
@c    Alexandria.  Others suppose No-Ammon to be the same as Diospolis.

@c    3:9. Ethiopia and Egypt were the strength thereof, and there is no end:
@c    Africa and the Libyans were thy helpers.

@c    3:10. Yet she also was removed and carried into captivity:  her young
@c    children were dashed in pieces at the top of every street, and they
@c    cast lots upon her nobles, and all her great men were bound in fetters.

@c    3:11. Therefore thou also shalt be made drunk, and shalt be despised:
@c    and thou shalt seek help from the enemies.

@c    3:12. All thy strong holds shall be like fig trees with their green
@c    figs:  if they be shaken, they shall fall into the mouth of the eater.

@c    3:13. Behold thy people in the midst of thee are women:  the gates of
@c    thy land shall be set wide open to thy enemies, the fire shall devour
@c    thy bars.

@c    3:14. Draw thee water for the siege, build up thy bulwarks:  go into the
@c    clay, and tread, work it and make brick.

@c    3:15. There shall the fire devour thee:  thou shalt perish by the sword,
@c    it shall devour thee like the bruchus:  assemble together like the
@c    bruchus, make thyself many like the locust.

@c    3:16. Thou hast multiplied thy merchandises above the stars of heaven:
@c    the bruchus hath spread himself and flown away.

@c    3:17. Thy guards are like the locusts:  and thy little ones like the
@c    locusts of locusts which swarm on the hedges in the day of cold:  the
@c    sun arose, and they flew away, and their place was not known where they
@c    were.

@c    Locusts of locusts. . .The young locusts.

@c    3:18. Thy shepherds have slumbered, O king of Assyria, thy princes
@c    shall be buried:  thy people are hid in the mountains, and there is none
@c    to gather them.

@c    3:19. Thy destruction is not hidden, thy wound is grievous:  all that
@c    have heard the fame of thee, have clapped their hands over thee:  for
@c    upon whom hath not thy wickedness passed continually?
