@c    THE BOOK OF NUMBERS



@c    This fourth Book of Moses is called NUMBERS, because it begins with the
@c    numbering of the people.  The Hebrews, from its first words, call it
@c    VAIEDABBER.  It contains the transactions of the Israelites from the
@c    second month of the second year after their going out of Egypt, until
@c    the beginning of the eleventh month of the fortieth year; that is, a
@c    history almost of thirty-nine years.



@c    Numbers Chapter 1


@c    The children of Israel are numbered:  the Levites are designed to serve
@c    the tabernacle.

@c    1:1. And the Lord spoke to Moses in the desert of Sinai in the
@c    tabernacle of the covenant, the first day of the second month, the
@c    second year of their going out of Egypt, saying:

@c    1:2. Take the sum of all the congregation of the children of Israel by
@c    their families, and houses, and the names of every one, as many as are
@c    of the male sex,

@c    1:3. From twenty years old and upwards, of all the men of Israel fit
@c    for war, and you shall number them by their troops, thou and Aaron.

@c    1:4. And there shall be with you the princes of the tribes, and of the
@c    houses in their kindreds,

@c    1:5. Whose names are these:  Of Ruben, Elisur the son of Sedeur.

@c    1:6. Of Simeon, Salamiel the son of Surisaddai.

@c    1:7. Of Juda, Nahasson the son of Aminadab.

@c    1:8. Of Issachar, Nathanael the son of Suar.

@c    1:9. Of Zabulon, Eliab the son of Helon.

@c    1:10. And of the sons of Joseph:  of Ephraim, Elisama the son of Ammiud:
@c    of Manasses, Gamaliel the son of Phadassur.

@c    1:11. Of Benjamin, Abidan the son of Gedeon.

@c    1:12. Of Dan, Ahiezer the son of Ammisaddai.

@c    1:13. Of Aser, Phegiel the son of Ochran.

@c    1:14. Of Gad, Eliasaph the son of Duel.

@c    1:15. Of Nephtali, Ahira the son of Enan.

@c    1:16. These are the most noble princes of the multitude by their tribes
@c    and kindreds, and the chiefs of the army of Israel:

@c    1:17. Whom Moses and Aaron took with all the multitude of the common
@c    people:

@c    1:18. And assembled them on the first day of the second month,
@c    reckoning them up by the kindreds, and houses, and families, and heads,
@c    and names of every one from twenty years old and upward,

@c    1:19. As the Lord had commanded Moses.  And they were numbered in the
@c    desert of Sinai.

@c    1:20. Of Ruben the eldest son of Israel, by their generations and
@c    families and houses and names of every head, all that were of the male
@c    sex, from twenty years old and upward, that were able to go forth to
@c    war,

@c    1:21. Were forty-six thousand five hundred.

@c    1:22. Of the sons of Simeon by their generations and families, and
@c    houses of their kindreds, were reckoned up by the names and heads of
@c    every one, all that were of the male sex, from twenty years old and
@c    upward, that were able to go forth to war,

@c    1:23. Fifty-nine thousand three hundred.

@c    1:24. Of the sons of Gad, by their generations and families and houses
@c    of their kindreds were reckoned up by the names of every one from
@c    twenty years old and upward, all that were able to go forth to war,

@c    1:25. Forty-five thousand six hundred and fifty.

@c    1:26. Of the sons of Juda, by their generations and families and houses
@c    of their kindreds, by the names of every one from twenty years old and
@c    upward, all that were able to go forth to war,

@c    1:27. Were reckoned up seventy-four thousand six hundred.

@c    1:28. Of the sons of Issachar, by their generations and families and
@c    houses of their kindreds, by the names of every one from twenty years
@c    old and upward, all that could go forth to war,

@c    1:29. Were reckoned up fifty-four thousand four hundred.

@c    1:30. Of the sons of Zabulon, by the generations and families and
@c    houses of their kindreds, were reckoned up by the names of every one
@c    from twenty years old and upward, all that were able to go forth to
@c    war,

@c    1:31. Fifty-seven thousand four hundred.

@c    1:32. Of the sons of Joseph, namely, of the sons of Ephraim, by the
@c    generations and families and houses of their kindreds, were reckoned up
@c    by the names of every one, from twenty years old and upward, all that
@c    were able to go forth to war,

@c    1:33. Forty thousand five hundred.

@c    1:34. Moreover of the sons of Manasses, by the generations and families
@c    and houses of their kindreds, were reckoned up by the names of every
@c    one from twenty years old and upward, all that could go forth to war,

@c    1:35. Thirty-two thousand two hundred.

@c    1:36. Of the sons of Benjamin, by their generations and families and
@c    houses of their kindreds, were reckoned up by the names of every one
@c    from twenty years old and upward, all that were able to go forth to
@c    war,

@c    1:37. Thirty-five thousand four hundred.

@c    1:38. Of the sons of Dan, by their generations and families and houses
@c    of their kindreds, were reckoned up by the names of every one from
@c    twenty years old and upward, all that were able to go forth to war,

@c    1:39. Sixty-two thousand seven hundred.

@c    1:40. Of the sons of Aser, by their generations and families and houses
@c    of their kindreds, were reckoned up by the names of every one from
@c    twenty years old and upward, all that were able to go forth to war,

@c    1:41. Forty-one thousand and five hundred.

@c    1:42. Of the sons of Nephtali, by their generations and families and
@c    houses of their kindreds, were reckoned up by the names of every one
@c    from twenty years old and upward, were able to go forth to war,

@c    1:43. Fifty-three thousand four hundred.

@c    1:44. These are they who were numbered by Moses and Aaron, and the
@c    twelve princes of Israel, every one by the houses of their kindreds.

@c    1:45. And the whole number of the children of Israel by their houses
@c    and families, from twenty years old and upward, that were able to go to
@c    war,

@c    1:46. Were six hundred and three thousand five hundred and fifty men.

@c    1:47. But the Levites in the tribes of their families were not numbered
@c    with them.

@c    1:48. And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying:

@c    1:49. Number not the tribe of Levi, neither shalt thou put down the sum
@c    of them with the children of Israel:

@c    1:50. But appoint them over the tabernacle of the testimony, and all
@c    the vessels thereof, and whatsoever pertaineth to the ceremonies.  They
@c    shall carry the tabernacle and all the furniture thereof:  and they
@c    shall minister, and shall encamp round about the tabernacle.

@c    1:51. When you are to go forward, the Levites shall take down the
@c    tabernacle:  when you are to camp, they shall set it up.  What stranger
@c    soever cometh to it, shall be slain.

@c    1:52. And the children of Israel shall camp every man by his troops and
@c    bands and army.

@c    1:53. But the Levites shall pitch their tents round about the
@c    tabernacle, lest there come indignation upon the multitude of the
@c    children of Israel, and they shall keep watch, and guard the tabernacle
@c    of the testimony.

@c    1:54. And the children of Israel did according to all things which the
@c    Lord had commanded Moses.



@c    Numbers Chapter 2


@c    The order of the tribes in their camp.

@c    2:1. And the Lord spoke to Moses and Aaron, saying:

@c    2:2. All the children of Israel shall camp by their troops, ensigns,
@c    and standards, and the houses of their kindreds, round about the
@c    tabernacle of the covenant.

@c    2:3. On the east Juda shall pitch his tents by the bands of his army:
@c    and the prince of his sons; shall be Nahasson the son of Aminadab.

@c    2:4. And the whole sum of the fighting men of his stock, were
@c    seventy-four thousand six hundred.

@c    2:5. Next unto him they of the tribe of Issachar encamped, whose prince
@c    was Nathanael, the son of Suar.

@c    2:6. And the whole number of his fighting men were fifty-four thousand
@c    four hundred.

@c    2:7. In the tribe of Zabulon the prince was Eliab the son of Helon.

@c    2:8. And all the army of fighting men of his stock, were fifty-seven
@c    thousand four hundred.

@c    2:9. All that were numbered in the camp of Juda, were a hundred and
@c    eighty-six thousand four hundred:  and they by their troops shall march
@c    first.

@c    2:10. In the camp of the sons of Ruben, on the south side, the prince
@c    shall be Elisur the son of Sedeur:

@c    2:11. And the whole army of his fighting men, that were numbered, were
@c    forty-six thousand five hundred.

@c    2:12. Beside him camped they of the tribe of Simeon:  whose prince was
@c    Salamiel the son of Surisaddai.

@c    2:13. And the whole army of his fighting men, that were numbered, were
@c    fifty-nine thousand three hundred.

@c    2:14. In the tribe of Gad the prince was Eliasaph the son of Duel.

@c    2:15. And the whole army of his righting men that were numbered, were
@c    forty-five thousand six hundred and fifty.

@c    2:16. All that were reckoned up in the camp of Ruben, were a hundred
@c    and fifty-one thousand four hundred and fifty, by their troops:  they
@c    shall march in the second place.

@c    2:17. And the tabernacle of the testimony shall be carried by the
@c    officers of the Levites and their troops.  As it shall be set up, so
@c    shall it be taken down.  Every one shall march according to their
@c    places, and ranks.

@c    2:18. On the west side shall be the camp of the sons of Ephraim, whose
@c    prince was Elisama the son of Ammiud.

@c    2:19. The whole army of his fighting men, that were numbered, were
@c    forty thousand five hundred.

@c    2:20. And with them the tribe of the sons of Manasses, whose prince was
@c    Gamaliel the son of Phadassur.

@c    2:21. And the whole army of his fighting men, that were numbered, were
@c    thirty-two thousand two hundred.

@c    2:22. In the tribe of the sons of Benjamin the prince was Abidan the
@c    son of Gedeon.

@c    2:23. And the whole army of fighting men, that were reckoned up, were
@c    thirty-five thousand four hundred.

@c    2:24. All that were numbered in the camp of Ephraim, were a hundred and
@c    eight-thousand one hundred by their troops:  they shall march in the
@c    third place.

@c    2:25. On the north side camped the sons of Dan:  whose prince was
@c    Ahiezar the son of Ammisaddai.

@c    2:26. The whole army of his fighting men, that were numbered, were
@c    sixty-two thousand seven hundred.

@c    2:27. Beside him they of the tribe of Aser pitched their tents:  whose
@c    prince was Phegiel the son of Ochran.

@c    2:28. The whole army of his fighting men, that were numbered, were
@c    forty-one thousand five hundred.

@c    2:29. Of the tribe of the sons of Nephtali the prince was Ahira the son
@c    of Enan.

@c    2:30. The whole army of his fighting men, were fifty-three thousand
@c    four hundred.

@c    2:31. All that were numbered in the camp of Dan, were a hundred and
@c    fifty-seven thousand six hundred:  and they shall march last.

@c    2:32. This is the number of the children of Israel, of their army
@c    divided according to the houses of their kindreds and their troops, six
@c    hundred and three thousand five hundred and fifty.

@c    2:33. And the Levites were not numbered among the children of Israel:
@c    for so the Lord had commanded Moses.

@c    2:34. And the children of Israel did according to all things that the
@c    Lord had commanded.  They camped by their troops, and marched by the
@c    families and houses of their fathers.



@c    Numbers Chapter 3


@c    The Levites are numbered and their offices distinguished.  They are
@c    taken in the place of the firstborn of the children of Israel.

@c    3:1. These are the generations of Aaron and Moses in the day that the
@c    Lord spoke to Moses in mount Sinai.

@c    3:2. And these the names of the sons of Aaron:  his firstborn Nadab,
@c    then Abiu, and Eleazar, and Ithamar.

@c    3:3. These the names of the sons of Aaron the priests that were
@c    anointed, and whose hands were filled and consecrated, to do the
@c    functions of priesthood.

@c    3:4. Now Nadab and Abiu died, without children, when they offered
@c    strange fire before the Lord, in the desert of Sinai:  and Eleazar and
@c    Ithamar performed the priestly office in the presence of Aaron their
@c    father.

@c    3:5. And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying:

@c    3:6. Bring the tribe of Levi, and make them stand in the sight of Aaron
@c    the priest to minister to him, and let them watch,

@c    3:7. And observe whatsoever appertaineth to the service of the
@c    multitude before the tabernacle of the testimony,

@c    3:8. And let them keep the vessels of the tabernacle, serving in the
@c    ministry thereof.

@c    3:9. And thou shalt give the Levites for a gift,

@c    3:10. To Aaron and to his sons, to whom they are delivered by the
@c    children of Israel.  But thou shalt appoint Aaron and his sons over the
@c    service of priesthood.  The stranger that approacheth to minister, shall
@c    be put to death.

@c    3:11. And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying:

@c    3:12. I have taken the Levites from the children of Israel, for every
@c    firstborn that openeth the womb among the children of Israel, and the
@c    Levites shall be mine.

@c    3:13. For every firstborn is mine:  since I struck the firstborn in the
@c    land of Egypt:  I have sanctified to myself whatsoever is firstborn in
@c    Israel both of man and beast, they are mine:  I am the Lord.

@c    3:14. And the Lord spoke to Moses in the desert of Sinai, saying:

@c    3:15. Number the sons of Levi by the houses of their fathers and their
@c    families, every male from one month and upward.

@c    3:16. Moses numbered them as the Lord had commanded.

@c    3:17. And there were found sons of Levi by their names, Gerson and
@c    Caath Merari.

@c    3:18. The sons of Gerson:  Lebni and Semei.

@c    3:19. The sons of Caath:  Amram, and Jesaar, Hebron and Oziel:

@c    3:20. The sons of Merari, Moholi and Musi.

@c    3:21. Of Gerson were two families, the Lebnites, and the Semeites:

@c    3:22. Of which were numbered, people of the male sex from one month and
@c    upward, seven thousand five hundred.

@c    3:23. These shall pitch behind the tabernacle on the west,

@c    3:24. Under their prince Eliasaph the son of Lael.

@c    3:25. And their charge shall be in the tabernacle of the covenant:

@c    3:26. The tabernacle itself and the cover thereof, the hanging that is
@c    drawn before the doors of the tabernacle of the covenant, and the
@c    curtains of the court:  the hanging also that is hanged in the entry of
@c    the court of the tabernacle, and whatsoever belongeth to the rite of
@c    the altar, the cords of the tabernacle, and all the furniture thereof.

@c    3:27. Of the kindred of Caath come the families of the Amramites and
@c    Jesaarites and Hebronites and Ozielites.  These are the families of the
@c    Caathites reckoned up by their names:

@c    3:28. All of the male sex from one month and upward, eight thousand six
@c    hundred:  they shall have the guard of the sanctuary,

@c    3:29. And shall camp on the south side.

@c    3:30. And their prince shall be Elisaphan the son of Oziel:

@c    3:31. And they shall keep the ark, and the table and the candlestick,
@c    the altars, and the vessels of the sanctuary, wherewith they minister,
@c    and the veil, and all the furniture of this kind.

@c    3:32. And the prince of the princes of the Levites, Eleazar, the son of
@c    Aaron the priest, shall be over them that watch for the guard of the
@c    sanctuary.

@c    3:33. And of Merari are the families of the Moholites, and Musites,
@c    reckoned up by their names:

@c    3:34. All of the male kind from one month and upward, six thousand two
@c    hundred.

@c    3:35. Their prince Suriel the son of Abihaiel:  their shall camp on the
@c    north side.

@c    3:36. Under their custody shall be the boards of the tabernacle, and
@c    the bars, and the pillars and their sockets, and all things that
@c    pertain to this kind of service:

@c    3:37. And the pillars of the court round about with their sockets, and
@c    the pins with their cords.

@c    3:38. Before the tabernacle of the covenant, that is to say on the east
@c    side shall Moses and Aaron camp, with their sons, having the custody of
@c    the sanctuary, in the midst of the children of Israel.  What stranger
@c    soever cometh unto it, shall be put to death.

@c    3:39. All the Levites, that I Moses and Aaron numbered according to the
@c    precept of the Lord, by their f families, of the male kind from one
@c    month and upward, were twenty-two thousand.

@c    3:40. And the Lord said to Moses:  Number the firstborn of the male sex
@c    of the children of Israel, from one month and upward, and thou shalt
@c    take the sum of them.

@c    3:41. And thou shalt take the Levites to me for all the firstborn of
@c    the children of Israel, I am the Lord:  and their cattle for all the
@c    firstborn of the cattle of the children of Israel:

@c    3:42. Moses reckoned up, as the Lord had commanded, the firstborn of
@c    the children of Israel:

@c    3:43. And the males by their names, from one month and upward, were
@c    twenty-two thousand two hundred and seventy-three.

@c    3:44. And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying:

@c    3:45. Take the Levites for the firstborn of the children of Israel, and
@c    the cattle of the Levites for their cattle, and the Levites shall be
@c    mine.  I am the Lord.

@c    3:46. But for the price of the two hundred and seventy-three, of the
@c    firstborn of the children of Israel, that exceed the number of the
@c    Levites,

@c    3:47. Thou shalt take five sicles for every bead, according to the
@c    weight of the sanctuary.  A sicle hath twenty obols.

@c    3:48. And thou shalt give the money to Aaron and his sons, the price of
@c    them that are above.

@c    3:49. Moses therefore took the money of them that were above, and whom
@c    they had redeemed from the Levites,

@c    3:50. For the firstborn of the children of Israel, one thousand three
@c    hundred and sixty-five sicles, according to the weight of the
@c    sanctuary,

@c    3:51. And gave it to Aaron and his sons according to the word that the
@c    Lord had commanded him.



@c    Numbers Chapter 4


@c    The age and time of the Levites' service:  their offices and burdens.

@c    4:1. And the Lord spoke to Moses, and Aaron, saying:

@c    4:2. Take the sum of the sons of Caath from the midst of the Levites,
@c    by their houses and families.

@c    4:3. From thirty years old and upward, to fifty years old, of all that
@c    go in to stand and to minister in the tabernacle of the covenant.

@c    4:4. This is the service of the sons of Caath:

@c    4:5. When the camp is; to set forward, Aaron and his sons shall go into
@c    the tabernacle of the covenant, and the holy of holies, and shall take
@c    down the veil that hangeth before the door, and shall wrap up the ark
@c    of the testimony in it,

@c    4:6. And shall cover it again with a cover of violet skins, and shall
@c    spread over it a cloth all of violet, and shall put in the bars.

@c    4:7. They shall wrap up also the table of proposition in a cloth of
@c    violet, and shall put with it the censers and little mortars, the cups
@c    and bowls to pour out the libations:  the loaves shall be always on it:

@c    4:8. And they shall spread over it a cloth of scarlet, which again they
@c    shall cover with a covering of violet skins, and shall put in the bars.

@c    4:9. They shall take also a cloth of violet wherewith they shall cover
@c    the candlestick with the lamps and tongs thereof and the snuffers and
@c    all the oil vessels, which are necessary for the dressing of the lamps:

@c    4:10. And over all they shall put a cover of violet skins and put in
@c    the bars.

@c    4:11. And they shall wrap up the golden altar also in a cloth of
@c    violet, and shall spread over it a cover of violet skins, and put in
@c    the bars.

@c    4:12. All the vessels wherewith they minister in the sanctuary, they
@c    shall wrap up in a cloth of violet, and shall spread over it a cover of
@c    violet skins, and put in the bars.

@c    4:13. They shall cleanse the altar also from the ashes, and shall wrap
@c    it up in a purple cloth,

@c    4:14. And shall put it with all the vessels that they use in the
@c    ministry thereof, that is to say, firepans, fleshhooks and forks,
@c    pothooks and shovels.  They shall cover all the vessels of the altar
@c    together with a covering of violet skins, and shall put in the bars.

@c    4:15. And when Aaron and his sons have wrapped up the sanctuary and the
@c    vessels thereof at the removing of the camp, then shall the sons of
@c    Caath enter in to carry the things wrapped up:  and they shall not touch
@c    the vessels of the sanctuary, lest they die.  These are the burdens of
@c    the sons of Caath:  in the tabernacle of the covenant:

@c    4:16. And over them shall be Eleazar the son of Aaron the priest, to
@c    whose charge pertaineth the oil to dress the lamps, and the sweet
@c    incense, and the sacrifice, that is always offered, and the oil of
@c    unction, and whatsoever pertaineth to the service of the tabernacle,
@c    and of all the vessels that are in the sanctuary.

@c    4:17. And the Lord spoke to Moses and Aaron, saying:

@c    4:18. Destroy not the people of Caath from the midst of the Levites:

@c    4:19. But do this to them, that they may live, and not die, by touching
@c    the holies of holies.  Aaron and his sons shall go in, and they shall
@c    appoint every man his work, and shall divide the burdens that every man
@c    is to carry.

@c    4:20. Let not others by any curiosity see the things that are in the
@c    sanctuary before they be wrapped up, otherwise they shall die.

@c    4:21. And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying:

@c    4:22. Take the sum of the sons of Gerson also by their houses and
@c    families and kindreds.

@c    4:23. From thirty years old and upward, unto fifty years old.  Number
@c    them all that go in and minister in the tabernacle of the covenant.

@c    4:24. This is the office of the family of the Gersonites:

@c    4:25. To carry the curtains of the tabernacle and the roof of the
@c    covenant, the other covering, and the violet covering over all, and the
@c    hanging that hangeth in the entry of the tabernacle of the covenant,

@c    4:26. The curtains of the court, and the veil in the entry that is
@c    before tabernacle.  All things that pertain to the altar, the cords and
@c    the vessels of the ministry,

@c    4:27. The sons of Gerson shall carry, by the commandment of Aaron and
@c    his sons:  and each man shall know to what burden he must be assigned.

@c    4:28. This is the service of the family of the Gersonites in the
@c    tabernacle of the covenant, and they shall be under the hand of Ithamar
@c    the son of Aaron the priest.

@c    4:29. Thou shalt reckon up the sons of Merari also by the families and
@c    houses of their fathers,

@c    4:30. From thirty years old and upward, unto fifty years old, all that
@c    go in to the office of their ministry, and to the service of the
@c    covenant of the testimony.

@c    4:31. These are their burdens:  They shall carry the boards of the
@c    tabernacle and the bars thereof, the pillars and their sockets,

@c    4:32. The pillars also of the court round about, with their sockets and
@c    pins and cords.  They shall receive by account all the vessels and
@c    furniture, and so shall carry them.

@c    4:33. This is the office of the family of the Merarites, and their
@c    ministry in the tabernacle of the covenant:  and they shall be under the
@c    hand of Ithamar the son of Aaron the priest.

@c    4:34. So Moses and Aaron and the princes of the synagogue reckoned up
@c    the sons of Caath, by their kindreds and the houses of their fathers,

@c    4:35. From thirty years old and upward, unto fifty years old, all that
@c    go in to the ministry of the tabernacle of the covenant:

@c    4:36. And they were found two thousand seven hundred and fifty.

@c    4:37. This is the number of the people of Caath that go in to the
@c    tabernacle of the covenant:  these did Moses and Aaron number according
@c    to the word of the Lord by the hand of Moses.

@c    4:38. The sons of Gerson also were numbered by the kindreds and houses
@c    of their fathers,

@c    4:39. From thirty years old and upward, unto fifty years old, all that
@c    go in to minister in the tabernacle of the covenant:

@c    4:40. And they were found two thousand six hundred and thirty.

@c    4:41. This is the people of the Gersonites, whom Moses and Aaron
@c    numbered according to the word of the Lord.

@c    4:42. The sons of Merari also were numbered by the kindreds and houses
@c    of their fathers,

@c    4:43. From thirty years old and upward, unto fifty years old, all that
@c    go in to fulfil the rites of the tabernacle of the covenant:

@c    4:44. And they were found three thousand two hundred.

@c    4:45. This is the number of the sons of Merari, whom Moses and Aaron
@c    reckoned up according to the commandment of the Lord by the hand of
@c    Moses.

@c    4:46. All that were reckoned up of the Levites, and whom Moses and
@c    Aaron and the princes of Israel took by name, by the kindreds and
@c    houses of their fathers,

@c    4:47. From thirty years old and upward, until fifty years old, that go
@c    into the ministry of the tabernacle, and to carry the burdens,

@c    4:48. Were in all eight thousand five hundred and eighty.

@c    4:49. Moses reckoned them up according to the word of the Lord, every
@c    one according to their office and burdens, as the Lord had commanded
@c    him.



@c    Numbers Chapter 5


@c    The unclean are removed out of the camp:  confession of sins, and
@c    satisfaction:  firstfruits and oblations belonging to the priests:  trial
@c    of jealousy.

@c    5:1. And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying:

@c    5:2. Command the children of Israel, that they cast out of the camp
@c    every leper, and whosoever hath an issue of seed, or is defiled by the
@c    dead:

@c    5:3. Whether it be man or woman, cast ye them out of the camp, lest
@c    they defile it when I shall dwell with you,

@c    5:4. And the children of Israel did so, and they cast them forth
@c    without the camp, as the Lord had spoken to Moses.

@c    5:5. And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying:

@c    5:6. Say to the children of Israel:  When a man or woman shall have
@c    committed any of all the sins that men are wont to commit, and by
@c    negligence shall have transgressed the commandment of the Lord, and
@c    offended,

@c    5:7. They shall confess their sin, and restore the principal itself,
@c    and the fifth part over and above, to him against whom they have
@c    sinned.

@c    Shall confess. . .This confession and satisfaction, ordained in the Old
@c    Law, was a figure of the sacrament of penance.

@c    5:8. But if there be no one to receive it, they shall give it to the
@c    Lord, and it shall be the priest's, besides the ram that is offered for
@c    expiation, to be an atoning sacrifice.

@c    5:9. All the firstfruits also, which the children of Israel offer,
@c    belong to the priest:

@c    5:10. And whatsoever is offered into the sanctuary by every one, and is
@c    delivered into the hands of the priest, it shall be his.

@c    5:11. And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying:

@c    5:12. Speak to the children of Israel, and thou shalt say to them:  The
@c    man whose wife shall have gone astray, and contemning her husband,

@c    5:13. Shall have slept with another man, and her husband cannot
@c    discover it, but the adultery is secret, and cannot be proved by
@c    witnesses, because she was not found in the adultery:

@c    5:14. If the spirit of jealousy stir up the husband against his wife,
@c    who either is defiled, or is charged with false suspicion,

@c    The spirit of jealousy, etc. . .This ordinance was designed to clear the
@c    innocent, and to prevent jealous husbands from doing mischief to their
@c    wives:  as likewise to give all a horror of adultery, by punishing it in
@c    so remarkable a manner.

@c    5:15. He shall bring her to the priest, and shall offer an oblation for
@c    her, the tenth part of a measure of barley meal:  he shall not pour oil
@c    thereon, nor put frankincense upon it:  because it is a sacrifice of
@c    jealousy, and an oblation searching out adultery.

@c    5:16. The priest therefore shall offer it, and set it before the Lord.

@c    5:17. And he shall take holy water in an earthen vessel, and he shall
@c    cast a little earth of the pavement of the tabernacle into it.

@c    5:18. And when the woman shall stand before the Lord, he shall uncover
@c    her head, and shall put on her hands the sacrifice of remembrance, and
@c    the oblation of jealousy:  and he himself shall hold the most bitter
@c    waters, whereon he hath heaped curses with execration.

@c    5:19. And he shall adjure her, and shall say:  If another man hath not
@c    slept with thee, and if thou be not defiled by forsaking thy husband's
@c    bed, these most bitter waters, on which I have heaped curses, shall not
@c    hurt thee.

@c    5:20. But if thou hast gone aside from thy husband, and art defiled,
@c    and hast lain with another man:

@c    5:21. These curses shall light upon thee:  The Lord make thee a curse,
@c    and an example for all among his people:  may he make thy thigh to rot,
@c    and may thy belly swell and burst asunder.

@c    5:22. Let the cursed waters enter into thy belly, and may thy womb
@c    swell and thy thigh rot.  And the woman shall answer, Amen, amen.

@c    5:23. And the priest shall write these curses in a book, and shall wash
@c    them out with the most bitter waters, upon which he hath heaped the
@c    curses,

@c    5:24. And he shall give them her to drink.  And when she hath drunk them
@c    up,

@c    5:25. The priest shall take from her hand the sacrifice of jealousy,
@c    and shall elevate it before the Lord, and shall put it upon the altar:
@c    yet so as first,

@c    5:26. To take a handful of the sacrifice of that which is offered, and
@c    burn it upon the altar:  and so give the most bitter waters to the woman
@c    to drink.

@c    5:27. And when she hath drunk them, if she be defiled, and having
@c    despised her husband be guilty of adultery, the malediction shall go
@c    through her, and her belly swelling, her thigh shall rot:  and the woman
@c    shall be a curse, and an example to all the people.

@c    5:28. But if she be not defiled, she shall not be hurt, and shall bear
@c    children.

@c    5:29. This is the law of jealousy.  If a woman hath gone aside from her
@c    husband, and be defiled,

@c    5:30. And the husband stirred up by the spirit of jealousy bring her
@c    before the Lord, and the priest do to her according to all things that
@c    are here written:

@c    5:31. The husband shall be blameless, and she shall bear her iniquity.



@c    Numbers Chapter 6


@c    The law of the Nazarites:  the form of blessing the people.

@c    6:1. And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying:

@c    6:2. Speak to the children of Israel, and thou shalt say to them:  When
@c    a man, or woman, shall make a vow to be sanctified, and will consecrate
@c    themselves to the Lord:

@c    6:3. They shall abstain from wine, and from every thing that may make a
@c    man drunk.  They shall not drink vinegar of wine, or of any other drink,
@c    nor any thing that is pressed out of the grape:  nor shall they eat
@c    grapes either fresh or dried.

@c    6:4. All the days that they are consecrated to the Lord by vow:  they
@c    shall eat nothing that cometh of the vineyard, from the raisin even to
@c    the kernel.

@c    6:5. All the time of his separation no razor shall pass over his head,
@c    until the day be fulfilled of his consecration to the Lord.  He shall be
@c    holy, and shall let the hair of his head grow.

@c    6:6. All the time of his consecration he shall not go in to any dead,

@c    6:7. Neither shall he make himself unclean, even for his father, or for
@c    his mother, or for his brother, or for his sister, when they die,
@c    because the consecration of his God is upon his head.

@c    6:8. All the days of his separation he shall be holy to the Lord.

@c    6:9. But if any man die suddenly before him:  the head of his
@c    consecration shall be defiled:  and he shall shave it forthwith on the
@c    same day of his purification, and again on the seventh day.

@c    6:10. And on the eighth day he shall bring two turtles, or two young
@c    pigeons to the priest in the entry of the covenant of the testimony.

@c    6:11. And the priest shall offer one for sin, and the other for a
@c    holocaust, and shall pray for him, for that he hath sinned by the dead:
@c    and he shall sanctify his head that day:

@c    6:12. And shall consecrate to the Lord the days of his separation,
@c    offering a lamb of one year for sin:  yet so that the former days be
@c    made void, because his sanctification was profaned.

@c    6:13. This is the law of consecration.  When the days which he had
@c    determined by vow shall be expired, he shall bring him to the door of
@c    the tabernacle of the covenant,

@c    6:14. And shall offer his oblation to the Lord:  one he lamb of a year
@c    old without blemish for a holocaust, and one ewe lamb of a year old
@c    without blemish for a sin offering, and one ram without blemish for a
@c    victim of peace offering,

@c    6:15. A basket also of unleavened bread, tempered with oil, and wafers
@c    without leaven anointed with oil, and the libations of each:

@c    6:16. And the priest shall present them before the Lord, and shall
@c    offer both the sin offering and the holocaust.

@c    6:17. But the ram he shall immolate for a sacrifice of peace offering
@c    to the Lord, offering at the same time the basket of unleavened bread,
@c    and the libations that are due by custom.

@c    6:18. Then shall the hair of the consecration of the Nazarite, be
@c    shaved off before the door of the tabernacle of the covenant:  and he
@c    shall take his hair, and lay it upon the fire, which is under the
@c    sacrifice of the peace offerings.

@c    6:19. And shall take the boiled shoulder of the ram, and one unleavened
@c    cake out of the basket, and one unleavened wafer, and he shall deliver
@c    them into the hands of the Nazarite, after his head is shaven.

@c    6:20. And receiving them again from him, he shall elevate them in the
@c    sight of the Lord:  and they being sanctified shall belong to the
@c    priest, as the breast, which was commanded to be separated, and the
@c    shoulder.  After this the Nazarite may drink wine.

@c    6:21. This is the law of the Nazarite, when he hath vowed his oblation
@c    to the Lord in the time of his consecration, besides those things which
@c    his hand shall find, according to that which he had vowed in his mind,
@c    so shall he do for the fulfilling of his sanctification.

@c    6:22. And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying:

@c    6:23. Say to Aaron and his sons:  Thus shall you bless the children of
@c    Israel, and you shall say to them:

@c    6:24. The Lord bless thee, and keep thee.

@c    6:25. The Lord shew his face to thee, and have mercy on thee.

@c    6:26. The Lord turn his countenance to thee, and give thee peace.

@c    6:27. And they shall invoke my name upon the children of Israel, and I
@c    will bless them.



@c    Numbers Chapter 7


@c    The offerings of the princes at the dedication of the tabernacle.  God
@c    speaketh to Moses from the propitiatory.

@c    7:1. And it came to pass in the day that Moses had finished the
@c    tabernacle, and set it up, and had anointed and sanctified it with all
@c    its vessels, the altar likewise and all the vessels thereof,

@c    7:2. The princes of Israel and the heads of the families, in every
@c    tribe, who were the rulers of them who had been numbered, offered

@c    7:3. Their gifts before the Lord, six wagons covered, and twelve oxen.
@c    Two princes offered one wagon, and each one an ox, and they offered
@c    them before the tabernacle.

@c    7:4. And the Lord said to Moses:

@c    7:5. Receive them from them to serve in the ministry of the tabernacle,
@c    and thou shalt deliver them to the Levites according to the order of
@c    their ministry.

@c    7:6. Moses therefore receiving the wagons and the oxen, delivered them
@c    to the Levites.

@c    7:7. Two wagons and four oxen he gave to the sons of Gerson, according
@c    to their necessity.

@c    7:8. The other four wagons, and eight oxen he gave to the sons of
@c    Merari, according to their offices and service, under the hand of
@c    Ithamar the son of Aaron the priest.

@c    7:9. But to the sons of Caath he gave no wagons or oxen:  because they
@c    serve in the sanctuary and carry their burdens upon their own
@c    shoulders.

@c    7:10. And the princes offered for the dedication of the altar on the
@c    day when it was anointed, their oblation before the altar.

@c    7:11. And the Lord said to Moses:  Let each of the princes one day after
@c    another offer their gifts for the dedication of the altar.

@c    7:12. The first day Nahasson the son of Aminadab of the tribe of Juda
@c    offered his offering:

@c    7:13. And his offering was a silver dish weighing one hundred and
@c    thirty sicles, a silver bowl of seventy sicles according to the weight
@c    of the sanctuary, both full of flour tempered with oil for a sacrifice:

@c    7:14. A little mortar of ten sicles of gold full of incense:

@c    7:15. An ox of the herd, and a ram, and lamb of a year old for a
@c    holocaust:

@c    7:16. And a buck goat for sin:

@c    7:17. And for the sacrifice of peace offerings, two oxen, five rams,
@c    five he goats, five lambs of a year old.  This was the offering of
@c    Nahasson the son of Aminadab.

@c    7:18. The second day Nathanael the son of Suar, prince of the tribe of
@c    Issachar, made his offering,

@c    7:19. A silver dish weighing one hundred and thirty sicles, a silver
@c    bowl of seventy sicles, according to the weight of the sanctuary, both
@c    full of flour tempered with oil for a sacrifice:

@c    7:20. A little mortar of gold weighing ten sicles full of incense:

@c    7:21. An ox of the herd, and a ram, and a lamb of a year old for a
@c    holocaust:

@c    7:22. And a buck goat for sin:

@c    7:23. And for the sacrifice of peace offerings, two oxen, five rams,
@c    five buck goats, five lambs of a year old.  This was the offering of
@c    Nathanael the son of Suar.

@c    7:24. The third day the prince of the sons of Zabulon, Eliab the son of
@c    Helon,

@c    7:25. Offered a silver dish weighing one hundred and thirty sicles, a
@c    silver bowl of seventy sicles by the weight of the sanctuary, both full
@c    of flour tempered with oil for a sacrifice:

@c    7:26. A little mortar of gold weighing ten sicles full of incense:

@c    7:27. An ox of the herd, and a ram, and a lamb of a year old for a
@c    holocaust:

@c    7:28. And a buck goat for sin:

@c    7:29. And for the sacrifice of peace offerings, two oxen, five rams,
@c    five buck goats, five lambs of a year old.  This is the oblation of
@c    Eliab the son of Helon.

@c    7:30. The fourth day the prince of the sons of Ruben, Elisur the son of
@c    Sedeur,

@c    7:31. Offered a silver dish weighing one hundred and thirty sicles, a
@c    silver bowl of seventy sicles according to the weight of the sanctuary,
@c    both full of flour tempered with oil for a sacrifice:

@c    7:32. A little mortar of gold weighing ten sicles full of incense:

@c    7:33. An ox of the herd, and a ram, and a lamb of a year old, for a
@c    holocaust:

@c    7:34. And a buck goat for sin:

@c    7:35. And for victims of peace offerings two oxen, five rams, five buck
@c    goats, five lambs of a year old.  This was the offering of Elisur the
@c    son of Sedeur.

@c    7:36. The fifth day the prince of the sons of Simeon, Salamiel the son
@c    of Surisaddai,

@c    7:37. Offered a silver dish weighing one hundred and thirty sicles, a
@c    silver bowl of seventy sicles after the weight of the sanctuary, both
@c    full of flour tempered with oil for a sacrifice:

@c    7:38. A little mortar of gold weighing ten sicles full of incense:

@c    7:39. An ox of the herd, and a ram, and a lamb of a year old for a
@c    holocaust:

@c    7:40. And a buck goat for sin:

@c    7:41. And for sacrifices of peace offerings, two oxen, five rams, five
@c    buck goats, five lambs of a year old.  This was the offering of Salamiel
@c    the son of Surisaddai.

@c    7:42. The sixth day the prince of the sons of Gad, Eliasaph the son of
@c    Duel,

@c    7:43. Offered a silver dish weighing a hundred and thirty sicles, a
@c    silver bowl of seventy sicles by the weight of the sanctuary, both full
@c    of flour tempered with oil for a sacrifice:

@c    7:44. A little mortar of gold weighing ten sicles full of incense:

@c    7:45. An ox of the herd, and a ram, and a lamb of a year old for a
@c    holocaust:

@c    7:46. And a buck goat for sin:

@c    7:47. And for sacrifices of peace offerings, two oxen, five rams, five
@c    buck goats, five lambs of a year old.  This was the offering of Eliasaph
@c    the son of Duel.

@c    7:48. The seventh day the prince of the sons of Ephraim, Elisama the
@c    son of Ammiud,

@c    7:49. Offered a silver dish weighing a hundred and thirty sicles, a
@c    silver bowl of seventy sicles according to the weight of the sanctuary,
@c    both full of flour tempered with oil for a sacrifice:

@c    7:50. A little mortar of gold weighing ten sicles full of incense:

@c    7:51. An ox of the herd, and a ram, and a lamb of a year old for a
@c    holocaust:

@c    7:52. And a buck goat for sin:

@c    7:53. And for sacrifices of peace offerings, two oxen, five rams, five
@c    buck goats, five lambs of a year old.  This was the offering of Elisama
@c    the son of Ammiud.

@c    7:54. The eighth day the prince of the sons of Manasses, Gamaliel the
@c    son of Phadassur,

@c    7:55. Offered a silver dish, weighing a hundred and thirty sicles, a
@c    silver bowl of seventy sicles, according to the weight of the
@c    sanctuary, both full of flour tempered with oil for a sacrifice:

@c    7:56. A little mortar of gold weighing ten sicles full of incense:

@c    7:57. An ox of the herd, and a ram, and a lamb of a year old for a
@c    holocaust:

@c    7:58. And a buck goat for sin:

@c    7:59. And for sacrifices of peace offerings, two oxen, five rams, five
@c    buck goats, five lambs of a year old.  This was the offering of Gamaliel
@c    the son of Phadassur.

@c    7:60. The ninth day the prince of the sons of Benjamin, Abidan the son
@c    of Gedeon,

@c    7:61. Offered a silver dish weighing a hundred and thirty sicles, a
@c    silver bowl of seventy sicles by the weight of the sanctuary, both full
@c    of flour tempered with oil for a sacrifice:

@c    7:62. A little mortar of gold weighing ten sicles full of incense:

@c    7:63. An ox of the herd, and a ram, and a lamb of a year old for a
@c    holocaust:

@c    7:64. And a buck goat for sin:

@c    7:65. And for sacrifices of peace offerings, two oxen, five rams, five
@c    buck goats, five lambs of a year old.  This was the offering of Abidan
@c    the son of Gedeon.

@c    7:66. The tenth day the princes of the sons of Dan, Ahiezer the son of
@c    Ammisaddai,

@c    7:67. Offered a silver dish weighing a hundred and thirty sicles, a
@c    silver bowl of seventy sicles, according to the weight of the
@c    sanctuary, both full of flour tempered with oil for a sacrifice:

@c    7:68. A little mortar of gold weighing ten sicles full of incense:

@c    7:69. An ox of the herd, and a ram, and a lamb of a year old for a
@c    holocaust:

@c    7:70. And a buck goat for sin:

@c    7:71. And for sacrifices of peace offerings, two oxen, five rams, five
@c    buck goats, five lambs of a year old.  This was the offering of Ahiezer
@c    the son of Ammisaddai.

@c    7:72. The eleventh day the prince of the sons of Aser, Phegiel the son
@c    of Ochran,

@c    7:73. Offered a silver dish weighing a hundred and thirty sicles, a
@c    silver bowl of seventy sicles, according to the weight of the
@c    sanctuary, both full of flour tempered with oil for a sacrifice:

@c    7:74. A little mortar of gold weighing ten sicles full of incense:

@c    7:75. An ox of the herd, and a ram, and a lamb of a year old for a
@c    holocaust:

@c    7:76. And a buck goat for sin:

@c    7:77. And for sacrifices of peace offerings, two oxen, five rams, five
@c    buck goats, five lambs of a year old.  This was the offering of Phegiel
@c    the son of Ochran.

@c    7:78. The twelfth day the prince of the sons of Nephtali, Ahira the son
@c    of Enan,

@c    7:79. Offered a silver dish weighing a hundred and thirty sicles, a
@c    silver bowl of seventy sicles, according to the weight of the
@c    sanctuary, both full of flour tempered with oil for a sacrifice:

@c    7:80. A little mortar of gold weighing ten sicles full of incense:

@c    7:81. An ox of the herd, and a ram, and a lamb of a year old for a
@c    holocaust:

@c    7:82. And a buck goat for sin:

@c    7:83. And for sacrifices of peace offerings, two oxen, five rams, five
@c    buck goats, five lambs of a year old.  This was the offering of Ahira
@c    the son of Enan.

@c    7:84. These were the offerings made by the princes of Israel in the
@c    dedication of the altar, in the day wherein it was consecrated.  Twelve
@c    dishes of silver:  twelve silver bowls:  twelve little mortars of gold:

@c    7:85. Each dish weighing a hundred and thirty sicles of silver, and
@c    each bowl seventy sicles:  that is, putting all the vessels of silver
@c    together, two thousand four hundred sicles, by the weight of the
@c    sanctuary.

@c    7:86. Twelve little mortars of gold full of incense, weighing ten
@c    sicles apiece, by the weight of the sanctuary:  that is, in all a
@c    hundred and twenty sicles of gold.

@c    7:87. Twelve oxen out of the herd for a holocaust, twelve rams, twelve
@c    lambs of a year old, and their libations:  twelve buck goats for sin.

@c    7:88. And for sacrifices of peace offerings, oxen twenty-four, rams
@c    sixty, buck goats sixty, lambs of a year old sixty.  These things were
@c    offered in the dedication of the altar, when it was anointed.

@c    7:89. And when Moses entered into the tabernacle of the covenant, to
@c    consult the oracle, he heard the voice of one speaking to him from the
@c    propitiatory, that is over the ark between the two cherubims, and from
@c    this place he spoke to him.



@c    Numbers Chapter 8


@c    The seven lamps are placed on the golden candlestick, to shine towards
@c    the loaves of proposition:  the ordination of the Levites:  and to what
@c    age they shall serve in the tabernacle.

@c    8:1. And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying:

@c    8:2. Speak to Aaron, and thou shalt say to him:  When thou shalt place
@c    the seven lamps, let the candlestick be set up on the south side.  Give
@c    orders therefore that the lamps look over against the north, towards
@c    the table of the loaves of proposition, over against that part shall
@c    they give light, towards which the candlestick looketh.

@c    8:3. And Aaron did so, and he put the lamps upon the candlestick, as
@c    the Lord had commanded Moses.

@c    8:4. Now this was the work of the candlestick, it was of beaten gold,
@c    both the shaft in the middle, and all that came out of both sides of
@c    the branches:  according to the pattern which the Lord had shewn to
@c    Moses, so he made the candlestick.

@c    8:5. And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying:

@c    8:6. Take the Levites out of the midst of the children of Israel, and
@c    thou shalt purify them,

@c    8:7. According to this rite:  Let them be sprinkled with the water of
@c    purification, and let them shave all the hairs of their flesh.  And when
@c    they shall have washed their garments, and are cleansed,

@c    Let them be sprinkled with the water of purification. . .This was the
@c    holy water mixed with the ashes of the red cow, Num. 19., appointed for
@c    purifying all that were unclean.  It was a figure of the blood of
@c    Christ, applied to our souls by his holy sacraments.

@c    8:8. They shall take an ox of the herd, and for the offering thereof
@c    fine flour tempered with oil:  and thou shalt take another ox of the
@c    herd for a sin offering:

@c    8:9. And thou shalt bring the Levites before the tabernacle of the
@c    covenant, calling together all the multitude of the children of Israel:

@c    8:10. And when the Levites are before the Lord, the children of Israel
@c    shall put their hands upon them:

@c    8:11. And Aaron shall offer the Levites, as a gift in the sight of the
@c    Lord from the children of Israel, that they may serve in his ministry.

@c    8:12. The Levites also shall put their hands upon the heads of the
@c    oxen, of which thou shalt sacrifice one for sin, and the other for a
@c    holocaust to the Lord, to pray for them.

@c    8:13. And thou shalt set the Levites in the sight of Aaron and of his,
@c    and shalt consecrate them being offered to the Lord,

@c    8:14. And shalt separate them from the midst of the children of Israel,
@c    to be mine.

@c    8:15. And afterwards they shall enter into the tabernacle of the
@c    covenant, to serve me.  And thus shalt thou purify and consecrate them
@c    for an oblation of the Lord:  for as a gift they were given me by the
@c    children of Israel.

@c    8:16. I have taken them instead of the firstborn that open every womb
@c    in Israel,

@c    8:17. For all the firstborn of the children of Israel, both of men and
@c    of beasts, are mine.  From the day that I slew every firstborn in the
@c    land of Egypt, have I sanctified them to myself:

@c    8:18. And I have taken the Levites for all the firstborn of the
@c    children of Israel:

@c    8:19. And have delivered them for a gift to Aaron and his sons out of
@c    the midst of the people, to serve me for Israel in the tabernacle of
@c    the covenant, and to pray for them, lest there should be a plague among
@c    the people, if they should presume to approach unto my sanctuary.

@c    8:20. And Moses and Aaron and all the multitude of the children of
@c    Israel did with the Levites all that the Lord had commanded Moses

@c    8:21. And they were purified, and washed their garments.  And Aaron
@c    lifted them up in the sight of the Lord, and prayed for them,

@c    8:22. That being purified they might go into the tabernacle of the
@c    covenant to do their services before Aaron and his sons.  As the Lord
@c    had commanded Moses touching the Levites, so was it done.

@c    8:23. And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying:

@c    8:24. This is the law of the Levites:  From twenty-five years old and
@c    upwards, they shall go in to minister in the tabernacle of the
@c    covenant.

@c    8:25. And when they shall have accomplished the fiftieth year of their
@c    age, they shall cease to serve:

@c    8:26. And they shall be the ministers of their brethren in the
@c    tabernacle of the covenant, to keep the things that are committed to
@c    their care, but not to do the works.  Thus shalt thou order the Levites
@c    touching their charge.



@c    Numbers Chapter 9


@c    The precept of the pasch is renewed:  the unclean and travellers are to
@c    observe it the second month:  the camp is guided by the pillar of the
@c    cloud.

@c    9:1. The Lord spoke to Moses in the desert of Sinai, the second year
@c    after they were come out of the land of Egypt, in the first month,
@c    saying:

@c    9:2. Let the children of Israel make the phase in its due time,

@c    Make the phase. . .That is, keep the paschal solemnity, and eat the
@c    paschal lamb.

@c    9:3. The fourteenth day of this month in the evening, according to all
@c    the ceremonies and justifications thereof.

@c    9:4. And Moses commanded the children of Israel that they should make
@c    the phase.

@c    9:5. And they made it in its proper time:  the fourteenth day of the
@c    month at evening, in mount Sinai.  The children of Israel did according
@c    to all things that the Lord had commanded Moses.

@c    9:6. But behold some who were unclean by occasion of the soul of a man,
@c    who could not make the phase on that day, coming to Moses and Aaron,

@c    Behold some who were unclean by occasion of the soul of a man,
@c    etc. . .That is, by having touched or come near a dead body, out of which
@c    the soul was departed.

@c    9:7. Said to them:  We are unclean by occasion of the soul of a man.  Why
@c    are we kept back that we may not offer in its season the offering to
@c    the Lord among the children of Israel?

@c    9:8. And Moses answered them:  Stay that I may consult the Lord what he
@c    will ordain concerning you.

@c    9:9. And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying:

@c    9:10. Say to the children of Israel:  The man that shall be unclean by
@c    occasion of one that is dead, or shall be in a journey afar off in your
@c    nation, let him make the phase to the Lord.

@c    9:11. In the second month, on the fourteenth day of the month in the
@c    evening, they shall eat it with unleavened bread and wild lettuce:

@c    9:12. They shall not leave any thing thereof until morning, nor break a
@c    bone thereof, they shall observe all the ceremonies of the phase.

@c    9:13. But if any man is clean, and was not on a journey, and did not
@c    make the phase, that soul shall be cut off from among his people,
@c    because he offered not sacrifice to the Lord in due season:  he shall
@c    bear his sin.

@c    9:14. The sojourner also and the stranger if they be among you, shall
@c    make the phase to the Lord according to the ceremonies and
@c    justifications thereof.  The same ordinances shall be with you both for
@c    the stranger, and for him that was born in the land.

@c    9:15. Now on the day that the tabernacle was reared up, a cloud covered
@c    it.  But from the evening there was over the tabernacle, as it were, the
@c    appearance of fire until the morning.

@c    9:16. So it was always:  by day the cloud covered it, and by night as it
@c    were the appearance of fire.

@c    9:17. And when the cloud that covered the tabernacle was taken up, then
@c    the children of Israel marched forward:  and in the place where the
@c    cloud stood still, there they camped.

@c    9:18. At the commandment of the Lord they marched, and at his
@c    commandment they pitched the tabernacle.  All the days that the cloud
@c    abode over the tabernacle, they remained in the same place:

@c    9:19. And if it was so that it continued over it a long time, the
@c    children of Israel kept the watches of the Lord, and marched not,

@c    9:20. For as many days soever as the cloud stayed over the tabernacle.
@c    At the commandment of the Lord they pitched their tents, and at his
@c    commandment they took them down.

@c    9:21. If the cloud tarried from evening until morning, and immediately
@c    at break of day left the tabernacle, they marched forward:  and if it
@c    departed after a day and a night, they took down their tents.

@c    9:22. But if it remained over the tabernacle for two days or a month or
@c    a longer time, the children of Israel remained in the same place, and
@c    marched not:  but immediately as soon as it departed, they removed the
@c    camp.

@c    9:23. By the word of the Lord they pitched their tents, and by his word
@c    they marched:  and kept the watches of the Lord according to his
@c    commandment by the hand of Moses.



@c    Numbers Chapter 10


@c    The silver trumpets and their use.  They march from Sinai.

@c    10:1. And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying:

@c    10:2. Make thee two trumpets of beaten silver, wherewith thou mayest
@c    call together the multitude when the camp is to be removed.

@c    10:3. And when thou shalt sound the trumpets, all the multitude shall
@c    gather unto thee to the door of the tabernacle of the covenant.

@c    10:4. If thou sound but once, the princes and the heads of the
@c    multitude of Israel shall come to thee.

@c    10:5. But if the sound of the trumpets be longer, and with
@c    interruptions, they that are on the east side, shall first go forward.

@c    10:6. And at the second sounding and like noise of the trumpet, they
@c    who lie on the south side shall take up their tents.  And after this
@c    manner shall the rest do, when the trumpets shall sound for a march.

@c    10:7. But when the people is to be gathered together, the sound of the
@c    trumpets shall be plain, and they shall not make a broken sound.

@c    10:8. And the sons of Aaron the priest shall sound the trumpets:  and
@c    this shall be an ordinance for ever in your generations.

@c    10:9. If you go forth to war out of your land against the enemies that
@c    fight against you, you shall sound aloud with the trumpets, and there
@c    shall be a remembrance of you before the Lord your God, that you may be
@c    delivered out of the hands of your enemies.

@c    10:10. If at any time you shall have a banquet, and on your festival
@c    days, and on the first days of your months, you shall sound the
@c    trumpets over the holocausts, and the sacrifices of peace offerings,
@c    that they may be to you for a remembrance of your God.  I am the Lord
@c    your God.

@c    10:11. The second year, in the second month, the twentieth day of the
@c    month, the cloud was taken up from the tabernacle of the covenant.

@c    10:12. And the children of Israel marched by their troops from the
@c    desert of Sinai, and the cloud rested in the wilderness of Pharan.

@c    10:13. And the first went forward according to the commandment of the
@c    Lord by the hand of Moses.

@c    10:14. The sons of Juda by their troops:  whose prince was Nahasson the
@c    son of Aminadab.

@c    10:15. In the tribe of the sons of Issachar, the prince was Nathanael
@c    the son of Suar.

@c    10:16. In the tribe of Zabulon, the prince was Eliab the son of Helon.

@c    10:17. And the tabernacle was taken down, and the sons of Gerson and
@c    Merari set forward, bearing it.

@c    10:18. And the sons of Ruben also marched, by their troops and ranks,
@c    whose prince was Helisur the son of Sedeur.

@c    10:19. And in the tribe of Simeon, the prince was Salamiel the son of
@c    Surisaddai.

@c    10:20. And in the tribe of Gad, the prince was Eliasaph the son of
@c    Duel.

@c    10:21. Then the Caathites also marched carrying the sanctuary.  So long
@c    was the tabernacle carried, till they came to the place of setting it
@c    up.

@c    10:22. The sons of Ephraim also moved their camp by their troops, in
@c    whose army the prince was Elisama the son of Ammiud.

@c    10:23. And in the tribe of the sons of Manasses, the prince was
@c    Gamaliel the son of Phadassur.

@c    10:24. And in the tribe of Benjamin, the prince was Abidan the son of
@c    Gedeon.

@c    10:25. The last of all the camp marched the sons of Dan by their
@c    troops, in whose army the prince was Ahiezer the son of Ammisaddai.

@c    10:26. And in the tribe of the sons of Aser, the prince was Phegiel the
@c    son of Ochran.

@c    10:27. And in the tribe of the sons of Nephtali, the prince was Ahira
@c    the son of Enan.

@c    10:28. This was the order of the camps, and marches of the children of
@c    Israel by their troops, when they set forward.

@c    10:29. And Moses said to Hobab the son of Raguel the Madianite, his
@c    kinsman:  We are going towards the place which the Lord will give us:
@c    come with us, that we may do thee good:  for the Lord hath promised good
@c    things to Israel.

@c    10:30. But he answered him:  I will not go with thee, but I will return
@c    to my country, wherein I was born.

@c    10:31. And he said:  Do not leave us:  for thou knowest in what places we
@c    should encamp in the wilderness, and thou shalt be our guide.

@c    10:32. And if thou comest with us, we will give thee what is the best
@c    of the riches which the Lord shall deliver to us.

@c    10:33. So they marched from the mount of the Lord three days' journey,
@c    and the ark of the covenant of the Lord went before them, for three
@c    days providing a place for the camp.

@c    10:34. The cloud also of the Lord was over them by day when they
@c    marched.

@c    10:35. And when the ark was lifted up, Moses said:  Arise, O Lord, and
@c    let thy enemies be scattered, and let them that hate thee, flee from
@c    before thy face.

@c    10:36. And when it was set down, he said:  Return, O Lord, to the
@c    multitude of the host of Israel.



@c    Numbers Chapter 11


@c    The people murmur and are punished with fire.  God appointeth seventy
@c    ancients for assistants to Moses.  They prophesy.  The people have their
@c    fill of flesh, but forthwith many die of the plague.

@c    11:1. In the mean time there arose a murmuring of the people against
@c    the Lord, as it were repining at their fatigue.  And when the Lord heard
@c    it he was angry.  And the fire of the Lord being kindled against them,
@c    devoured them that were at the uttermost part of the camp.

@c    11:2. And when the people cried to Moses, Moses prayed to the Lord, and
@c    the fire was swallowed up.

@c    11:3. And he called the name of that place, The burning:  for that the
@c    fire of the Lord had been kindled against them.

@c    The burning. . .Hebrew, Taberah.

@c    11:4. For a mixt multitude of people, that came up with them, burned
@c    with desire, sitting and weeping, the children of Israel also being
@c    joined with them, and said:  Who shall give us flesh to eat?

@c    A mixt multitude. . .These were people that came with them out of Egypt,
@c    who were not of the race of Israel; who, by their murmuring, drew also
@c    the children of Israel to murmur:  this should teach us the danger of
@c    associating ourselves with the children of Egypt, that is, with the
@c    lovers and admirers of this wicked world.

@c    11:5. We remember the fish that we ate in Egypt free cost:  the
@c    cucumbers come into our mind, and the melons, and the leeks, and the
@c    onions, and the garlic.

@c    11:6. Our soul is dry, our eyes behold nothing else but manna.

@c    11:7. Now the manna was like coriander seed, of the colour of bdellium.

@c    Bdellium. . .Bdellium, according to Pliny, 1.21, c. 9. was of the colour
@c    of a man's nail, white and bright.

@c    11:8. And the people went about, and gathering it, ground it in a mill,
@c    or beat it in a mortar, and boiled it in a pot, and made cakes thereof
@c    of the taste of bread tempered with oil.

@c    11:9. And when the dew fell in the night upon the camp, the manna also
@c    fell with it.

@c    11:10. Now Moses heard the people weeping by their families, every one
@c    at the door of his tent.  And the wrath of the Lord was exceedingly
@c    enkindled:  to Moses also the thing seemed insupportable.

@c    11:11. And he said to the Lord:  Why hast thou afflicted thy servant?
@c    Wherefore do I not find favour before thee?  And why hast thou laid the
@c    weight of all this people upon me?

@c    11:12. Have I conceived all this multitude, or begotten them, that thou
@c    shouldst say to me:  Carry them in thy bosom as the nurse is wont to
@c    carry the little infant, and bear them into the land, for which thou
@c    hast sworn to their fathers?

@c    11:13. Whence should I have flesh to give to so great a multitude?  They
@c    weep against me, saying:  Give us flesh that we may eat.

@c    11:14. I am not able alone to bear all this people, because it is too
@c    heavy for me.

@c    11:15. But if it seem unto thee otherwise, I beseech thee to kill me,
@c    and let me find grace in thy eyes, that I be not afflicted with so
@c    great evils.

@c    11:16. And the Lord said to Moses:  Gather unto me seventy men of the
@c    ancients of Israel, whom thou knowest to be ancients and masters of the
@c    people:  and thou shalt bring them to the door of the tabernacle of the
@c    covenant, and shalt make them stand there with thee,

@c    Seventy men. . .This was the first institution of the council or senate,
@c    called the Sanhedrin, consisting of seventy or seventy-two senators or
@c    counsellors.

@c    11:17. That I may come down and speak with thee:  and I will take of thy
@c    spirit, and will give to them, that they may bear with thee the burden
@c    of the people, and thou mayest not be burthened alone.

@c    11:18. And thou shalt say to the people:  Be ye sanctified:  to morrow
@c    you shall eat flesh:  for I have heard you say:  Who will give us flesh
@c    to eat?  It was well with us in Egypt.  That the Lord may give you flesh,
@c    and you may eat:

@c    11:19. Not for one day, nor two, nor five, nor ten, no nor for twenty.

@c    11:20. But even for a month of days, till it come out at your nostrils,
@c    and become loathsome to you, because you have cast off the Lord, who is
@c    in the midst of you, and have wept before him, saying:  Why came we out
@c    of Egypt?

@c    11:21. And Moses said:  There are six hundred thousand footmen of this
@c    people, and sayest thou:  I will give them flesh to eat a whole month?

@c    11:22. Shall then a multitude of sheep and oxen be killed, that it may
@c    suffice for their food?  or shall the fishes of the sea be gathered
@c    together to fill them?

@c    11:23. And the Lord answered him:  Is the hand of the Lord unable?  Thou
@c    shalt presently see whether my word shall come to pass or no.

@c    11:24. Moses therefore came, and told the people the words of the Lord,
@c    and assembled seventy men of the ancients of Israel, and made them to
@c    stand about the tabernacle.

@c    11:25. And the Lord came down in a cloud, and spoke to him, taking away
@c    of the spirit that was in Moses, and giving to the seventy men.  And
@c    when the spirit had rested on them they prophesied, nor did they cease
@c    afterwards.

@c    11:26. Now there remained in the camp two of the men, of whom one was
@c    called Eldad, and the other Medad, upon whom the spirit rested; for
@c    they also had been enrolled, but were not gone forth to the tabernacle.

@c    11:27. And when they prophesied in the camp, there ran a young man, and
@c    told Moses, saying:  Eldad and Medad prophesy in the camp.

@c    11:28. Forthwith Josue the son of Nun, the minister of Moses, and
@c    chosen out of many, said:  My lord Moses forbid them.

@c    11:29. But he said:  Why hast thou emulation for me?  O that all the
@c    people might prophesy, and that the Lord would give them his spirit!

@c    11:30. And Moses returned, with the ancients of Israel, into the camp.

@c    11:31. And a wind going out from the Lord, taking quails up beyond the
@c    sea brought them, and cast them into the camp for the space of one
@c    day's journey, on every side of the camp round about, and they flew in
@c    the air two cubits high above the ground.

@c    11:32. The people therefore rising up all that day, and night, and the
@c    next day, gathered together of quails, he that did least, ten cores:
@c    and they dried them round about the camp.

@c    11:33. As yet the flesh was between their teeth, neither had that kind
@c    of meat failed:  when behold the wrath of the Lord being provoked
@c    against the people, struck them with an exceeding great plague.

@c    11:34. And that place was called, The graves of lust:  for there they
@c    buried the people that had lusted.  And departing from the graves of
@c    lust, they came unto Haseroth, and abode there.

@c    The graves of lust. . .Or, the sepulchres of concupiscence:  so called
@c    from their irregular desire of flesh.  In Hebrew, Kibroth.  Hattaavah.



@c    Numbers Chapter 12


@c    Mary and Aaron murmur against Moses, whom God praiseth above other
@c    prophets.  Mary being struck with leprosy, Aaron confesseth his fault.
@c    Moses prayeth for her, and after seven days' separation from the camp,
@c    she is restored.

@c    12:1. And Mary and Aaron spoke against Moses, because of his wife the
@c    Ethiopian,

@c    Ethiopian. . .Sephora the wife of Moses was of Madian, which bordered
@c    upon the land of Chus or Ethiopia:  where note, that the Ethiopia here
@c    spoken of is not that of Africa but that of Arabia.

@c    12:2. And they said:  Hath the Lord spoken by Moses only?  Hath he not
@c    also spoken to us in like manner?  And when the Lord heard this,

@c    12:3. (For Moses was a man exceeding meek above all men that dwelt upon
@c    earth)

@c    Exceeding meek. . .Moses being the meekest of men, would not contend for
@c    himself; therefore, God inspired him to write here his own defence:  and
@c    the Holy Spirit, whose dictate he wrote, obliged him to declare the
@c    truth, though it was so much to his own praise.

@c    12:4. Immediately he spoke to him, and to Aaron and Mary:  Come out you
@c    three only to the tabernacle of the covenant.  And when they were come
@c    out,

@c    12:5. The Lord came down in a pillar of the cloud, and stood in the
@c    entry of the tabernacle calling to Aaron and Mary.  And when they were
@c    come,

@c    12:6. He said to them:  Hear my words:  if there be among you a prophet
@c    of the Lord, I will appear to him in a vision, or I will speak to him
@c    in a dream.

@c    12:7. But it is not so with my servant Moses who is most faithful in
@c    all my house:

@c    12:8. For I speak to him mouth to mouth:  and plainly, and not by
@c    riddles and figures doth he see the Lord.  Why then were you not afraid
@c    to speak ill of my servant Moses?

@c    12:9. And being angry with them he went away:

@c    12:10. The cloud also that was over the tabernacle departed:  and behold
@c    Mary appeared white as snow with a leprosy.  And when Aaron had looked
@c    on her, and saw her all covered with leprosy,

@c    12:11. He said to Moses:  I beseech thee, my lord, lay not upon us this
@c    sin, which we have foolishly committed:

@c    12:12. Let her not be as one dead, and as an abortive that is cast
@c    forth from the mother's womb.  Lo, now one half of her flesh is consumed
@c    with the leprosy.

@c    12:13. And Moses cried to the Lord, saying O God, I beseech thee heal
@c    her.

@c    12:14. And the Lord answered him:  If her father had spitten upon her
@c    face, ought she not to have been ashamed for seven days at least?  Let
@c    her be separated seven days without the camp, and afterwards she shall
@c    be called again.

@c    12:15. Mary therefore was put out of the camp seven days:  and the
@c    people moved not from that place until Mary was called again.



@c    Numbers Chapter 13


@c    The twelve spies are sent to view the land.  The relation they make of
@c    it.

@c    13:1. And the people marched from Haseroth, and pitched their tents in
@c    the desert of Pharan.

@c    13:2. And there the Lord spoke to Moses, saying.

@c    13:3. Send men to view the land of Chanaan, which I will give to the
@c    children of Israel, one of every tribe, of the rulers.

@c    13:4. Moses did what the Lord had commanded, sending from the desert of
@c    Pharan, principal men, whose names are these:

@c    13:5. Of the tribe of Ruben, Sammua the son of Zechur.

@c    13:6. Of the tribe of Simeon, Saphat the son of Huri.

@c    13:7. Of the tribe of Juda, Caleb the son of Jephone.

@c    13:8. Of the tribe of Issachar, Igal the son of Joseph.

@c    13:9. Of the tribe of Ephraim, Osee the son of Nun.

@c    13:10. Of the tribe of Benjamin, Phalti the son of Raphu.

@c    13:11. Of the tribe of Zabulon, Geddiel the son of Sodi.

@c    13:12. Of the tribe of Joseph, of the sceptre of Manasses, Gaddi the
@c    son of Susi.

@c    13:13. Of the tribe of Dan, Ammiel the son of Gemalli.

@c    13:14. Of the tribe of Aser, Sthur the son of Michael.

@c    13:15. Of the tribe of Nephtali, Nahabi the son of Vapsi.

@c    13:16. Of the tribe of Gad, Guel the son of Machi.

@c    13:17. These are the names of the men, whom Moses sent to view the
@c    land:  and he called Osee the son of Nun, Josue.

@c    13:18. And Moses sent them to view the land of Chanaan, and said to
@c    them:  Go you up by the south side.  And when you shall come to the
@c    mountains,

@c    13:19. View the land, of what sort it is, and the people that are the
@c    inhabitants thereof, whether they be strong or weak:  few in number or
@c    many:

@c    13:20. The land itself, whether it be good or bad:  what manner of
@c    cities, walled or without walls:

@c    13:21. The ground, fat or barren, woody or without trees.  Be of good
@c    courage, and bring us of the fruits of the land.  Now it was the time
@c    when the firstripe grapes are fit to be eaten.

@c    13:22. And when they were gone up, they viewed the land from the desert
@c    of Sin, unto Rohob as you enter into Emath.

@c    13:23. And they went up at the south side, and came to Hebron, where
@c    were Achiman and Sisai and Tholmai the sons of Enac.  For Hebron was
@c    built seven years before Tanis the city of Egypt.

@c    13:24. And forward as far as the torrent of the cluster of grapes, they
@c    cut off a branch with its cluster of grapes, which two men carried upon
@c    a lever.  They took also of the pomegranates and of the figs of that
@c    place:

@c    13:25. Which was called Nehelescol, that is to say, the torrent of the
@c    cluster of grapes, because from thence the children of Israel had
@c    carried a cluster of grapes.

@c    13:26. And they that went to spy out the land returned after forty
@c    days, having gone round all the country,

@c    13:27. And came to Moses and Aaron and to all the assembly of the
@c    children of Israel to the desert of Pharan, which is in Cades.  And
@c    speaking to them and to all the multitude, they shewed them the fruits
@c    of the land:

@c    13:28. And they related and said:  We came into the land to which thou
@c    sentest us, which in very deed floweth with milk and honey as may be
@c    known by these fruits:

@c    13:29. But it hath very strong inhabitants, and the cities are great
@c    and walled.  We saw there the race of Enac.

@c    13:30. Amalec dwelleth in the south, the Hethite and the Jebusite and
@c    the Amorrhite in the mountains:  but the Chanaanite abideth by the sea
@c    and near the streams of the Jordan.

@c    13:31. In the mean time Caleb, to still the murmuring of the people
@c    that rose against Moses, said:  Let us go up and possess the land, for
@c    we shall be able to conquer it.

@c    13:32. But the others, that had been with him, said:  No, we are not
@c    able to go up to this people, because they are stronger than we.

@c    13:33. And they spoke ill of the land, which they had viewed, before
@c    the children of Israel, saying:  The land which we have viewed,
@c    devoureth its inhabitants:  the people, that we beheld are of a tall
@c    stature.

@c    Spoke ill, etc. . .These men, who by their misrepresentations of the
@c    land of promise, discouraged the Israelites from attempting the
@c    conquest of it, were a figure of worldlings, who, by decrying or
@c    misrepresenting true devotion, discourage Christians from seeking in
@c    earnest and acquiring so great a good, and thereby securing to
@c    themselves a happy eternity.

@c    13:34. There we saw certain monsters of the sons of Enac, of the giant
@c    kind:  in comparison of whom, we seemed like locusts.



@c    Numbers Chapter 14


@c    The people murmur.  God threateneth to destroy them.  He is appeased by
@c    Moses, yet so as to exclude the murmurers from entering the promised
@c    land.  The authors of the sedition are struck dead.  The rest going to
@c    fight against the will of God are beaten.

@c    14:1. Therefore the whole multitude crying wept that night.

@c    14:2. And all the children of Israel murmured against Moses and Aaron,
@c    saying:

@c    14:3. Would God that we had died in Egypt:  and would God we may die in
@c    this vast wilderness, and that the Lord may not bring us into this
@c    land, lest we fall by the sword, and our wives and children be led away
@c    captives.  Is it not better to return into Egypt?

@c    14:4. And they said one to another:  Let us appoint a captain, and let
@c    us return into Egypt.

@c    14:5. And when Moses and Aaron heard this, they fell down flat upon the
@c    ground before the multitude of the children of Israel.

@c    14:6. But Josue the son of Nun, and Caleb the son of Jephone, who
@c    themselves also had viewed the land, rent their garments,

@c    14:7. And said to all the multitude of the children of Israel:  The land
@c    which we have gone round is very good:

@c    14:8. If the Lord be favourable, he will bring us into it, and give us
@c    a land flowing with milk and honey.

@c    14:9. Be not rebellious against the Lord:  and fear ye not the people of
@c    this land, for we are able to eat them up as bread.  All aid is gone
@c    from them:  the Lord is with us, fear ye not.

@c    14:10. And when all the multitude cried out, and would have stoned
@c    them, the glory of the Lord appeared over the tabernacle of the
@c    covenant to all the children of Israel.

@c    14:11. And the Lord said to Moses:  How long will this people detract
@c    me?  how long will they not believe me for all the signs that I have
@c    wrought before them?

@c    14:12. I will strike them therefore with pestilence, and will consume
@c    them:  but thee I will make a ruler over a great nation, and a mightier
@c    than this is.

@c    14:13. And Moses said to the Lord:  That the Egyptians, from the midst
@c    of whom thou hast brought forth this people,

@c    14:14. And the inhabitants of this land, (who have heard that thou, O
@c    Lord, art among this people, and art seen face to face, and thy cloud
@c    protecteth them, and thou goest before them in a pillar of a cloud by
@c    day, and in a pillar of fire by night,)

@c    14:15. May hear that thou hast killed so great a multitude as it were
@c    one man and may say:

@c    14:16. He could not bring the people into the land for which he had
@c    sworn, therefore did he kill them in the wilderness.

@c    14:17. Let then the strength of the Lord be magnified, as thou hast
@c    sworn, saying:

@c    14:18. The Lord is patient and full of mercy, by taking away iniquity
@c    and wickedness, and leaving no man clear, who visitest the sins of the
@c    fathers upon the children unto the third and fourth generation.

@c    Clear. . .i.  e., who deserves punishment.

@c    14:19. Forgive, I beseech thee, the sins of this people, according to
@c    the greatness of thy mercy, as thou hast been merciful to them from
@c    their going out of Egypt unto this place.

@c    14:20. And the Lord said:  I have forgiven according to thy word.

@c    14:21. As I live:  and the whole earth shall be filled with the glory of
@c    the Lord.

@c    14:22. But yet all the men that have seen my majesty, and the signs
@c    that I have done in Egypt, and in the wilderness, and have tempted me
@c    now ten times, and have not obeyed my voice,

@c    14:23. Shall not see the land for which I swore to their fathers,
@c    neither shall any one of them that hath detracted me behold it.

@c    14:24. My servant Caleb, who being full of another spirit hath followed
@c    me, I will bring into this land which he hath gone round:  and his seed
@c    shall possess it.

@c    14:25. For the Amalecite and the Chanaanite dwell in the valleys.  To
@c    morrow remove the camp, and return into the wilderness by the way of
@c    the Red Sea.

@c    14:26. And the Lord spoke to Moses and Aaron, saying:

@c    14:27. How long doth this wicked multitude murmur against me?  I have
@c    heard the murmurings of the children of Israel.

@c    14:28. Say therefore to them:  As I live, saith the Lord:  According as
@c    you have spoken in my hearing, so will I do to you.

@c    14:29. In the wilderness shall your carcasses lie.  All you that were
@c    numbered from twenty years old and upward, and have murmured against
@c    me,

@c    14:30. Shall not enter into the land, over which I lifted up my hand to
@c    make you dwell therein, except Caleb the son of Jephone, and Josue the
@c    son of Nun.

@c    14:31. But your children, of whom you said, that they should be a prey
@c    to the enemies, will I bring in:  that they may see the land which you
@c    have despised.

@c    14:32. Your carcasses shall lie in the wilderness.

@c    14:33. Your children shall wander in the desert forty years, and shall
@c    bear your fornication, until the carcasses of their fathers be consumed
@c    in the desert,

@c    Shall bear your fornication. . .That is, shall bear the punishment of
@c    your disloyalty to God, which in the scripture language is here called
@c    a fornication, in a spiritual sense.

@c    14:34. According to the number of the forty days, wherein you viewed
@c    the land:  a year shall be counted for a day.  And forty years you shall
@c    receive your iniquities, and shall know my revenge:

@c    14:35. For as I have spoken, so will I do to all this wicked multitude,
@c    that hath risen up together against me:  in this wilderness shall it
@c    faint away and die.

@c    14:36. Therefore all the men, whom Moses had sent to view the land, and
@c    who at their return had made the whole multitude to murmur against him,
@c    speaking ill of the land that it was naught,

@c    14:37. Died and were struck in the sight of the Lord.

@c    14:38. But Josue the son of Nun, and Caleb had gone to view the land.

@c    14:39. And Moses spoke all these words to all the children of Israel,
@c    and the people mourned exceedingly.

@c    14:40. And behold rising up very early in the morning, they went up to
@c    the top of the mountain, and said:  We are ready to go up to the place,
@c    of which the Lord hath spoken:  for we have sinned.

@c    14:41. And Moses said to them:  Why transgress you the word of the Lord,
@c    which shall not succeed prosperously with you?

@c    14:42. Go not up, for the Lord is not with you:  lest you fall before
@c    your enemies.

@c    14:43. The Amalecite and the Chanaanite are before you, and by their
@c    sword you shall fall, because you would not consent to the Lord,
@c    neither will the Lord be with you.

@c    14:44. But they being blinded went up to the top of the mountain.  But
@c    the ark of the testament of the Lord and Moses departed not from the
@c    camp.

@c    14:45. And the Amalecite came down, and the Chanaanite that dwelt in
@c    the mountain:  and smiting and slaying them pursued them as far as
@c    Horma.



@c    Numbers Chapter 15


@c    Certain laws concerning sacrifices.  Sabbath breaking is punished with
@c    death.  The law of fringes on their garments.

@c    15:1. And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying:

@c    15:2. Speak to the children of Israel and thou shalt say to them:  When
@c    you shall be come unto the land of your habitation, which I will give
@c    you,

@c    15:3. And shall make an offering to the Lord, for a holocaust, or a
@c    victim, paying your vows, or voluntarily offering gifts, or in your
@c    solemnities burning a sweet savour unto the Lord, of oxen or of sheep:

@c    15:4. Whosoever immolateth the victim, shall offer a sacrifice of fine
@c    flour, the tenth part of an ephi, tempered with the fourth part of a
@c    hin of oil:

@c    15:5. And he shall give the same measure of wine to pour out in
@c    libations for the holocaust or for the victim.  For every lamb,

@c    15:6. And for every ram there shall be a sacrifice of flour of two
@c    tenths, which shall be tempered with the third part of a hin of oil:

@c    15:7. And he shall offer the third part the same measure of wine for
@c    the libation, for a sweet savour to the Lord.

@c    15:8. But when thou offerest a holocaust or sacrifice of oxen, to
@c    fulfil thy vow or for victims of peace offerings,

@c    15:9. Thou shalt give for every ox three tenths of flour tempered with
@c    half a hin of oil,

@c    15:10. And wine for libations of the same measure, for an offering of
@c    most sweet savour to the Lord.

@c    15:11. Thus shalt thou do

@c    15:12. For every ox and ram and lamb and kid.

@c    15:13. Both they that are born in the land, and the strangers

@c    15:14. Shall offer sacrifices after the same rite.

@c    15:15. There shall be all one law and judgment both for you and for
@c    them who are strangers in the land.

@c    15:16. And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying:

@c    15:17. Speak to the children of Israel, and thou shalt say to them:

@c    15:18. When you are come into the land which I will give you,

@c    15:19. And shall eat of the bread of that country, you shall separate
@c    firstfruits to the Lord,

@c    15:20. Of the things you eat.  As you separate firstfruits of your
@c    barnfloors:

@c    15:21. So also shall you give firstfruits of your dough to the Lord.

@c    15:22. And if through ignorance you omit any of these things, which the
@c    Lord hath spoken to Moses,

@c    15:23. And by him hath commanded you from the day that he began to
@c    command and thenceforward,

@c    15:24. And the multitude have forgotten to do it:  they shall offer a
@c    calf out of the herd, a holocaust for a most sweet savour to the Lord,
@c    and the sacrifice and libations thereof, as the ceremonies require, and
@c    a buck goat for sin:

@c    15:25. And the priest shall pray for all the multitude of the children
@c    of Israel:  and it shall be forgiven them, because they sinned
@c    ignorantly, offering notwithstanding a burnt offering to the Lord for
@c    themselves and for their sin and their Ignorance:

@c    15:26. And it shall be forgiven all the people of the children of
@c    Israel:  and the strangers that sojourn among them:  because it is the
@c    fault of all the people through ignorance.

@c    15:27. But if one soul shall sin ignorantly, he shall offer a she goat
@c    of a year old for his sin.

@c    15:28. And the priest shall pray for him, because he sinned ignorantly
@c    before the Lord:  and he shall obtain his pardon, and it shall be
@c    forgiven him.

@c    15:29. The same law shall be for all that sin by ignorance, whether
@c    they be natives or strangers.

@c    15:30. But the soul that committeth any thing through pride, whether he
@c    be born in the land or a stranger (because he hath been rebellious
@c    against the Lord) shall be cut off from among his people:

@c    15:31. For he hath contemned the word of the Lord, and made void his
@c    precept:  therefore shall he be destroyed, and shall bear his iniquity.

@c    15:32. And it came to pass, when the children of Israel were in the
@c    wilderness, and had found a man gathering sticks on the sabbath day,

@c    15:33. That they brought him to Moses and Aaron and the whole
@c    multitude.

@c    15:34. And they put him into prison, not knowing what they should do
@c    with him.

@c    15:35. And the Lord said to Moses:  Let that man die, let all the
@c    multitude stone him without the camp.

@c    15:36. And when they had brought him out, they stoned him, and he died
@c    as the Lord had commanded.

@c    15:37. The Lord also said to Moses:

@c    15:38. Speak to the children of Israel, and thou shalt tell them to
@c    make to themselves fringes in the corners of their garments, putting in
@c    them ribands of blue:

@c    Fringes. . .The Pharisees enlarged these fringes through hypocrisy,
@c    Matt. 23.5, to appear more zealous than other men for the law of God.

@c    15:39. That when they shall see them, they may remember all the
@c    commandments of the Lord, and not follow their own thoughts and eyes
@c    going astray after divers things,

@c    15:40. But rather being mindful of the precepts of the Lord, may do
@c    them and be holy to their God.

@c    15:41. I am the Lord your God, who brought you out of the land of
@c    Egypt, that I might be your God.



@c    Numbers Chapter 16


@c    The schism of Core and his adherents:  their punishment.

@c    16:1. And behold Core the son of Isaar, the son of Caath, the son of
@c    Levi, and Dathan and Abiron the sons of Eliab, and Hon the son of
@c    Pheleth of the children of Ruben,

@c    16:2. Rose up against Moses, and with them two hundred and fifty others
@c    of the children of Israel, leading men of the synagogue, and who in the
@c    time of assembly were called by name.

@c    Rose up. . .The crime of these men, which was punished in so remarkable
@c    a manner, was that of schism, and of rebellion against the authority
@c    established by God in the church; and their pretending to the
@c    priesthood without being lawfully called and sent:  the same is the case
@c    of all modern sectaries.

@c    16:3. And when they had stood up against Moses and Aaron, they said:
@c    Let it be enough for you, that all the multitude consisteth of holy
@c    ones, and the Lord is among them:  Why lift you up yourselves above the
@c    people of the Lord?

@c    16:4. When Moses heard this, he fell flat on his face:

@c    16:5. And speaking to Core and all the multitude, he said:  In the
@c    morning the Lord will make known who belong to him, and the holy he
@c    will join to himself:  and whom he shall choose, they shall approach to
@c    him.

@c    16:6. Do this therefore:  Take every man of you your censers, thou Core,
@c    and all thy company.

@c    16:7. And putting fire in them to morrow, put incense upon it before
@c    the Lord:  and whomsoever he shall choose, the same shall be holy:  you
@c    take too much upon you, ye sons of Levi.

@c    16:8. And he said again to Core:  Hear ye sons of Levi.

@c    16:9. Is it a small thing unto you, that the God of Israel hath spared
@c    you from all the people, and joined you to himself, that you should
@c    serve him in the service of the tabernacle, and should stand before the
@c    congregation of the people, and should minister to him?

@c    16:10. Did he therefore make thee and all thy brethren the sons of Levi
@c    to approach unto him, that you should challenge to yourselves the
@c    priesthood also,

@c    16:11. And that all thy company should stand against the Lord?  for what
@c    is Aaron that you murmur against him?

@c    16:12. Then Moses sent to call Dathan and Abiron the sons of Eliab.  But
@c    they answered:  We will not come.

@c    16:13. Is it a small matter to thee, that thou hast brought us out of a
@c    land that flowed with milk and honey, to kill us in the desert, except
@c    thou rule also like a lord over us?

@c    16:14. Thou hast brought us indeed into a land that floweth with rivers
@c    of milk and honey, and hast given us possessions of fields and
@c    vineyards; wilt thou also pull out our eyes?  We will not come.

@c    16:15. Moses therefore being very angry, said to the Lord:  Respect not
@c    their sacrifices:  thou knowest that I have not taken of them so much as
@c    a young ass at any time, nor have injured any of them.

@c    Very angry. . .This anger was a zeal against sin; and an indignation at
@c    the affront offered to God; like that which the same holy prophet
@c    conceived upon the sight of the golden calf, Ex. 32.19.

@c    16:16. And he said to Core:  Do thou and thy congregation stand apart
@c    before the Lord to morrow, and Aaron apart.

@c    16:17. Take every one of you censers, and put incense upon them,
@c    offering to the Lord two hundred and fifty censers:  let Aaron also hold
@c    his censer.

@c    16:18. When they had done this, Moses and Aaron standing,

@c    16:19. And had drawn up all the multitude against them to the door of
@c    the tabernacle, the glory of the Lord appeared to them all.

@c    16:20. And the Lord speaking to Moses and Aaron, said:

@c    16:21. Separate yourselves from among this congregation, that I may
@c    presently destroy them.

@c    16:22. They fell flat on their face, and said:  O most mighty, the God
@c    of the spirits of all flesh, for one man's sin shall thy wrath rage
@c    against all?

@c    16:23. And the Lord said to Moses:

@c    16:24. Command the whole people to separate themselves from the tents
@c    of Core and Dathan and Abiron.

@c    16:25. And Moses arose, and went to Dathan and Abiron:  and the ancients
@c    of Israel following him,

@c    16:26. He said to the multitude:  Depart from the tents of these wicked
@c    men, and touch nothing of theirs, lest you be involved in their sins.

@c    16:27. And when they were departed from their tents round about, Dathan
@c    and Abiron coming out stood in the entry of their pavilions with their
@c    wives and children, and all the people.

@c    16:28. And Moses said:  By this you shall know that the Lord hath sent
@c    me to do all things that you see, and that I have not forged them of my
@c    own head:

@c    16:29. If these men die the common death of men, and if they be visited
@c    with a plague, wherewith others also are wont to be visited, the Lord
@c    did not send me.

@c    16:30. But if the Lord do a new thing, and the earth opening her mouth
@c    swallow them down, and all things that belong to them, and they go down
@c    alive into hell, you shall know that they have blasphemed the Lord.

@c    16:31. And immediately as he had made an end of speaking, the earth
@c    broke asunder under their feet:

@c    16:32. And opening her mouth, devoured them with their tents and all
@c    their substance.

@c    16:33. And they went down alive into hell, the ground closing upon
@c    them, and they perished from among the people.

@c    16:34. But all Israel, that was standing round about, fled at the cry
@c    of them that were perishing:  saying:  Lest perhaps the earth swallow us
@c    up also.

@c    16:35. And a fire coming out from the Lord, destroyed the two hundred
@c    and fifty men that offered the incense.

@c    16:36. And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying:

@c    16:37. Command Eleazar the son of Aaron the priest to take up the
@c    censers that lie in the burning, and to scatter the fire of one side
@c    and the other:  because they are sanctified

@c    16:38. In the deaths of the sinners:  and let him beat them into plates,
@c    and fasten them to the altar, because incense hath been offered in them
@c    to the Lord, and they are sanctified, that the children of Israel may
@c    see them for a sign and a memorial.

@c    16:39. Then Eleazar the priest took the brazen censers, wherein they
@c    had offered, whom the burning fire had devoured, and beat them into
@c    plates, fastening them to the altar:

@c    16:40. That the children of Israel might have for the time to come
@c    wherewith they should be admonished, that no stranger or any one that
@c    is not of the seed of Aaron should come near to offer incense to the
@c    Lord, lest he should suffer as Core suffered, and all his congregation,
@c    according as the Lord spoke to Moses.

@c    16:41. The following day all the multitude of the children of Israel
@c    murmured against Moses and Aaron, saying:  You have killed the people of
@c    the Lord.

@c    16:42. And when there arose a sedition, and the tumult increased,

@c    16:43. Moses and Aaron fled to the tabernacle of the covenant.  And when
@c    they were gone into it, the cloud covered it, and the glory of the Lord
@c    appeared.

@c    16:44. And the Lord said to Moses:

@c    16:45. Get you out from the midst of this multitude, this moment will I
@c    destroy them.  And as they were lying on the ground,

@c    16:46. Moses said to Aaron:  Take the censer, and putting fire in it
@c    from the altar, put incense upon it, and go quickly to the people to
@c    pray for them:  for already wrath is gone out from the Lord, and the
@c    plague rageth.

@c    16:47. When Aaron had done this, and had run to the midst of the
@c    multitude which the burning fire was now destroying, he offered the
@c    incense:

@c    16:48. And standing between the dead and the living, he prayed for the
@c    people, and the plague ceased.

@c    16:49. And the number of them that were slain was fourteen thousand and
@c    seven hundred men, besides them that had perished in the sedition of
@c    Core.

@c    16:50. And Aaron returned to Moses to the door of the tabernacle of the
@c    covenant after the destruction was over.



@c    Numbers Chapter 17


@c    The priesthood is confirmed to Aaron by the miracle of the blooming of
@c    his rod, which is kept for a monument in the tabernacle.

@c    17:1. And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying:

@c    17:2. Speak to the children of Israel, and take of every one of them a
@c    rod by their kindreds, of all the princes of the tribes, twelve rods,
@c    and write the name of every man upon his rod.

@c    17:3. And the name of Aaron shall be for the tribe of Levi, and one rod
@c    shall contain all their families:

@c    17:4. And thou shalt lay them up in the tabernacle of the covenant
@c    before the testimony, where I will speak to thee.

@c    17:5. Whomsoever of these I shall choose, his rod shall blossom:  and I
@c    will make to cease from me the murmurings of the children of Israel,
@c    wherewith they murmur against you.

@c    17:6. And Moses spoke to the children of Israel:  and all the princes
@c    gave him rods one for every tribe:  and there were twelve rods besides
@c    the rod of Aaron.

@c    17:7. And when Moses had Laid them up before the Lord in the tabernacle
@c    of the testimony:

@c    17:8. He returned on the following day, and found that the rod of Aaron
@c    for the house of Levi, was budded:  and that the buds swelling it hid
@c    bloomed blossoms, which spreading the leaves, were formed into almonds.

@c    The rod of Aaron for the house of Levi, was budded, etc. . .This rod of
@c    Aaron which thus miraculously brought forth fruit, was a figure of the
@c    blessed Virgin conceiving and bringing forth her Son without any
@c    prejudice to her virginity.

@c    17:9. Moses therefore brought out all the rods from before the Lord to
@c    all the children of Israel:  and they saw, and every one received their
@c    rods.

@c    17:10. And the Lord said to Moses:  Carry back the rod of Aaron into the
@c    tabernacle of the testimony, that it may be kept there for a token of
@c    the rebellious children of Israel, and that their complaints may cease
@c    from me lest they die.

@c    17:11. And Moses did as the Lord had commanded.

@c    17:12. And the children of Israel said to Moses:  Behold we are
@c    consumed, we all perish.

@c    17:13. Whosoever approacheth to the tabernacle of the Lord, he dieth.
@c    Are we all to a man to be utterly destroyed?



@c    Numbers Chapter 18


@c    The charge of the priests and of the Levites, and their portion.

@c    18:1. And the Lord said to Aaron:  Thou, and thy sons, and thy father's
@c    house with thee shall bear the iniquity of the sanctuary:  and thou and
@c    thy sons with thee shall bear the sins of your priesthood.

@c    Thou, and thy father's house with thee, shall bear the iniquity of the
@c    sanctuary. . .That is, you shall be punished if, through negligence or
@c    want of due attention, you err in the discharge of the sacred functions
@c    for which you were ordained.

@c    18:2. And take with thee thy brethren also of the tribe of Levi, and
@c    the sceptre of thy father, and let them be ready in hand, and minister
@c    to thee:  but thou and thy sons shall minister in the tabernacle of the
@c    testimony.

@c    18:3. And the Levites shall watch to do thy commands, and about all the
@c    works of the tabernacle:  only they shall not come nigh the vessels of
@c    the sanctuary nor the altar, lest both they die, and you also perish
@c    with them.

@c    18:4. But let them be with thee, and watch in the charge of the
@c    tabernacle, and in all the ceremonies thereof.  A stranger shall not
@c    join himself with you.

@c    18:5. Watch ye in the charge of the sanctuary, and in the ministry of
@c    the altar:  lest indignation rise upon the children of Israel.

@c    18:6. I have given you your brethren the Levites from among the
@c    children of Israel, and have delivered them for a gift to the Lord, to
@c    serve in the ministries of the tabernacle.

@c    18:7. But thou and thy sons look ye to the priesthood:  and all things
@c    that pertain to the service of the altar, and that are within the veil,
@c    shall be executed by the priests.  If any stranger shall approach, he
@c    shall be slain.

@c    18:8. And the Lord said to Aaron:  Behold I have given thee the charge
@c    of my firstfruits.  All things that are sanctified by the children of
@c    Israel, I have delivered to thee and to thy sons for the priestly
@c    office, by everlasting ordinances.

@c    18:9. These therefore shalt thou take of the things that are
@c    sanctified, and are offered to the Lord.  Every offering, and sacrifice,
@c    and whatsoever is rendered to me for sin and for trespass, and becometh
@c    holy of holies, shall be for thee and thy sons.

@c    18:10. Thou shalt eat it in the sanctuary:  the males only shall eat
@c    thereof, because it is a consecrated thing to thee.

@c    18:11. But the firstfruits, which the children of Israel shall vow and
@c    offer, I have given to thee, and to thy sons, and to thy daughters, by
@c    a perpetual law.  He that is clean in thy house, shall eat them.

@c    18:12. All the best of the oil, and of the wine, and of the corn,
@c    whatsoever firstfruits they offer to the Lord, I have given them to
@c    thee.

@c    18:13. All the firstripe of the fruits, that the ground bringeth forth,
@c    and which are brought to the Lord, shall be for thy use:  he that is
@c    clean in thy house, shall eat them.

@c    18:14. Every thing that the children of Israel shall give by vow, shall
@c    be thine.

@c    18:15. Whatsoever is firstborn of all flesh, which they offer to the
@c    Lord, whether it be of men, or of beasts, shall belong to thee:  only
@c    for the firstborn of man thou shalt take a price, and every beast that
@c    is unclean thou shalt cause to be redeemed,

@c    18:16. And the redemption of it shall be after one month, for five
@c    sicles of silver, by the weight of the sanctuary.  A sicle hath twenty
@c    obols.

@c    18:17. But the firstling of a cow, and of a sheep and of a goat thou
@c    shalt not cause to be redeemed, because they are sanctified to the
@c    Lord.  Their blood only thou shalt pour upon the altar, and their fat
@c    thou shalt burn for a most sweet odour to the Lord.

@c    18:18. But the flesh shall fall to thy use, as the consecrated breast,
@c    and the right shoulder shall be thine.

@c    18:19. All the firstfruits of the sanctuary which the children of
@c    Israel offer to the Lord, I have given to thee and to thy sons and
@c    daughters, by a perpetual ordinance.  It is a covenant of salt for ever
@c    before the Lord, to thee and to thy sons.

@c    A covenant of salt. . .It is a proverbial expression, signifying a
@c    covenant not to be altered or corrupted; as salt is used to keep things
@c    from corruption; a covenant perpetual, like that by which it was
@c    appointed, that salt should be used in every sacrifice.  Lev. 2.

@c    18:20. And the Lord said to Aaron:  You shall possess nothing in their
@c    land, neither shall you have a portion among them:  I am thy portion and
@c    inheritance in the midst of the children of Israel.

@c    18:21. And I have given to the sons of Levi all the tithes of Israel
@c    for a possession, for the ministry wherewith they serve me in the
@c    tabernacle of the covenant:

@c    18:22. That the children of Israel may not approach any more to the
@c    tabernacle, nor commit deadly sin,

@c    Deadly sin. . .That is, sin which will bring death after it.

@c    18:23. But only the sons of Levi may serve me in the tabernacle, and
@c    bear the sins of the people.  It shall be an everlasting ordinance in
@c    your generations.  They shall not possess any other thing,

@c    18:24. But be content with the oblation or tithes, which I have
@c    separated for their uses and necessities.

@c    18:25. And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying:

@c    18:26. Command the Levites, and declare unto them:  When you shall
@c    receive of the children of Israel the tithes, which I have given you,
@c    offer the firstfruits of them to the Lord, that is to say, the tenth
@c    part of the tenth:

@c    18:27. That it may be reckoned to you as an oblation of firstfruits, as
@c    well of the barnfloors as of the winepresses:

@c    18:28. And of all the things of which you receive tithes, offer the
@c    firstfruits to the Lord, and give them to Aaron the priest.

@c    18:29. All the things that you shall offer of the tithes, and shall
@c    separate for the gifts of the Lord, shall be the best and choicest
@c    things.

@c    18:30. And thou shalt say to them:  If you offer all the goodly and the
@c    better things of the tithes, it shall be reckoned to you as if you had
@c    given the firstfruits of the barnfloor and the winepress:

@c    18:31. And you shall eat them in all your places, both you and your
@c    families:  because it is your reward for the ministry, wherewith you
@c    serve in the tabernacle of the testimony.

@c    18:32. And you shall not sin in this point, by reserving the choicest
@c    and fat things to yourselves, lest you profane the oblations of the
@c    children of Israel, and die.



@c    Numbers Chapter 19


@c    The law of the sacrifice of the red cow, and the water of expiation.

@c    19:1. And the Lord spoke to Moses and Aaron, saying:

@c    19:2. This is the observance of the victim, which the Lord hath
@c    ordained.  Command the children of Israel, that they bring unto thee a
@c    red cow of full age, in which there is no blemish, and which hath not
@c    carried the yoke:

@c    A red cow, etc. . .This red cow, offered in sacrifice for sin, and
@c    consumed with fire without the camp, with the ashes of which, mingled
@c    with water, the unclean were to be expiated and purified; was a figure
@c    of the passion of Christ, by whose precious blood applied to our souls
@c    in the holy sacraments, we are cleansed from our sins.

@c    19:3. And you shall deliver her to Eleazar the priest, who shall bring
@c    her forth without the camp, and shall immolate her in the sight of all:

@c    19:4. And dipping his finger in her blood, shall sprinkle it over
@c    against the door of the tabernacle seven times,

@c    19:5. And shall burn her in the sight of all delivering up to the fire
@c    her skin, and her flesh, and her blood, and her dung.

@c    19:6. The priest shall also take cedar wood, and hyssop, and scarlet
@c    twice dyed, and cast it into the flame, with which the cow is consumed.

@c    19:7. And then after washing his garments, and body, he shall enter
@c    into the camp, and shall be unclean until the evening.

@c    19:8. He also that hath burned her, shall wash his garments, and his
@c    body, and shall be unclean until the evening.

@c    19:9. And a man that is clean shall gather up the ashes of the cow, and
@c    shall pour them forth without the camp in a most clean place, that they
@c    may be reserved for the multitude of the children of Israel, and for a
@c    water of aspersion:  because the cow was burnt for sin.

@c    19:10. And when he that carried the ashes of the cow, hath washed his
@c    garments, he shall be unclean until the evening.  The children of
@c    Israel, and the strangers that dwell among them, shall observe this for
@c    a holy thing by a perpetual ordinance.

@c    19:11. He that toucheth the corpse of a man, and is therefore unclean
@c    seven days,

@c    19:12. Shall be sprinkled with this water on the third day, and on the
@c    seventh, and so shall be cleansed.  If he were not sprinkled on the
@c    third day, he cannot be cleansed on the seventh.

@c    19:13. Every one that toucheth the corpse of a man, and is not
@c    sprinkled with this mixture, shall profane the tabernacle of the Lord,
@c    and shall perish out of Israel:  because he was not sprinkled with the
@c    water of expiation, he shall be unclean, and his uncleanness shall
@c    remain upon him.

@c    19:14. This is the law of a man that dieth in a tent:  All that go into
@c    his tent and all the vessels that are there, shall be unclean seven
@c    days.

@c    19:15. The vessel that hath no cover, nor binding over it, shall be
@c    unclean.

@c    19:16. If any man in the field touch the corpse of a man that was
@c    slain, or that died of himself, or his bone, or his grave, he shall be
@c    unclean seven days.

@c    19:17. And they shall take of the ashes of the burning and of the sin
@c    offering, and shall pour living waters upon them into a vessel.

@c    19:18. And a man that is clean shall dip hyssop in them, and shall
@c    sprinkle therewith all the tent, and all the furniture, and the men
@c    that are defiled with touching any such thing:

@c    19:19. And in this manner he that is clean shall purify the unclean on
@c    the third and on the seventh day.  And being expiated the seventh day,
@c    he shall wash both himself and his garments, and be unclean until the
@c    evening.

@c    19:20. If any man be not expiated after this rite, his soul shall
@c    perish out of the midst of the church:  because he hath profaned the
@c    sanctuary of the Lord, and was not sprinkled with the water of
@c    purification.

@c    19:21. This precept shall be an ordinance for ever.  He also that
@c    sprinkled the water, shall wash his garments.  Every one that shall
@c    touch the waters of expiation, shall be unclean until the evening.

@c    19:22. Whatsoever a person toucheth who is unclean, he shall make it
@c    unclean:  and the person that toucheth any of these things, shall be
@c    unclean until the evening.



@c    Numbers Chapter 20


@c    The death of Mary the sister of Moses.  The people murmur for want of
@c    water:  God giveth it them from the rock.  The death of Aaron.

@c    20:1. And the children of Israel, and all the multitude came into the
@c    desert of Sin, in the first month:  and the people abode in Cades.  And
@c    Mary died there, and was buried in the same place.

@c    20:2. And the people wanting water, came together against Moses and
@c    Aaron:

@c    20:3. And making a sedition, they said:  Would God we had perished among
@c    our brethren before the Lord.

@c    20:4. Why have you brought out the church of the Lord into the
@c    wilderness, that both we and our cattle should die?

@c    20:5. Why have you made us come up out of Egypt, and have brought us
@c    into this wretched place which cannot be sowed, nor bringeth forth
@c    figs, nor vines, nor pomegranates, neither is there any water to drink?

@c    20:6. And Moses and Aaron leaving the multitude, went into the
@c    tabernacle of the covenant, and fell flat upon the ground, and cried to
@c    the Lord, and said.  O Lord God, hear the cry of this people, and open
@c    to them thy treasure, a fountain of living water, that being satisfied,
@c    they may cease to murmur.  And the glory of the Lord appeared over them.

@c    20:7. And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying:

@c    20:8. Take the rod, and assemble the people together, thou and Aaron
@c    thy brother, and speak to the rock before them, and it shall yield
@c    waters.  And when thou hast brought forth water out of the rock, all the
@c    multitude and their cattle shall drink.

@c    20:9. Moses therefore took the rod, which was before the Lord, as he
@c    had commanded him,

@c    20:10. And having gathered together the multitude before the rock, he
@c    said to them:  Hear, ye rebellious and incredulous:  Can we bring you
@c    forth water out of this rock?

@c    20:11. And when Moses bad lifted up his hand, and struck the rock twice
@c    with the rod, there came forth water in great abundance, so that the
@c    people and their cattle drank,

@c    The rock. . .This rock was a figure of Christ, and the water that issued
@c    out from the rock, of his precious blood, the source of all our good.

@c    20:12. And the Lord said to Moses and Aaron:  Because you have not
@c    believed me, to sanctify me before the children of Israel, you shall
@c    not bring these people into the land, which I will give them.

@c    You have not believed, etc. . .The fault of Moses and Aaron, on this
@c    occasion, was a certain diffidence and weakness of faith; not doubting
@c    of God's power or veracity; but apprehending the unworthiness of that
@c    rebellious and incredulous people, and therefore speaking with some
@c    ambiguity.

@c    20:13. This is the Water of contradiction, where the children of Israel
@c    strove with words against the Lord, and he was sanctified in them.

@c    The Water of contradiction. . .Or strife.  Hebrew, Meribah.

@c    20:14. In the mean time Moses sent messengers from Cades to the king of
@c    Edom, to say:  Thus saith thy brother Israel:  Thou knowest all the
@c    labour that hath come upon us:

@c    20:15. In what manner our fathers went down into Egypt, and there we
@c    dwelt a long time, and the Egyptians afflicted us and our fathers.

@c    20:16. And how we cried to the Lord, and he heard us, and sent an
@c    angel, who hath brought us out of Egypt.  Lo, we are now in the city of
@c    Cades, which is in the uttermost of thy borders,

@c    20:17. And we beseech thee that we may have leave to pass through thy
@c    country.  We will not go through the fields, nor through the vineyards,
@c    we will not drink the waters of thy wells, but we will go by the common
@c    highway, neither turning aside to the right hand, nor to the left, till
@c    we are past thy borders.

@c    20:18. And Edom answered them:  Thou shalt not pass by me:  if thou dost
@c    I will come out armed against thee.

@c    20:19. And the children of Israel said:  We will go by the beaten way:
@c    and if we and our cattle drink of thy waters, we will give thee what is
@c    just:  there shall be no difficulty in the price, only let us pass
@c    speedily.

@c    20:20. But he answered:  Thou shalt not pass.  And immediately he came
@c    forth to meet them with an infinite multitude, and a strong hand,

@c    20:21. Neither would he condescend to their desire to grant them
@c    passage through his borders.  Wherefore Israel turned another way from
@c    him.

@c    20:22. And when they had removed the camp from Cades, they came to
@c    mount Hor, which is in the borders of the land of Edom:

@c    20:23. Where the Lord spoke to Moses:

@c    20:24. Let Aaron, saith he, go to his people:  for he shall not go into
@c    the land which I have given the children of Israel, because he was
@c    incredulous to my words, at the waters of contradiction.

@c    20:25. Take Aaron and his son with him, and bring them up into mount
@c    Hor:

@c    20:26. And when thou hast stripped the father of his vesture, thou
@c    shalt vest therewith Eleazar his son:  Aaron shall be gathered to his
@c    people, and die there.

@c    20:27. Moses did as the Lord had commanded:  and they went up into mount
@c    Hor before all the multitude.

@c    20:28. And when he had stripped Aaron of his vestments, he vested
@c    Eleazar his son with them.

@c    20:29. And Aaron being dead in the top of the mountain, he came down
@c    with Eleazar.

@c    20:30. And all the multitude seeing that Aaron was dead, mourned for
@c    him thirty days throughout all their families.



@c    Numbers Chapter 21


@c    King Arad is overcome.  The people murmur and are punished with fiery
@c    serpents:  they are healed by the brazen serpent.  They conquer the kings
@c    Sehon and Og.

@c    21:1. And when king Arad the Chanaanite, who dwelt towards the south,
@c    had heard this, to wit, that Israel was come by the way of the spies,
@c    he fought against them, and overcoming them carried off their spoils.

@c    21:2. But Israel binding himself by vow to the Lord, said:  If thou wilt
@c    deliver thus people into my hand, I will utterly destroy their cities.

@c    21:3. And the Lord heard the prayers of Israel, and delivered up the
@c    Chanaanite, and they cut them off and destroyed their cities:  and they
@c    called the name of that place Horma, that is to say, Anathema.

@c    Anathema. . .That is, a thing devoted to utter destruction.

@c    21:4. And they marched from mount Hor, by the way that leadeth to the
@c    Red Sea, to compass the land of Edom.  And the people began to be weary
@c    of their journey and labour:

@c    21:5. And speaking against God and Moses, they said:  Why didst thou
@c    bring us out of Egypt, to die in the wilderness?  There is no bread, nor
@c    have we any waters:  our soul now loatheth this very light food.

@c    Very light food. . .So they call the heavenly manna:  thus worldlings
@c    loathe the things of heaven, for which they have no relish.

@c    21:6. Wherefore the Lord sent among the people fiery serpents, which
@c    bit them and killed many of them.

@c    Fiery serpents. . .They are so called, because they that were bitten by
@c    them were burnt with a violent heat.

@c    21:7. Upon which they came to Moses, and said; We have sinned, because
@c    we have spoken against the Lord and thee:  pray that he may take away
@c    these serpents from us.  And Moses prayed for the people.

@c    21:8. And the Lord said to him:  Make a brazen serpent, and set it up
@c    for a sign:  whosoever being struck shall look on it, shall live.

@c    21:9. Moses therefore made a brazen serpent, and set it up for a sign:
@c    which when they that were bitten looked upon, they were healed.

@c    A brazen serpent. . .This was a figure of Christ crucified, and of the
@c    efficacy of a lively faith in him, against the bites of the hellish
@c    serpent.  John 3.14.

@c    21:10. And the children of Israel setting forwards camped in Oboth.

@c    21:11. And departing thence they pitched their tents in Jeabarim, in
@c    the wilderness, that faceth Moab toward the east.

@c    21:12. And removing from thence, they came to the torrent Zared:

@c    21:13. Which they left and encamped over against Arnon, which is in the
@c    desert and standeth out on the borders of the Amorrhite.  For Arnon is
@c    the border of Moab, dividing the Moabites and the Amorrhites.

@c    21:14. Wherefore it is said in the book of the wars of the Lord:  As he
@c    did in the Red Sea, so will he do in the streams of Arnon.

@c    The book of the wars, etc. . .An ancient book, which, like several
@c    others quoted in scripture, has been lost.

@c    21:15. The rocks of the torrents were bowed down that they might rest
@c    in Ar, and lie down in the borders of the Moabites.

@c    21:16. When they went from that place, the well appeared whereof the
@c    Lord said to Moses:  Gather the people together, and I will give them
@c    water.

@c    21:17. Then Israel sung this song:  Let the well spring up.  They sung
@c    thereto:

@c    21:18. The well, which the princes dug, and the chiefs of the people
@c    prepared by the direction of the lawgiver, and with their staves.  And
@c    they marched from the wilderness to Mathana.

@c    21:19. From Mathana unto Nahaliel:  from Nahaliel unto Bamoth.

@c    21:20. From Bamoth, is a valley in the country of Moab, to the top of
@c    Phasga, which looked towards the desert.

@c    21:21. And Israel sent messengers to Sehon king of the Amorrhites,
@c    saying:

@c    21:22. I beseech thee that I may have leave to pass through thy land:
@c    we will not go aside into the fields or the vineyards, we will not
@c    drink waters of the wells, we will go the king's highway, till we be
@c    past thy borders.

@c    21:23. And he would not grant that Israel should pass by his borders:
@c    but rather gathering an army, went forth to meet them in the desert,
@c    and came to Jasa and fought against them.

@c    21:24. And he was slain by them with the edge of the sword, and they
@c    possessed his land from the Arnon unto the Jeboc, and to the confines
@c    of the children of Ammon:  for the borders of the Ammonites, were kept
@c    with a strong garrison.

@c    21:25. So Israel took all his cities, and dwelt in the cities of the
@c    Amorrhite, to wit, in Hesebon, and in the villages thereof.

@c    21:26. Hesebon was the city of Sehon the king of the Amorrhites, who
@c    fought against the king of Moab:  and took all the land, that had been
@c    of his dominion, as far as the Arnon.

@c    21:27. Therefore it is said in the proverb:  Come into Hesebon, let the
@c    city of Sehon be built and set up:

@c    21:28. A fire is gone out of Hesebon, a flame from the city of Sehon,
@c    and hath consumed Ar of the Moabites, and the inhabitants of the high
@c    places of the Arnon.

@c    21:29. Woe to thee Moab:  thou art undone, O people of Chamos.  He hath
@c    given his sons to flight, and his daughters into captivity to Sehon the
@c    king of the Amorrhites.

@c    21:30. Their yoke is perished from Hesebon unto Dibon, they came weary
@c    to Nophe, and unto Medaba.

@c    21:31. So Israel dwelt in the land of the Amorrhite.

@c    21:32. And Moses sent some to take a view of Jazer:  and they took the
@c    villages of it, and conquered the inhabitants.

@c    21:33. And they turned themselves, and went up by the way of Basan, and
@c    Og the king of Basan came against them with all his people, to fight in
@c    Edrai.

@c    21:34. And the Lord said to Moses:  Fear him not, for I have delivered
@c    him and all his people, and his country into thy hand:  and thou shalt
@c    do to him as thou didst to Sehon the king of the Amorrhites, the
@c    inhabitant of Hesebon.

@c    21:35. So they slew him also with his sons, and all his people, not
@c    letting any one escape, and they possessed his land.



@c    Numbers Chapter 22


@c    Balac, king of Moab, sendeth twice for Balaam to curse Israel.  In his
@c    way Balaam is rebuked by an angel.

@c    22:1. And they went forward and encamped in the plains of Moab, over
@c    against where Jericho is situate beyond the Jordan.

@c    22:2. And Balac the son of Sephor, seeing all that Israel had done to
@c    the Amorrhite,

@c    22:3. And that the Moabites were in great fear of him, and were not
@c    able to sustain his assault,

@c    22:4. He said to the elders of Madian:  So will this people destroy all
@c    that dwell in our borders, as the ox is wont to eat the grass to the
@c    very roots.  Now he was at that time king in Moab.

@c    22:5. He sent therefore messengers to Balaam the son of Beor, a
@c    soothsayer, who dwelt by the river of the land of the children of
@c    Ammon, to call him, and to say:  Behold a people is come out of Egypt,
@c    that hath covered the face of the earth, sitting over against me.

@c    22:6. Come therefore, and curse this people, because it is mightier
@c    than I:  if by any means I may beat them and drive them out of my land:
@c    for I know that he whom thou shalt bless is blessed, and he whom thou
@c    shalt curse is cursed.

@c    22:7. And the ancients of Moab, and the elders of Madian, went with the
@c    price of divination in their hands.  And where they were come to Balaam,
@c    and had told him all the words of Balac:

@c    22:8. He answered:  Tarry here this night and I will answer whatsoever
@c    the Lord shall say to me.  And while they stayed with Balaam, God came
@c    and said to him:

@c    22:9. What mean these men that are with thee?

@c    22:10. He answered:  Balac the son of Sephor king of the Moabites hath
@c    sent to me,

@c    22:11. Saying:  Behold a people that is come out of Egypt, hath covered
@c    the face of the land:  come and curse them, if by any means I may fight
@c    with them and drive them away.

@c    22:12. And God said to Balaam:  Thou shalt not go with them, nor shalt
@c    thou curse the people:  because it is blessed.

@c    22:13. And he rose in the morning and said to the princes:  Go into your
@c    country, because the Lord hath forbid me to come with you.

@c    22:14. The princes returning, said to Balac:  Balaam would not come with
@c    us.

@c    22:15. Then he sent many more and more noble than he had sent before:

@c    22:16. Who, when they were come to Balaam, said:  Thus saith Balac the
@c    son of Sephor, Delay not to come to me:

@c    22:17. For I am ready to honour thee, and will give thee whatsoever
@c    thou wilt:  come and curse this people.

@c    22:18. Balaam answered:  If Balac would give me his house full of silver
@c    and gold, I cannot alter the word of the Lord my God, to speak either
@c    more or less.

@c    22:19. I pray you to stay here this night also, that I may know what
@c    the Lord will answer me once more.

@c    To stay. . .His desiring them to stay, after he had been fully informed
@c    already that it was not God's will he should go, came from the
@c    inclination he had to gratify Balac, for the sake of worldly gain.  And
@c    this perverse disposition God punished by permitting him to go (though
@c    not to curse the people as he would willingly have done), and suffering
@c    him to fall still deeper and deeper into sin, till he came at last to
@c    give that abominable counsel against the people of God, which ended in
@c    his own destruction.  So sad a thing it is to indulge a passion for
@c    money.

@c    22:20. God therefore came to Balaam in the night, and said to him:  If
@c    these men be come to call thee, arise and go with them:  yet so, that
@c    thou do what I shall command thee.

@c    22:21. Balaam arose in the morning, and saddling his ass went with
@c    them.

@c    22:22. And God was angry.  And an angel of the Lord stood in the way
@c    against Balaam, who sat on the ass, and had two servants with him.

@c    22:23. The ass seeing the angel standing in the way, with a drawn
@c    sword, turned herself out of the way, and went into the field.  And when
@c    Balaam beat her, and had a mind to bring her again to the way,

@c    22:24. The angel stood in a narrow place between two walls, wherewith
@c    the vineyards were enclosed.

@c    22:25. And the ass seeing him, thrust herself close to the wall, and
@c    bruised the foot of the rider.  But he beat her again:

@c    22:26. And nevertheless the angel going on to a narrow place, where
@c    there was no way to turn aside either to the right hand or to the left,
@c    stood to meet him.

@c    22:27. And when the ass saw the angel standing, she fell under the feet
@c    of the rider:  who being angry beat her sides more vehemently with a
@c    staff.

@c    22:28. And the Lord opened the mouth of the ass, and she said:  What
@c    have I done to thee?  Why strikest thou me, lo, now this third time?

@c    Opened the mouth, etc. . .The angel moved the tongue of the ass, to
@c    utter these speeches, to rebuke, by the mouth of a brute beast, the
@c    brutal fury and folly of Balaam.

@c    22:29. Balaam answered:  Because thou hast deserved it, and hast served
@c    me ill:  I would I had a sword that I might kill thee.

@c    22:30. The ass said:  Am not I thy beast, on which thou hast been always
@c    accustomed to ride until this present day?  tell me if I ever did the
@c    like thing to thee.  But he said:  Never.

@c    22:31. Forthwith the Lord opened the eyes of Balaam, and he saw the
@c    angel standing in the way with a drawn sword, and he worshipped him
@c    falling flat on the ground.

@c    22:32. And the angel said to him:  Why beatest thou thy ass these three
@c    times?  I am come to withstand thee, because thy way is perverse, and
@c    contrary to me:

@c    Perverse. . .Because thy inclinations are wicked in being willing for
@c    the sake of gain to curse the people of whom I am the guardian.

@c    22:33. And unless the ass had turned out of the way, giving place to me
@c    who stood against thee, I had slain thee, and she should have lived.

@c    22:34. Balaam said:  I have sinned, not knowing that thou didst stand
@c    against me:  and now if it displease thee that I go, I will return.

@c    22:35. The angel said:  Go with these men, and see thou speak no other
@c    thing than what I shall command thee.  He went therefore with the
@c    princes.

@c    22:36. And when Balac heard it he came forth to meet him in a town of
@c    the Moabites, that is situate in the uttermost borders of Arnon.

@c    22:37. And he said to Balaam:  I sent messengers to call thee, why didst
@c    thou not come immediately to me?  was it because I am not able to reward
@c    thy coming?

@c    22:38. He answered him:  Lo, here I am:  shall I have power to speak any
@c    other thing but that which God shall put in my mouth?

@c    22:39. So they went on together, and came into a city, that was in the
@c    uttermost borders of his kingdom.

@c    22:40. And when Balac had killed oxen and sheep, he sent presents to
@c    Balaam, and to the princes that were with him.

@c    22:41. And when morning was come, he brought him to the high places of
@c    Baal, and he beheld the uttermost part of the people.



@c    Numbers Chapter 23


@c    Balaam, instead of cursing Israel, is obliged to bless them, and
@c    prophesy good things of them.

@c    23:1. And Balaam said to Balac:  Build me here seven altars, and prepare
@c    as many calves, and the same number of rams.

@c    23:2. And when he had done according to the word of Balaam, they laid
@c    together a calf and a ram upon every altar.

@c    23:3. And Balaam said to Balac:  Stand a while by thy burnt offering,
@c    until I go, to see if perhaps the Lord will meet me, and whatsoever he
@c    shall command, I will speak to thee.

@c    23:4. And when he was gone with speed, God met him.  And Balaam speaking
@c    to him, said:  I have erected seven altars, and have laid on everyone a
@c    calf and a ram.

@c    23:5. And the Lord put the word in his mouth, and said:  Return to
@c    Balac, and thus shalt thou speak.

@c    23:6. Returning he found Balac standing by his burnt offering, with all
@c    the princes of the Moabites:

@c    23:7. And taking up his parable, he said:  Balac king of the Moabites
@c    hath brought me from Aram, from the mountains of the east:  Come, said
@c    he, and curse Jacob:  make haste and detest Israel.

@c    23:8. How shall I curse him, whom God hath not cursed?  By what means
@c    should I detest him, whom the Lord detesteth not?

@c    23:9. I shall see him from the tops of the rocks, and shall consider
@c    him from the hills.  This people shall dwell alone, and shall not be
@c    reckoned among the nations.

@c    23:10. Who can count the dust of Jacob, and know the number of the
@c    stock of Israel?  Let my soul die the death of the just, and my last end
@c    be like to them.

@c    23:11. And Balac said to Balaam:  What is this that thou dost?  I sent
@c    for thee to curse my enemies:  and thou contrariwise blessest them.

@c    23:12. He answered him:  Can I speak any thing else but what the Lord
@c    commandeth?

@c    23:13. Balac therefore said:  Come with me to another place from whence
@c    thou mayest see part of Israel, and canst not see them all:  curse them
@c    from thence.

@c    23:14. And when he had brought him to a high place, upon the top of
@c    mount Phasga, Balaam built seven altars, and laying on every one a calf
@c    and a ram,

@c    23:15. He said to Balac:  Stand here by thy burnt offering while I go to
@c    meet him.

@c    23:16. And when the Lord had met him, and had put the word in his
@c    mouth, he said:  Return to Balac, and thus shalt thou say to him.

@c    23:17. Returning he found him standing by his burnt sacrifice, and the
@c    princes of the Moabites with him.  And Balac said to him:  What hath the
@c    Lord spoken?

@c    23:18. But he taking up his parable, said:  Stand, O Balac, and give
@c    ear:  hear, thou son of Sephor:

@c    23:19. God is not a man, that he should lie, nor is the son of man,
@c    that he should be changed.  Hath he said then, and will he not do?  hath
@c    he spoken, and will he not fulfil?

@c    23:20. I was brought to bless, the blessing I am not able to hinder.

@c    23:21. There is no idol in Jacob, neither is there an image god to be
@c    seen in Israel.  The Lord his God is with him, and the sound of the
@c    victory of the king in him.

@c    23:22. God hath brought him out of Egypt, whose strength is like to the
@c    rhinoceros.

@c    23:23. There is no soothsaying in Jacob, nor divination in Israel.  In
@c    their times it shall be told to Jacob and to Israel what God hath
@c    wrought.

@c    23:24. Behold the people shall rise up as a lioness, and shall lift
@c    itself up as a lion:  it shall not lie down till it devour the prey, and
@c    drink the blood of the slain.

@c    23:25. And Balac said to Balaam:  Neither curse, nor bless him.

@c    23:26. And he said:  Did I not tell thee, that whatsoever God should
@c    command me, that I would do?

@c    23:27. And Balac said to him:  Come and I will bring thee to another
@c    place; if peradventure it please God that thou mayest curse them from
@c    thence.

@c    23:28. And when he had brought him upon the top of mount Phogor, which
@c    looketh towards the wilderness,

@c    23:29. Balaam said to him:  Build me here seven altars, and prepare as
@c    many calves, and the same number of rams.

@c    23:30. Balac did as Balaam had said:  and he laid on every altar, a calf
@c    and a ram.



@c    Numbers Chapter 24


@c    Balaam still continues to prophesy good things in favour of Israel.

@c    24:1. And when Balaam saw that it pleased the Lord that he should bless
@c    Israel, he went not as he had gone before, to seek divination:  but
@c    setting his face towards the desert,

@c    24:2. And lifting up his eyes, he saw Israel abiding in their tents by
@c    their tribes:  and the spirit of God rushing upon him,

@c    24:3. He took up his parable and said:  Balaam the son of Beor hath
@c    said:  The man hath said, whose eye is stopped up:

@c    24:4. The bearer of the words of God hath said, he that hath beheld the
@c    vision of the Almighty, he that falleth, and so his eyes are opened:

@c    24:5. How beautiful are thy tabernacles O Jacob, and thy tents, O
@c    Israel!

@c    24:6. As woody valleys, as watered gardens near the rivers, as
@c    tabernacles which the Lord hath pitched, as cedars by the waterside.

@c    24:7. Water shall flow out of his bucket, and his seed shall be in many
@c    waters.  For Agag his king shall be removed, and his kingdom shall be
@c    taken away.

@c    24:8. God hath brought him out of Egypt, whose strength is like to the
@c    rhinoceros.  They shall devour the nations that are his enemies, and
@c    break their bones, and pierce them with arrows.

@c    24:9. Lying down he hath slept as a lion, and as a lioness, whom none
@c    shall dare to rouse.  He that blesseth thee, shall also himself be
@c    blessed:  he that curseth thee shall be reckoned accursed.

@c    24:10. And Balac being angry against Balaam, clapped his hands together
@c    and said:  I called thee to curse my enemies, and thou on the contrary
@c    hast blessed them three times.

@c    24:11. Return to thy place.  I had determined indeed greatly to honour
@c    thee, but the Lord hath deprived thee of the honour designed for thee.

@c    24:12. Balaam made answer to Balac:  Did I not say to thy messengers,
@c    whom thou sentest to me:

@c    24:13. If Balac would give me his house full of silver and gold, I
@c    cannot go beyond the word of the Lord my God, to utter any thing of my
@c    own head either good or evil:  but whatsoever the Lord shall say, that I
@c    will speak?

@c    24:14. But yet going to my people, I will give thee counsel, what this
@c    people shall do to thy people in the latter days.

@c    24:15. Therefore taking up his parable, again he said:  Balaam the son
@c    of Beor hath said:  The man whose eye is stopped up, hath said:

@c    24:16. The hearer of the words of God hath said, who knoweth the
@c    doctrine of the Highest, and seeth the visions of the Almighty, who
@c    falling hath his eyes opened:

@c    24:17. I shall see him, but not now:  I shall behold him, but not near.
@c    A STAR SHALL RISE out of Jacob and a sceptre shall spring up from
@c    Israel:  and shall strike the chiefs of Moab, and shall waste all the
@c    children of Seth

@c    24:18. And he shall possess Idumea:  the inheritance of Seir shall come
@c    to their enemies, but Israel shall do manfully.

@c    24:19. Out of Jacob shall he come that shall rule, and shall destroy
@c    the remains of the city.

@c    24:20. And when he saw Amalec, he took up his parable, and said:  Amalec
@c    the beginning of nations, whose latter ends shall be destroyed.

@c    24:21. He saw also the Cinite:  and took up his parable, and said:  Thy
@c    habitation indeed is strong:  but though thou build thy nest in a rock,

@c    24:22. And thou be chosen of the stock of Cin, how long shalt thou be
@c    able to continue?  For Assur shall take thee captive.

@c    24:23. And taking up his parable, again he said:  Alas, who shall live
@c    when God shall do these things?

@c    24:24. They shall come in galleys from Italy, they shall overcome the
@c    Assyrians, and shall waste the Hebrews, and at the last they themselves
@c    also shall perish.

@c    24:25. And Balaam rose, and returned to his place:  Balac also returned
@c    the way that he came.



@c    Numbers Chapter 25


@c    The people fall into fornication and idolatry; for which twenty-four
@c    thousand are slain.  The zeal of Phinees.

@c    25:1. And Israel at that time abode in Settim, and the people committed
@c    fornication with the daughters of Moab,

@c    25:2. Who called them to their sacrifices.  And they ate of them, and
@c    adored their gods.

@c    25:3. And Israel was initiated to Beelphegor:  upon which the Lord being
@c    angry,

@c    Initiated to Beelphegor. . .That is, they took to the worship of
@c    Beelphegor, an obscene idol of the Moabites, and were consecrated, as
@c    it were, to him.

@c    25:4. Said to Moses:  Take all the princes of the people, and hang them
@c    up on gibbets against the sun:  that my fury may be turned away from
@c    Israel.

@c    25:5. And Moses said to the judges of Israel:  Let every man kill his
@c    neighbours, that have been initiated to Beelphegor.

@c    25:6. And behold one of the children of Israel went in before his
@c    brethren to a harlot of Madian, in the sight of Moses and of all the
@c    children of Israel, who were weeping before the door of the tabernacle.

@c    25:7. And when Phinees the son of Eleazar the son of Aaron the priest
@c    saw it, he rose up from the midst of the multitude, and taking a
@c    dagger,

@c    25:8. Went in after the Israelite into the brothel house, and thrust
@c    both of them through together, to wit, the man and the woman in the
@c    genital parts.  And the scourge ceased from the children of Israel.

@c    25:9. And there were slain four and twenty thousand men.

@c    25:10. And the Lord said to Moses:

@c    25:11. Phinees the son of Eleazar the son of Aaron the priest, hath
@c    turned away my wrath from the children of Israel:  because he was moved
@c    with my zeal against them, that I myself might not destroy the children
@c    of Israel in my zeal.

@c    25:12. Therefore say to him:  behold I give him the peace of my
@c    covenant,

@c    25:13. And the covenant of the priesthood for ever shall be both to him
@c    and his seed, because he hath been zealous for his God, and hath made
@c    atonement for the wickedness of the children of Israel.

@c    25:14. And the name of the Israelite, that was slain with the woman of
@c    Madian, was Zambri the son of Salu, a prince of the kindred and tribe
@c    of Simeon.

@c    25:15. And the Madianite woman, that was slain with him, was called
@c    Cozbi the daughter of Sur, a most noble prince among the Madianites.

@c    25:16. And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying:

@c    25:17. Let the Madianites find you their enemies, and slay you them:

@c    25:18. Because they also have acted like enemies against you, and have
@c    guilefully deceived you by the idol Phogor, and Cozbi their sister, a
@c    daughter of a prince of Madian, who was slain in the day of the plague
@c    for the sacrilege of Phogor.



@c    Numbers Chapter 26


@c    The people are again numbered by their tribes and families.

@c    26:1. After the blood of the guilty was shed, the Lord said to Moses
@c    and to Eleazar the son of Aaron, the priest:

@c    26:2. Number the whole sum of the children of Israel from twenty years
@c    old and upward, by their houses and kindreds, all that are able to go
@c    forth to war.

@c    26:3. Moses therefore and Eleazar the priest, being in the plains of
@c    Moab upon the Jordan over against Jericho, spoke to them that were

@c    26:4. From twenty years old and upward, as the Lord had commanded:  and
@c    this is the number of them:

@c    26:5. Ruben the firstborn of Israel.  His sons were Henoch, of whom is
@c    the family of the Henochites:  and Phallu, of whom is the family of the
@c    Phalluites:

@c    26:6. And Hesron, of whom is the family of the Hesronites:  and Charmi,
@c    of whom is the family of the Charmites.

@c    26:7. These are the families of the stock of Ruben:  whose number was
@c    found to be forty-three thousand seven hundred and thirty.

@c    26:8. The son of Phallu was Eliab.

@c    26:9. His sons, were Namuel and Dathan and Abiron.  These are Dathan and
@c    Abiron the princes of the people, that rose against Moses and Aaron in
@c    the sedition of Core, when they rebelled against the Lord:

@c    26:10. And the earth opening her mouth swallowed up Core, many others
@c    dying, when the fire burned two hundred and fifty men.  And there was a
@c    great miracle wrought,

@c    26:11. That when Core perished, his sons did not perish.

@c    26:12. The sons of Simeon by their kindreds:  Namuel, of him is the
@c    family of the Namuelites:  Jamin, of him is the family of the Jaminites:
@c    Jachim, of him is the family of the Jachimites:

@c    26:13. Zare, of him is the family of the Zarites:  Saul, of him is the
@c    family of the Saulites.

@c    26:14. These are the families of the stock of Simeon, of which the
@c    whole number was twenty-two thousand two hundred.

@c    26:15. The sons of Gad by their kindreds:  Sephon, of him is the family
@c    of the Sephonites:  Aggi, of him is the family of the Aggites:  Suni, of
@c    him is the family of the Sunites:

@c    26:16. Ozni, of him is the family of the Oznites:  Her, of him is the
@c    family of the Herites:

@c    26:17. Arod, of him is the family of the Arodites:  Ariel, of him is the
@c    family of the Arielites.

@c    26:18. These are the families of Gad, of which the whole number was
@c    forty thousand five hundred.

@c    26:19. The sons of Juda, Her and Onan, who both died in the land of
@c    Chanaan.

@c    26:20. And the sons of Juda by their kindreds were:  Sela, of whom is
@c    the family of the Selaites:  Phares, of whom is the family of the
@c    Pharesites:  Zare, of whom is the family of the Zarites.

@c    26:21. Moreover the sons of Phares were:  Hesron, of whom is the family
@c    of the Hesronites:  and Hamul, of whom is the family of the Hamulites.

@c    26:22. These are the families of Juda, of which the whole number was
@c    seventy-six thousand five hundred.

@c    26:23. The sons of Issachar, by their kindreds:  Thola of whom is the
@c    family of the Tholaites:  Phua, of whom is the family of the Phuaites:

@c    26:24. Jasub, of whom is the family of the Jasubites:  Semran, of whom
@c    is the family of the Semranites.

@c    26:25. These are the kindreds of Issachar, whose number was sixty-four
@c    thousand three hundred.

@c    26:26. The sons of Zabulon by their kindreds:  Sared, of whom is the
@c    family of the Saredites:  Elon, of whom is the family of the Elonites:
@c    Jalel, of whom is the family of the Jalelites.

@c    26:27. These are the kindreds of Zabulon, whose number was sixty
@c    thousand five hundred.

@c    26:28. The sons of Joseph by their kindred, Manasses and Ephraim.

@c    26:29. Of Manasses was born Machir, of whom is the family of the
@c    Machirites.  Machir begot Galaad, of whom is the family of the
@c    Galaadites.

@c    26:30. Galaad had sons:  Jezer, of whom is the family of the Jezerites:
@c    and Helec, of whom is the family of the Helecites:

@c    26:31. And Asriel, of whom is the family of the Asrielites:  and Sechem,
@c    of whom is the family of the Sechemites:

@c    26:32. And Semida, of whom is the family of the Semidaites:  and Hepher,
@c    of whom is the family of the Hepherites.

@c    26:33. And Hepher was the father of Salphaad, who had no sons, but only
@c    daughters, whose names are these:  Maala, and Noa, and Hegla, and
@c    Melcha, and Thersa.

@c    26:34. These are the families of Manasses, and the number of them
@c    fifty-two thousand seven hundred.

@c    26:35. And the sons of Ephraim by their kindreds were these:  Suthala,
@c    of whom is the family of the Suthalaites:  Becher, of whom is the family
@c    of the Becherites:  Thehen, of whom is the family of the Thehenites.

@c    26:36. Now the son of Suthala was Heran, of whom is the family of the
@c    Heranites.

@c    26:37. These are the kindreds of the sons of Ephraim:  whose number was
@c    thirty-two thousand five hundred.

@c    26:38. These are the sons of Joseph by their families.  The sons of
@c    Benjamin in their kindreds:  Bela, of whom is the family of the
@c    Belaites:  Asbel, of whom is the family of the Asbelites:  Ahiram, of
@c    whom is the family of the Ahiramites:

@c    26:39. Supham, of whom is the family of the Suphamites:  Hupham, of whom
@c    is the family of the Huphamites.

@c    26:40. The sons of Bela:  Hered, and Noeman.  Of Hered, is the family of
@c    the Heredites:  of Noeman, the family of the Noemanites.

@c    26:41. These are the sons of Benjamin by their kindreds, whose number
@c    was forty-five thousand six hundred.

@c    26:42. The sons of Dan by their kindreds:  Suham, of whom is the family
@c    of the Suhamites:  These are the kindreds of Dan by their families.

@c    26:43. All were Suhamites, whose number was sixty-four thousand four
@c    hundred.

@c    26:44. The sons of Aser by their kindreds:  Jemna, of whom is the family
@c    of the Jemnaites:  Jessui, of whom is the family of the Jessuites:  Brie,
@c    of whom is the family of the Brieites.

@c    26:45. The sons of Brie:  Heber, of whom is the family of the Heberites:
@c    and Melchiel, of whom is the family of the Melchielites.

@c    26:46. And the name of the daughter of Aser, was Sara.

@c    26:47. These are the kindreds of the sons of Aser, and their number
@c    fifty-three thousand four hundred.

@c    26:48. The sons of Nephtali by their kindreds:  Jesiel, of whom is the
@c    family of the Jesielites:  Guni, of whom is the family of the Gunites:

@c    26:49. Jeser, of whom is the family of the Jeserites:  Sellem, of whom
@c    is the family of the Sellemites.

@c    26:50. These are the kindreds of the sons of Nephtali by their
@c    families:  whose number was forty-five thousand four hundred.

@c    26:51. This is the sum of the children of Israel, that were reckoned
@c    up, six hundred and one thousand seven hundred and thirty.

@c    26:52. And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying:

@c    26:53. To these shall the land be divided for their possessions
@c    according to the number of names.

@c    26:54. To the greater number thou shalt give a greater portion, and to
@c    the fewer a less:  to every one, as they have now been reckoned up,
@c    shall a possession be delivered:

@c    26:55. Yet so that by lot the land be divided to the tribe and
@c    families.

@c    26:56. Whatsoever shall fall by lot, that shall be taken by the more,
@c    or the fewer.

@c    26:57. This also is the number of the sons of Levi by their families:
@c    Gerson, of whom is the family of the Gersonites:  Caath, of whom is the
@c    family of the Caathites:  Merari, of whom is the family of the
@c    Merarites.

@c    26:58. These are the families of Levi:  The family of Lobni, the family
@c    of Hebroni, the family of Core.  Now Caath begot Amram:

@c    26:59. Who had to wife Jochabed the daughter of Levi, who was born to
@c    him in Egypt.  She bore to her husband Amram sons, Aaron and Moses, and
@c    Mary their sister.

@c    26:60. Of Aaron were born Nadab and Abiu, and Eleazar and Ithamar:

@c    26:61. Of whom Nadab and Abiu died, when they had offered the strange
@c    fire before the Lord.

@c    26:62. And all that were numbered, were twenty-three thousand males
@c    from one month old and upward:  for they were not reckoned up among the
@c    children of Israel, neither was a possession given to them with the
@c    rest.

@c    26:63. This is the number of the children of Israel, that were enrolled
@c    by Moses and Eleazar the priest, in the plains of Moab upon the Jordan,
@c    over against Jericho.

@c    26:64. Among whom there was not one of them that were numbered before
@c    by Moses and Aaron in the desert of Sinai.

@c    26:65. For the Lord had foretold that they should die in the
@c    wilderness.  And none remained of them, but Caleb the son of Jephone,
@c    and Josue the son of Nun.



@c    Numbers Chapter 27


@c    The law of inheritance.  Josue is appointed to succeed Moses.

@c    27:1. Then came the daughters of Salphaad, the son of Hepher, the son
@c    of Galaad, the son of Machir, the son of Manasses, who was the son of
@c    Joseph:  and their names are Maala, and Noa, and Hegla, and Melcha, and
@c    Thersa.

@c    27:2. And they stood before Moses and Eleazar the priest, and all the
@c    princes of the people at the door of the tabernacle of the covenant,
@c    and said:

@c    27:3. Our father died in the desert, and was not in the sedition, that
@c    was raised against the Lord under Core, but he died in his own sin:  and
@c    he had no male children.  Why is his name taken away out of his family,
@c    because he had no son?  Give us a possession among the kinsmen of our
@c    father.

@c    27:4. And Moses referred their cause to the judgment of the Lord.

@c    27:5. And the Lord said to him:

@c    27:6. The daughters of Salphaad demand a just thing:  Give them a
@c    possession among their father's kindred, and let them succeed him in
@c    his inheritance.

@c    27:7. And to the children of Israel thou shalt speak these things:

@c    27:8. When a man dieth without a son, his inheritance shall pass to his
@c    daughter.

@c    27:9. If he have no daughter, his brethren shall succeed him.

@c    27:10. And if he have no brethren, you shall give the inheritance to
@c    his father's brethren.

@c    27:11. But if he have no uncles by the father, the inheritance shall be
@c    given to them that are the next akin.  And this shall be to the children
@c    of Israel sacred by a perpetual law, as the Lord hath commanded Moses.

@c    27:12. The Lord also said to Moses:  Go up into this mountain Abarim,
@c    and view from thence the land which I will give to the children of
@c    Israel.

@c    27:13. And when thou shalt have seen it, thou also shalt go to thy
@c    people, as thy brother Aaron is gone:

@c    27:14. Because you offended me in the desert of Sin in the
@c    contradiction of the multitude, neither would you sanctify me before
@c    them at the waters.  These are the waters of contradiction in Cades of
@c    the desert of Sin.

@c    27:15. And Moses answered him:

@c    27:16. May the Lord the God of the spirits of all flesh provide a man,
@c    that may be over this multitude:

@c    27:17. And may go out and in before them, and may lead them out, or
@c    bring them in:  lest the people of the Lord be as sheep without a
@c    shepherd.

@c    27:18. And the Lord said to him:  take Josue the son of Nun, a man in
@c    whom is the Spirit, and put thy hand upon him.

@c    27:19. And he shall stand before Eleazar the priest and all the
@c    multitude:

@c    27:20. And thou shalt give him precepts in the sight of all, and part
@c    of thy glory, that all the congregation of the children of Israel may
@c    hear him.

@c    27:21. If any thing be to be done, Eleazar the priest shall consult the
@c    Lord for him.  He and all the children of Israel with him, and the rest
@c    of the multitude shall go out and go in at his word.

@c    27:22. Moses did as the Lord had commanded.  And, when he had taken
@c    Josue, he set him before Eleazar the priest, and all the assembly of
@c    the people,

@c    27:23. And laying his hands on his head, he repeated all things that
@c    the Lord had commanded.



@c    Numbers Chapter 28


@c    Sacrifices are appointed as well for every day as for sabbaths, and
@c    other festivals.

@c    28:1. The Lord also said to Moses:

@c    28:2. Command the children of Israel, and thou shalt say to them:  Offer
@c    ye my oblation and my bread, and burnt sacrifice of most sweet odour,
@c    in their due seasons.

@c    28:3. These are the sacrifices which you shall offer:  Two lambs of a
@c    year old without blemish every day for the perpetual holocaust:

@c    28:4. One you shall offer in the mornings, and the other in the
@c    evening:

@c    28:5. And the tenth part of an ephi of flour, which shall be tempered
@c    with the, purest oil, of the measure of the fourth part of a hin.

@c    28:6. It is the continual holocaust which you offered in mount Sinai
@c    for a most sweet odour of a sacrifice by fire to the Lord.

@c    28:7. And for a libation you shall offer of wine the fourth part of a
@c    hin for every lamb in the sanctuary of the Lord.

@c    28:8. And you shall offer the other lamb in like manner in the evening
@c    according to all the rites of the morning sacrifice, and of the
@c    libations thereof, an oblation of most sweet odour to the Lord.

@c    28:9. And on the sabbath day you shall offer two lambs of a year old
@c    without blemish, and two tenths of flour tempered with oil in
@c    sacrifice, and the libations,

@c    28:10. Which regularly are poured out every sabbath for the perpetual
@c    holocaust.

@c    28:11. And on the first day of the month you shall offer a holocaust to
@c    the Lord, two calves of the herd, one ram, and seven lambs of a year
@c    old, without blemish,

@c    28:12. And three tenths of flour tempered with oil in sacrifice for
@c    every calf:  and two tenths of flour tempered with oil for every ram:

@c    28:13. And the tenth of a tenth of flour tempered with oil in sacrifice
@c    for every lamb.  It is a holocaust of most sweet odour and an offering
@c    by fire to the Lord.

@c    28:14. And these shall be the libations of wine that are to be poured
@c    out for every victim:  Half a hin for every calf, a third for a ram, and
@c    a fourth for a lamb.  This shall be the holocaust for every month, as
@c    they succeed one another in the course of the year.

@c    28:15. A buck goat also shall be offered to the Lord for a sin offering
@c    over and above the perpetual holocaust with its libations.

@c    28:16. And in the first month, on the four tenth day of the month,
@c    shall be the phase of the Lord,

@c    28:17. And on the fifteenth day the solemn feast:  seven days shall they
@c    eat unleavened bread.

@c    28:18. And the first day of them shall be venerable and holy:  you shall
@c    not do any servile work therein.

@c    28:19. And you shall offer a burnt sacrifice a holocaust to the Lord,
@c    two calves of the herd, one ram, seven lambs of a year old, without
@c    blemish:

@c    28:20. And for the sacrifice of every one three tenths of flour which
@c    shall be tempered with oil to every calf, and two tenths to every ram,

@c    28:21. And the tenth of a tenth, to every lamb, that is to say, to all
@c    the seven lambs:

@c    28:22. And one buck goat for sin, to make atonement for you,

@c    28:23. Besides the morning holocaust which you shall always offer.

@c    28:24. So shall you do every day of the seven days for the food of the
@c    fire, and for a most sweet odour to the Lord, which shall rise from the
@c    holocaust, and from the libations of each.

@c    28:25. The seventh day also shall be most solemn and holy unto you, you
@c    shall do no servile work therein.

@c    28:26. The day also of firstfruits, when after the weeks are
@c    accomplished, you shall offer new fruits to the Lord, shall be
@c    venerable and holy:  you shall do no servile work therein.

@c    28:27. And you shall offer a holocaust for a most sweet odour to the
@c    Lord, two calves of the herd, one ram, and seven lambs of a year old,
@c    without blemish:

@c    28:28. And in the sacrifices of them three tenths of flour tempered
@c    with oil to every calf, two to every ram,

@c    28:29. The tenth of a tenth to every lamb, which in all are seven
@c    lambs:  a buck goat also,

@c    28:30. Which is slain for expiation:  besides the perpetual holocaust
@c    and the libations thereof.

@c    28:31. You shall offer them all without blemish with their libations.



@c    Numbers Chapter 29


@c    Sacrifices for the festivals of the seventh month.

@c    29:1. The first day also of the seventh month shall be venerable and
@c    holy unto you; you shall do no servile work therein, because it is the
@c    day of the sounding and of trumpets.

@c    29:2. And you shall offer a holocaust for a most sweet odour to the
@c    Lord, one calf of the herd, one ram and seven lambs of a year old,
@c    without blemish.

@c    29:3. And for their sacrifices, three tenths of flour tempered with oil
@c    to every calf, two tenths to a ram,

@c    29:4. One tenth to a lamb, which in all are seven lambs:

@c    29:5. And a buck goat for sin, which is offered for the expiation of
@c    the people,

@c    29:6. Besides the holocaust of the first day of the month with the
@c    sacrifices thereof, and the perpetual holocaust with the accustomed
@c    libations.  With the same ceremonies you shall offer a burnt sacrifice
@c    for a most sweet odour to the Lord.

@c    29:7. The tenth day also of this seventh month shall be holy and
@c    venerable unto you, and you shall afflict your souls; you shall do no
@c    servile work therein.

@c    29:8. And you shall offer a holocaust to the Lord for a most sweet
@c    odour, one calf of the herd, one ram, and seven lambs of a year old,
@c    without blemish:

@c    29:9. And for their sacrifices, three tenths of flour tempered with oil
@c    to every calf, two tenths to a ram,

@c    29:10. The tenth of a tenth to every lamb, which are in all seven
@c    lambs:

@c    29:11. And a buck goat for sin, besides the things that are wont to be
@c    offered for sin, for expiation, and for the perpetual holocaust with
@c    their sacrifice and libations.

@c    29:12. And on the fifteenth day of the seventh month, which shall be
@c    unto you holy and venerable, you shall do no servile work, but shall
@c    celebrate a solemnity to the Lord seven days.

@c    29:13. And you shall offer a holocaust for a most sweet odour to the
@c    Lord, thirteen calves of the herd, two rams, and fourteen lambs of a
@c    year old, without blemish:

@c    29:14. And for their libations three tenths of flour tempered with oil
@c    to every calf, being in all thirteen calves:  and two tenths to each
@c    ram, being two rams,

@c    29:15. And the tenth of a tenth to every lamb, being in all fourteen
@c    lambs:

@c    29:16. And a buck goat for sin, besides the perpetual holocaust, and
@c    the sacrifice and the libation thereof.

@c    29:17. On the second day you shall offer twelve calves of the herd, two
@c    rams and fourteen lambs of a year old, without blemish:

@c    29:18. And the sacrifices and the libations for every one, for the
@c    calves and for the rams and for the lambs you shall duly celebrate:

@c    29:19. And a buck goat for a sin offering besides the perpetual
@c    holocaust, and the sacrifice and the libation thereof.

@c    29:20. The third day you shall offer eleven calves, two rams, and
@c    fourteen lambs of a year old, without blemish:

@c    29:21. And the sacrifices and the libations of every one for the calves
@c    and for the rams and for the lambs you shall offer according to the
@c    rite:

@c    29:22. And a buck goat for sin, besides the perpetual holocaust, and
@c    the sacrifice, and the libation thereof.

@c    29:23. The fourth day you shall offer ten calves, two rams, and
@c    fourteen lambs of a year old, without blemish:

@c    29:24. And the sacrifices and the libations of every one for the calves
@c    and for the rams and for the lambs you shall celebrate in right manner:

@c    29:25. And a buck goat for sin, besides the perpetual holocaust, and
@c    the sacrifice and the libation thereof.

@c    29:26. The fifth day you shall offer nine calves, two rams, and
@c    fourteen lambs of a year old, without blemish:

@c    29:27. And the sacrifices and the libations of every one for the calves
@c    and for the rams and for the lambs you shall celebrate according to the
@c    rite:

@c    29:28. And a buck goat for sin, besides the perpetual holocaust, and
@c    the sacrifice and the libation thereof.

@c    29:29. The sixth day you shall offer eight calves, two rams, and
@c    fourteen lambs of a year old, without blemish:

@c    29:30. And the sacrifices and the libations of every one for the calves
@c    and for the rams and for the lambs you shall celebrate according to the
@c    rite:

@c    29:31. And a buck goat for sin, besides the perpetual holocaust, and
@c    the sacrifice and the libation thereof.

@c    29:32. The seventh day you shall offer seven calves and two rams, and
@c    fourteen lambs of a year old, without blemish:

@c    29:33. And the sacrifices and the libations of every one for the calves
@c    and for the rams and for the lambs you shall celebrate according to the
@c    rite:

@c    29:34. And a buck goat for sin, besides the perpetual holocaust, and
@c    the sacrifice and the libation thereof.

@c    29:35. On the eighth day, which is most solemn, you shall do no servile
@c    work:

@c    29:36. But you shall offer a holocaust for a most sweet odour to the
@c    Lord, one calf, one ram, and seven lambs of a year old, without
@c    blemish:

@c    29:37. And the sacrifices and the libations of every one for the calves
@c    and for the rams and for the lambs you shall celebrate according to the
@c    rite:

@c    29:38. And a buck goat for sin, besides the perpetual holocaust, and
@c    the sacrifice and the libation thereof.

@c    29:39. These things shall you offer to the Lord in your solemnities:
@c    besides your vows and voluntary oblations for holocaust, for sacrifice,
@c    for libation, and for victims of peace offerings.



@c    Numbers Chapter 30


@c    Of vows and oaths:  and their obligation.

@c    30:1. And Moses told the children of Israel all that the Lord had
@c    commanded him:

@c    30:2. And he said to the princes of the tribes of the children of
@c    Israel:  This is the word that the Lord hath commanded:

@c    30:3. If any man make a vow to the Lord, or bind himself by an oath:  he
@c    shall not make his word void but shall fulfil all that he promised.

@c    30:4. If a woman vow any thing, and bind herself by an oath, being in
@c    her father's house, and but yet a girl in age:  if her father knew the
@c    vow that she hath promised, and the oath wherewith she hath bound her
@c    soul, and held his peace, she shall be bound by the vow:

@c    30:5. Whatsoever she promised and swore, she shall fulfil in deed.

@c    30:6. But if her father, immediately as soon as he heard it, gainsaid
@c    it, both her vows and her oaths shall be void, neither shall she be
@c    bound to what she promised, because her father hath gainsaid it.

@c    30:7. If she have a husband, and shall vow any thing, and the word once
@c    going out of her mouth shall bind her soul by an oath,

@c    30:8. The day that her husband shall hear it, and not gainsay it, she
@c    shall be bound to the vow, and shall give whatsoever she promised.

@c    30:9. But if as soon as he heareth he gainsay it, and make her promises
@c    and the words wherewith she had bound her soul of no effect:  the Lord
@c    will forgive her.

@c    30:10. The widow, and she that is divorced, shall fulfil whatsoever
@c    they vow.

@c    30:11. If the wife in the house of her husband, hath bound herself by
@c    vow and by oath,

@c    30:12. If her husband hear, and hold his peace, and doth not disallow
@c    the promise, she shall accomplish whatsoever she had promised.

@c    30:13. But if forthwith he gainsay it, she shall not be bound by the
@c    promise:  because her husband gainsaid it, and the Lord will be merciful
@c    to her.

@c    30:14. If she vow and bind herself by oath, to afflict her soul by
@c    fasting, or abstinence from other things, it shall depend on the will
@c    of her husband, whether she shall do it, or not do it.

@c    30:15. But if the husband hearing it hold his peace, and defer the
@c    declaring his mind till another day:  whatsoever she had vowed and
@c    promised, she shall fulfil:  because immediately as he heard it, he held
@c    his peace.

@c    30:16. But if he gainsay it after that he knew it, he shall bear her
@c    iniquity.

@c    30:17. These are the laws which the Lord appointed to Moses between the
@c    husband and the wife, between the father and the daughter that is as
@c    yet but a girl in age, or that abideth in her father's house.



@c    Numbers Chapter 31


@c    The Madianites are slain for having drawn the people of Israel into
@c    sin.  The dividing of the booty.

@c    31:1. And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying:

@c    31:2. Revenge first the children of Israel on the Madianites, and so
@c    thou shalt be gathered to thy people.

@c    31:3. And Moses forthwith said:  Arm of you men to fight, who may take
@c    the revenge of the Lord on the Madianites.

@c    31:4. Let a thousand men be chosen out of every tribe of Israel to be
@c    sent to the war.

@c    31:5. And they gave a thousand of every tribe, that is to say, twelve
@c    thousand men well appointed for battle.

@c    31:6. And Moses sent them with Phinees the son of Eleazar the priest,
@c    and he delivered to him the holy vessels, and the trumpets to sound.

@c    31:7. And when they had fought against the Madianites and had overcome
@c    them, they slew all the men.

@c    31:8. And their kings Evi, and Recem, and Sur, and Hur, and Rebe, five
@c    princes of the nation:  Balaam also the son of Beor they killed with the
@c    sword.

@c    31:9. And they took their women, and their children captives, and all
@c    their cattle, and all their goods:  and all their possessions they
@c    plundered:

@c    31:10. And all their cities, and their villages, and castles, they
@c    burned.

@c    31:11. And they carried away the booty, and all that they had taken
@c    both of men and of beasts.

@c    31:12. And they brought them to Moses, and Eleazar the priest, and to
@c    all the multitude of the children of Israel.  But the rest of the things
@c    for use they carried to the camp on the plains of Moab, beside the
@c    Jordan over against Jericho.

@c    31:13. And Moses and Eleazar the priest and all the princes of the
@c    synagogue went forth to meet them without the camp.

@c    31:14. And Moses being angry with the chief officers of the army, the
@c    tribunes, and the centurions that were come from the battle,

@c    31:15. Said:  Why have you saved the women?

@c    31:16. Are not these they, that deceived the children of Israel by the
@c    counsel of Balaam, and made you transgress against the Lord by the sin
@c    of Phogor, for which also the people was punished?

@c    The sin of Phogor. . .The sin committed in the worship of Beelphegor.

@c    31:17. Therefore kill all that are of the male sex, even of the
@c    children:  and put to death the women, that have carnally known men.

@c    Of children. . .Women and children, ordinarily speaking, were not to be
@c    killed in war, Deut. 20.14.  But the great Lord of life and death was
@c    pleased to order it otherwise in the present case, in detestation of
@c    the wickedness of this people, who by the counsel of Balaam, had sent
@c    their women among the Israelites on purpose to draw them from God.

@c    31:18. But the girls, and all the women that are virgins save for
@c    yourselves:

@c    31:19. And stay without the camp seven days.  He that hath killed a man,
@c    or touched one that is killed, shall be purified the third day and the
@c    seventh day.

@c    31:20. And of all the spoil, every garment, or vessel, or any thing
@c    made for use, of the skins, or hair of goats, or of wood, shall be
@c    purified.

@c    31:21. Eleazar also the priest spoke to the men of the army, that had
@c    fought, in this manner:  This is the ordinance of the law, which the
@c    Lord hath commanded Moses:

@c    31:22. Gold, and silver, and brass, and iron, and lead, and tin,

@c    31:23. And all that may pass through the fire, shall be purified by
@c    fire, but whatsoever cannot abide the fire, shall be sanctified with
@c    the water of expiation:

@c    31:24. And you shall wash your garments the seventh day, and being
@c    purified, you shall afterwards enter into the camp.

@c    31:25. And the Lord said to Moses:

@c    31:26. Take the sum of the things that were taken both of man and
@c    beast, thou and Eleazar the priest and the princes of the multitude:

@c    31:27. And thou shalt divide the spoil equally, between them that
@c    fought and went out to the war, and between the rest of the multitude.

@c    31:28. And thou shalt separate a portion to the Lord from them that
@c    fought and were in the battle, one soul of five hundred as well of
@c    persons as of oxen and asses and sheep.

@c    31:29. And thou shalt give it to Eleazar the priest, because they are
@c    the firstfruits of the Lord.

@c    31:30. Out of the moiety also of the children of Israel thou shalt take
@c    the fiftieth head of persons, and of oxen, and asses, and sheep, and of
@c    all beasts, and thou shalt give them to the Levites that watch in the
@c    charge of the tabernacle of the Lord.

@c    31:31. And Moses and Eleazar did as the Lord had commanded.

@c    31:32. And the spoil which the army had taken, was six hundred
@c    seventy-five thousand sheep,

@c    31:33. Seventy-two thousand oxen,

@c    31:34. Sixty-one thousand asses:

@c    31:35. And thirty-two thousand persons of the female sex, that had not
@c    known men.

@c    31:36. And one half was given to them that had been in the battle, to
@c    wit, three hundred thirty-seven thousand five hundred sheep:

@c    31:37. Out of which, for the portion of the Lord, were reckoned six
@c    hundred seventy five sheep.

@c    31:38. And out of the thirty-six thousand oxen, seventy-two oxen:

@c    31:39. Out of the thirty thousand five hundred asses, sixty-one asses:

@c    31:40. Out of the sixteen thousand persons, there fell to the portion
@c    of the Lord, thirty-two souls.

@c    31:41. And Moses delivered the number of the firstfruits of the Lord to
@c    Eleazar the priest, as had been commanded him,

@c    31:42. Out of the half of the children of Israel, which he had
@c    separated for them that had been in the battle.

@c    31:43. But out of the half that fell to the rest of the multitude, that
@c    is to say, out of the three hundred thirty-seven thousand five hundred
@c    sheep,

@c    31:44. And out of the thirty-six thousand oxen,

@c    31:45. And out of the thirty thousand five hundred asses,

@c    31:46. And out of the sixteen thousand persons,

@c    31:47. Moses took the fiftieth head, and gave it to the Levites that
@c    watched in the tabernacle of the Lord, as the Lord had commanded.

@c    31:48. And when the commanders of the army, and the tribunes and
@c    centurions were come to Moses, they said:

@c    31:49. We thy servants have reckoned up the number of the fighting men,
@c    whom we had under our hand, and not so much as one was wanting.

@c    31:50. Therefore we offer as gifts to the Lord what gold every one of
@c    us could find in the booty, in garters and tablets, rings and
@c    bracelets, and chains, that thou mayst pray to the Lord for us.

@c    31:51. And Moses and Eleazar the priest received all the gold in divers
@c    kinds,

@c    31:52. In weight sixteen thousand seven hundred and fifty sicles, from
@c    the tribunes and from the centurions.

@c    31:53. For that which every one had taken in the booty was his own.

@c    31:54. And that which was received they brought into the tabernacle of
@c    the testimony, for a memorial of the children of Israel before the
@c    Lord.



@c    Numbers Chapter 32


@c    The tribes of Ruben and Gad, and half of the tribe of Manasses, receive
@c    their inheritance on the east side of Jordan, upon conditions approved
@c    of by Moses.

@c    32:1. And the sons of Ruben and Gad had many flocks of cattle, and
@c    their substance in beasts was infinite.  And when they saw the lands of
@c    Jazer and Galaad fit for feeding cattle,

@c    32:2. They came to Moses and Eleazar the priest, and the princes of the
@c    multitude, and said:

@c    32:3. Ataroth, and Dibon, and Jazer, and Nemra, Hesebon, and Eleale,
@c    and Saban, and Nebo, and Beon,

@c    32:4. The land, which the Lord hath conquered in the sight of the
@c    children of Israel, is a very fertile soil for the feeding of beasts:
@c    and we thy servants have very much cattle:

@c    32:5. And we pray thee, if we have found favour in thy sight, that thou
@c    give it to us thy servants in possession, and make us not pass over the
@c    Jordan.

@c    32:6. And Moses answered them:  What, shall your brethren go to fight,
@c    and will you sit here?

@c    32:7. Why do ye overturn the minds of the children of Israel, that they
@c    may not dare to pass into the place which the Lord hath given them?

@c    32:8. Was it not thus your fathers did, when I sent from Cadesbarne to
@c    view the land?

@c    32:9. And when they were come as far as the valley of the cluster,
@c    having viewed all the country, they overturned the hearts of the
@c    children of Israel, that they should not enter into the coasts, which
@c    the Lord gave them.

@c    32:10. And he swore in his anger, saying:

@c    32:11. If these men, that came up out of Egypt, from twenty years old
@c    and upward, shall see the land, which I promised with an oath to
@c    Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob:  because they would not follow me,

@c    32:12. Except Caleb the son of Jephone the Cenezite, and Josue the son
@c    of Nun:  these have fulfilled my will.

@c    32:13. And the Lord being angry against Israel, led them about through
@c    the desert forty years, until the whole generation, that had done evil
@c    in his sight, was consumed.

@c    32:14. And behold, said he, you are risen up instead of your fathers,
@c    the increase and offspring of sinful men, to augment the fury of the
@c    Lord against Israel.

@c    32:15. For if you will not follow him, he will leave the people in the
@c    wilderness, and you shall be the cause of the destruction of all.

@c    32:16. But they coming near, said:  We will make sheepfolds, and stalls
@c    for our cattle, and strong cities for our children:

@c    32:17. And we ourselves will go armed and ready for battle before the
@c    children of Israel, until we bring them in unto their places.  Our
@c    little ones, and all we have, shall be in walled cities, for fear of
@c    the ambushes of the inhabitants.

@c    32:18. We will not return into our houses until the children of Israel
@c    possess their inheritance:

@c    32:19. Neither will we seek any thing beyond the Jordan, because we
@c    have already our possession on the east side thereof,

@c    32:20. And Moses said to them:  If you do what you promise, go on well
@c    appointed for war before the Lord:

@c    32:21. And let every fighting man pass over the Jordan, until the Lord
@c    overthrow his enemies:

@c    32:22. And all the land be brought under him, then shall you be
@c    blameless before the Lord and before Israel, and you shall obtain the
@c    countries that you desire, before the Lord.

@c    32:23. But if you do not what you say, no man can doubt but you sin
@c    against God:  and know ye, that your sin shall overtake you.

@c    32:24. Build therefore cities for your children, and folds and stalls
@c    for your sheep and beasts, and accomplish what you have promised.

@c    32:25. And the children of Gad and Ruben said to Moses:  We are thy
@c    servants, we will do what my lord commandeth.

@c    32:26. We will leave our children, and our wives and sheep and cattle,
@c    in the cities of Galaad:

@c    32:27. And we thy servants all well appointed will march on to the war,
@c    as thou, my lord, speakest.

@c    32:28. Moses therefore commanded Eleazar the priest, and Josue the son
@c    of Nun, and the princes of the families of all the tribes of Israel,
@c    and said to them:

@c    32:29. If the children of Gad, and the children of Ruben pass with you
@c    over the Jordan, all armed for war before the Lord, and the land be
@c    made subject to you:  give them Galaad in possession.

@c    32:30. But if they will not pass armed with you into the land of
@c    Chanaan, let them receive places to dwell in among you.

@c    32:31. And the children of Gad, and the children of Ruben answered:  As
@c    the Lord hath spoken to his servants, so will we do:

@c    32:32. We will go armed before the Lord into the land of Chanaan, and
@c    we confess that we have already received our possession beyond the
@c    Jordan.

@c    32:33. Moses therefore gave to the children of Gad and of Ruben, and to
@c    the half tribe of Manasses the son of Joseph, the kingdom of Sehon king
@c    of the Amorrhites, and the kingdom of Og king of Basan, and their land
@c    and the cities thereof round about.

@c    32:34. And the sons of Gad built Dibon, and Ataroth, and Aroer,

@c    32:35. And Etroth, and Sophan, and Jazer, and Jegbaa,

@c    32:36. And Bethnemra, and Betharan, fenced cities, and folds for their
@c    cattle.

@c    32:37. But the children of Ruben built Hesebon, and Eleale, and
@c    Cariathaim,

@c    32:38. And Nabo, and Baalmeon (their names being changed) and Sabama:
@c    giving names to the cities which they had built.

@c    32:39. Moreover the children of Machir, the son of Manasses, went into
@c    Galaad, and wasted it, cutting off the Amorrhites, the inhabitants
@c    thereof.

@c    32:40. And Moses gave the land of Galaad to Machir the son of Manasses,
@c    and he dwelt in it.

@c    32:41. And Jair the son of Manasses went, and took the villages
@c    thereof, and he called them Havoth Jair, that is to say, the villages
@c    of Jair.

@c    32:42. Nobe also went, and took Canath with the villages thereof:  and
@c    he called it by his own name, Nobe.



@c    Numbers Chapter 33


@c    The mansions or journeys of the children of Israel towards the land of
@c    promise.

@c    33:1. These are the mansions of the children of Israel, who went out of
@c    Egypt by their troops under the conduct of Moses and Aaron,

@c    The mansions. . .These mansions, or journeys of the children of Israel
@c    from Egypt to the land of promise, were figures, according to the
@c    fathers, of the steps and degrees by which Christians leaving sin are
@c    to advance from virtue to virtue, till they come to the heavenly
@c    mansions, after this life, to see and enjoy God.

@c    33:2. Which Moses wrote down according to the places of their
@c    encamping, which they changed by the commandment of the Lord.

@c    33:3. Now the children of Israel departed from Ramesses the first
@c    month, on the fifteenth day of the first month, the day after the
@c    phase, with a mighty hand, in the sight of all the Egyptians,

@c    33:4. Who were burying their firstborn, whom the Lord had slain (upon
@c    their gods also he had executed vengeance,)

@c    33:5. And they camped in Soccoth.

@c    33:6. And from Soccoth they came into Etham, which is in the uttermost
@c    borders of the wilderness.

@c    33:7. Departing from thence they came over against Phihahiroth, which
@c    looketh towards Beelsephon, and they camped before Magdalum.

@c    33:8. And departing from Phihahiroth, they passed through the midst of
@c    the sea into the wilderness:  and having marched three days through the
@c    desert of Etham, they camped in Mara.

@c    33:9. And departing from Mara, they came into Elim, where there were
@c    twelve fountains of waters, and seventy palm trees:  and there they
@c    camped.

@c    33:10. But departing from thence also, they pitched their tents by the
@c    Red Sea.  And departing from the Red Sea,

@c    33:11. They camped in the desert of Sin.

@c    33:12. And they removed from thence, and came to Daphca.

@c    33:13. And departing from Daphca, they camped in Alus.

@c    33:14. And departing from Alus, they pitched their tents in Raphidim,
@c    where the people wanted water to drink.

@c    33:15. And departing from Raphidim, they camped in the desert of Sinai.

@c    33:16. But departing also from the desert of Sinai, they came to the
@c    graves of lust.

@c    33:17. And departing from the graves of lust, they camped in Haseroth.

@c    33:18. And from Haseroth they came to Rethma.

@c    33:19. And departing from Rethma, they camped in Remmomphares.

@c    33:20. And they departed from thence and came to Lebna.

@c    33:21. Removing from Lebna they camped in Ressa.

@c    33:22. And departing from Ressa, they came to Ceelatha.

@c    33:23. And they removed from thence and camped in the mountain Sepher.

@c    33:24. Departing from the mountain Sepher, they came to Arada,

@c    33:25. From thence they went and camped in Maceloth.

@c    33:26. And departing from Maceloth, they came to Thahath.

@c    33:27. Removing from Thahath they camped in Thare.

@c    33:28. And they departed from thence, and pitched their tents in
@c    Methca.

@c    33:29. And removing from Methca, they camped in Hesmona.

@c    33:30. And departing from Hesmona, they came to Moseroth.

@c    33:31. And removing from Moseroth, they camped in Benejaacan.

@c    33:32. And departing from Benejaacan, they came to mount Gadgad.

@c    33:33. From thence they went and camped in Jetebatha.

@c    33:34. And from Jetebatha they came to Hebrona.

@c    33:35. And departing from Hebrona, they camped in Asiongaber.

@c    33:36. They removed from thence and came into the desert of Sin, which
@c    is Cades.

@c    33:37. And departing from Cades, they camped in mount Hor, in the
@c    uttermost borders of the land of Edom.

@c    33:38. And Aaron the priest went up into mount Hor at the commandment
@c    of the Lord:  and there he died in the fortieth year of the coming forth
@c    of the children of Israel out of Egypt, the fifth month, the first day
@c    of the month,

@c    33:39. When he was a hundred and twenty-three years old.

@c    33:40. And king Arad the Chanaanite, who dwelt towards the south, heard
@c    that the children of Israel were come to the land of Chanaan.

@c    33:41. And they departed from mount Hor, and camped in Salmona.

@c    33:42. From whence they removed and came to Phunon.

@c    33:43. And departing from Phunon, they camped in Oboth.

@c    33:44. And from Oboth they came to Ijeabarim, which is in the borders
@c    of the Moabites.

@c    33:45. And departing from Ijeabarim they pitched their tents in
@c    Dibongab.

@c    33:46. From thence they went and camped in Helmondeblathaim.

@c    33:47. And departing from Helmondeblathaim, they came to the mountains
@c    of Abarim over against Nabo.

@c    33:48. And departing from the mountains of Abarim, they passed to the
@c    plains of Moab, by the Jordan, over against Jericho.

@c    33:49. And there they camped from Bethsimoth even to Ablesatim in the
@c    plains of the Moabites,

@c    33:50. Where the Lord said to Moses:

@c    33:51. Command the children of Israel, and say to them:  When you shall
@c    have passed over the Jordan, entering into the land of Chanaan,

@c    33:52. Destroy all the inhabitants of that land:  Beat down their
@c    pillars, and break in pieces their statues, and waste all their high
@c    places,

@c    33:53. Cleansing the land, and dwelling in it.  For I have given it you
@c    for a possession.

@c    33:54. And you shall divide it among you by lot.  To the more you shall
@c    give a larger part, and to the fewer a lesser.  To every one as the lot
@c    shall fall, so shall the inheritance be given.  The possession shall be
@c    divided by the tribes and the families.

@c    33:55. But if you will not kill the inhabitants of the land:  they that
@c    remain, shall be unto you as nails in your eyes, and spears in your
@c    sides, and they shall be your adversaries in the land of your
@c    habitation.

@c    33:56. And whatsoever I had thought to do to them, I will do to you.



@c    Numbers Chapter 34


@c    The limits of Chanaan; with the names of the men that make the division
@c    of it.

@c    34:1. And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying:

@c    34:2. Command the children of Israel, and thou shalt say to them:  When
@c    you are entered into the land of Chanaan, and it shall be fallen into
@c    your possession by lot, it shall be bounded by these limits:

@c    34:3. The south side shall begin from the wilderness of Sin, which is
@c    by Edom:  and shall have the most salt sea for its furthest limits
@c    eastward:

@c    The most salt sea. . .The lake of Sodom, otherwise called the Dead Sea.

@c    34:4. Which limits shall go round on the south side by the ascent of
@c    the Scorpion and so into Senna, and reach toward the south as far as
@c    Cadesbarne, from whence the frontiers shall go out to the town called
@c    Adar, and shall reach as far as Asemona.

@c    The Scorpion. . .A mountain so called from having a great number of
@c    scorpions.

@c    34:5. And the limits shall fetch a compass from Asemona to the torrent
@c    of Egypt, and shall end in the shore of the great sea.

@c    The great sea. . .The Mediterranean.

@c    34:6. And the west side shall begin from the great sea, and the same
@c    shall be the end thereof.

@c    34:7. But toward the north side the borders shall begin from the great
@c    sea, reaching to the most high mountain,

@c    The most high mountain. . .Libanus.

@c    34:8. From which they shall come to Emath, as far as the borders of
@c    Sedada:

@c    34:9. And the limits shall go as far as Zephrona, and the village of
@c    Enan.  These shall be the borders on the north side.

@c    34:10. From thence they shall mark out the grounds towards the east
@c    side from the village of Enan unto Sephama.

@c    34:11. And from Sephama the bounds shall go down to Rebla over against
@c    the fountain of Daphnis:  from thence they shall come eastward to the
@c    sea of Cenereth,

@c    Sea of Cenereth. . .This is the sea of Galilee, illustrated by the
@c    miracles of our Lord.

@c    34:12. And shall reach as far as the Jordan, and at the last shall be
@c    closed in by the most salt sea.  This shall be your land with its
@c    borders round about.

@c    34:13. And Moses commanded the children of Israel, saying:  This shall
@c    be the land which you shall possess by lot, and which the Lord hath
@c    commanded to be given to the nine tribes, and to the half tribe.

@c    34:14. For the tribe of the children of Ruben by their families, and
@c    the tribe of the children of Gad according to the number of their
@c    kindreds, and half of the tribe of Manasses,

@c    34:15. That is, two tribes and a half, have received their portion
@c    beyond the Jordan over against Jericho at the east side.

@c    34:16. And the Lord said to Moses:

@c    34:17. These are the names of the men, that shall divide the land unto
@c    you:  Eleazar the priest, and Josue the son of Nun,

@c    34:18. And one prince of every tribe,

@c    34:19. Whose names are these:  Of the tribe of Juda, Caleb the son of
@c    Jephone.

@c    34:20. Of the tribe of Simeon, Samuel the son of Ammiud.

@c    34:21. Of the tribe of Benjamin, Elidad the son of Chaselon.

@c    34:22. Of the tribe of the children of Dan, Bocci the son of Jogli.

@c    34:23. Of the children of Joseph of the tribe of Manasses, Hanniel the
@c    son of Ephod.

@c    34:24. Of the tribe of Ephraim, Camuel the son of Sephtan.

@c    34:25. Of the tribe of Zabulon, Elisaphan the son of Pharnach.

@c    34:26. Of the tribe of Issachar, Phaltiel the prince, the son of Ozan.

@c    34:27. Of the tribe of Aser, Ahiud the son of Salomi.

@c    34:28. Of the tribe of Nephtali:  Phedael the son of Ammiud.

@c    34:29. These are they Whom the Lord hath commanded to divide the land
@c    of Chanaan to the children of Israel.



@c    Numbers Chapter 35


@c    Cities are appointed for the Levites.  Of which six are to be the cities
@c    of refuge.

@c    35:1. And the Lord spoke these things also to Moses in the plains of
@c    Moab by the Jordan, over against Jericho:

@c    35:2. Command the children of Israel that they give to the Levites out
@c    of their possessions,

@c    35:3. Cities to dwell in, and their suburbs round about:  that they may
@c    abide in the towns, and the suburbs may be for them cattle and beasts:

@c    35:4. Which suburbs shall reach from the walls of the cities outward, a
@c    thousand paces on every side:

@c    35:5. Toward the east shall be two thousand cubits:  and toward the
@c    south in like manner shall be two thousand cubits:  toward the sea also,
@c    which looketh to the west, shall be the same extent:  and the north side
@c    shall be bounded with the like limits.  And the cities shall be in the
@c    midst, and the suburbs without.

@c    35:6. And among the cities, which you shall give to the Levites, six
@c    shall be separated for refuge to fugitives, that he who hath shed blood
@c    may flee to them:  and besides these there shall be other forty-two
@c    cities,

@c    35:7. That is, in all forty-eight with their suburbs.

@c    35:8. And of these cities which shall be given out of the possessions
@c    of the children of Israel, from them that have more, more shall be
@c    taken:  and from them that have less, fewer.  Each shall give towns to
@c    the Levites according to the extent of their inheritance.

@c    35:9. The Lord said to Moses:

@c    35:10. Speak to the children of Israel, and thou shalt say to them:
@c    When you shall have passed over the Jordan into the land of Chanaan,

@c    35:11. Determine what cities shall be for the refuge of fugitives, who
@c    have shed blood against their will.

@c    35:12. And when the fugitive shall be in them, the kinsman of him that
@c    is slain may not have power to kill him, until he stand before the
@c    multitude, and his cause be judged.

@c    35:13. And of those cities, that are separated for the refuge of
@c    fugitives,

@c    35:14. Three shall be beyond the Jordan, and three in the land of
@c    Chanaan,

@c    35:15. As well for the children of Israel as for strangers and
@c    sojourners, that he may flee to them, who hath shed blood against his
@c    will.

@c    35:16. If any man strike with iron, and he die that was struck:  he
@c    shall be guilty of murder, and he himself shall die.

@c    35:17. If he throw a stone, and he that is struck die:  he shall be
@c    punished in the same manner.

@c    35:18. If he that is struck with wood die:  he shall be revenged by the
@c    blood of him that struck him.

@c    35:19. The kinsman of him that was slain, shall kill the murderer:  as
@c    soon as he apprehendeth him, he shall kill him.

@c    35:20. If through hatred any one push a man, or fling any thing at him
@c    with ill design:

@c    35:21. Or being his enemy, strike him with his hand, and he die:  the
@c    striker shall be guilty of murder:  the kinsman of him that was slain as
@c    soon as he findeth him, shall kill him.

@c    35:22. But if by chance medley, and without hatred,

@c    35:23. And enmity, he do any of these things,

@c    35:24. And this be proved in the hearing of the people, and the cause
@c    be debated between him that struck, and the next of kin:

@c    35:25. The innocent shall be delivered from the hand of the revenger,
@c    and shall be brought back by sentence into the city, to which he had
@c    fled, and he shall abide there until the death of the high priest, that
@c    is anointed with the holy oil.

@c    Until the death, etc. . .This mystically signified that our deliverance
@c    was to be effected by the death of Christ, the high priest and the
@c    anointed of God.

@c    35:26. If the murderer be found without the limits of the cities that
@c    are appointed for the banished,

@c    35:27. And be struck by him that is the avenger of blood:  he shall not
@c    be guilty that killed him.

@c    35:28. For the fugitive ought to have stayed in the city until the
@c    death of the high priest:  and after he is dead, then shall the
@c    manslayer return to his own country.

@c    35:29. These things shall be perpetual, and for an ordinance in all
@c    your dwellings.

@c    35:30. The murderer shall be punished by witnesses:  none shall be
@c    condemned upon the evidence of one man.

@c    35:31. You shall not take money of him that is guilty of blood, but he
@c    shall die forthwith.

@c    35:32. The banished and fugitives before the death of the high priest
@c    may by no means return into their own cities.

@c    35:33. Defile not the land of your habitation, which is stained with
@c    the blood of the innocent:  neither can it otherwise be expiated, but by
@c    his blood that hath shed the blood of another.

@c    35:34. And thus shall your possession be cleansed, myself abiding with
@c    you.  For I am the Lord that dwell among the children of Israel.



@c    Numbers Chapter 36


@c    That the inheritances may not be alienated from one tribe to another,
@c    all are to marry within their own tribes.

@c    36:1. And the princes of the families of Galaad, the son of Machir, the
@c    son of Manasses, of the stock of the children of Joseph, came and spoke
@c    to Moses before the princes of Israel, and said:

@c    36:2. The Lord hath commanded thee, my lord, that thou shouldst divide
@c    the land by lot to the children of Israel, and that thou shouldst give
@c    to the daughters of Salphaad our brother the possession due to their
@c    father:

@c    36:3. Now if men of another tribe take them to wives, their possession
@c    will follow them, and being transferred to another tribe, will be a
@c    diminishing of our inheritance.

@c    36:4. And so it shall come to pass, that when the jubilee, the is, the
@c    fiftieth year of remission, is come, the distribution made by the lots
@c    shall be confounded, and the possession of the one shall pass to the
@c    others.

@c    36:5. Moses answered the children of Israel, and said by the command of
@c    the Lord:  The tribe of the children of Joseph hath spoken rightly.

@c    36:6. And this is the law promulgated by the Lord touching the
@c    daughters of Salphaad:  Let them marry to whom they will, only so that
@c    it be to men of their own tribe.

@c    36:7. Lest the possession of the children of Israel be mingled from
@c    tribe to tribe.  For all men shall marry wives of their own tribe and
@c    kindred:

@c    36:8. And all women shall take husbands of the same tribe:  that the
@c    inheritance may remain in the families.

@c    36:9. And that the tribes be not mingled one with another, but remain
@c    so

@c    36:10. As they were separated by the Lord.  And the daughters of
@c    Salphaad did as was commanded:

@c    36:11. And Maala, and Thersa, and Hegla, and Melcha, and Noa were
@c    married to the sons of their uncle by their father

@c    36:12. Of the family of Manasses, who was the son of Joseph:  and the
@c    possession that had been allotted to them, remained in the tribe and
@c    family of their father.

@c    36:13. These are the commandments and judgment, which the Lord
@c    commanded by the hand of Moses to the children of Israel, in the plains
@c    of Moab upon the Jordan over against Jericho.
