@c    THE PROPHECY OF OSEE



@c    OSEE, or Hosea, whose name signifies A saviour, was the first in the
@c    order of time among those who are commonly called lesser prophets,
@c    because their prophecies are short.  He prophesied in the kingdom of
@c    Israel, that is, of the ten tribes, about the same time that Isaias
@c    prophesied in the kingdom of Juda.



@c    Osee Chapter 1


@c    By marrying a harlot, and by the names of his children, the prophet
@c    sets forth the crimes of Israel and their punishment.  He foretells
@c    their redemption by Christ.

@c    1:1. The word of the Lord, that came to Osee, the son of Beeri, in the
@c    days of Ozias, Joathan, Achaz, and Ezechias, kings of Juda, and in the
@c    days of Jeroboam, the son of Joas, king of Israel.

@c    1:2. The beginning of the Lord's speaking by Osee:  and the Lord said to
@c    Osee:  Go, take thee a wife of fornications, and have of her children of
@c    fornications:  for the land by fornication shall depart from the Lord.

@c    A wife of fornications. . .That is, a wife that has been given to
@c    fornication.  This was to represent the Lord's proceedings with his
@c    people Israel, who, by spiritual fornication, were continually
@c    offending him.--Ibid.  Children of fornications. . .So called from the
@c    character of their mother, if not also from their own wicked
@c    dispositions.

@c    1:3. So he went and took Gomer, the daughter of Debelaim:  and she
@c    conceived, and bore him a son.

@c    1:4. And the Lord said to him:  Call his name Jezrahel:  for yet a little
@c    while, and I will visit the blood of Jezrahel upon the house of Jehu,
@c    and I will cause to cease the kingdom of the house of Israel.

@c    1:5. And in that day I will break in pieces the bow of Israel in the
@c    valley of Jezrahel.

@c    1:6. And she conceived again, and bore a daughter, and he said to him:
@c    Call her name, Without mercy:  for I will not add any more to have mercy
@c    on the house of Israel, but I will utterly forget them.

@c    Without mercy. . .Lo-Ruhamah.

@c    1:7. And I will have mercy on the house of Juda, and I will save them
@c    by the Lord, their God:  and I will not save them by bow, nor by sword,
@c    nor by battle, nor by horses, nor by horsemen.

@c    1:8. And she weaned her that was called Without mercy.  And she
@c    conceived, and bore a son.

@c    1:9. And he said:  Call his name, Not my people:  for you are not my
@c    people, and I will not be yours.

@c    Not my people. . .Lo-ammi.

@c    1:10. And the number of the children of Israel shall be as the sand of
@c    the sea, that is without measure, and shall not be numbered.  And it
@c    shall be in the place where it shall be said to them:  You are not my
@c    people:  it shall be said to them:  Ye are the sons of the living God.

@c    The number, etc. . .Viz., of the true Israelites, the children of the
@c    church of Christ.

@c    1:11. And the children of Juda, and the children of Israel, shall be
@c    gathered together:  and they shall appoint themselves one head, and
@c    shall come up out of the land:  for great is the day of Jezrahel.

@c    One head. . .viz., Christ.--Ibid.  Great is the day of Jezrahel. . .That
@c    is, of the seed of God; for Jezrahel signifies the seed of God.



@c    Osee Chapter 2


@c    Israel is justly punished for leaving God.  The abundance of grace in
@c    the church of Christ.

@c    2:1. Say ye to your brethren:  You are my people:  and to your sister:
@c    Thou hast obtained mercy.

@c    Say to your brethren, etc. . .or, Call your brethren, My people:  and
@c    your sister, Her that hath obtained mercy.  This is connected with the
@c    latter end of the foregoing chapter, and relates to the converts of
@c    Israel.

@c    2:2. Judge your mother, judge her:  because she is not my wife, and I am
@c    not her husband.  Let her put away her fornications from her face, and
@c    her adulteries from between her breasts.

@c    Your mother. . .The synagogue.

@c    2:3. Lest I strip her naked, and set her as in the day that she was
@c    born:  and I will make her as a wilderness, and will set her as a land
@c    that none can pass through and will kill her with drought.

@c    2:4. And I will not have mercy on her children.  for they are the
@c    children of fornications.

@c    2:5. For their mother hath committed fornication, she that conceived
@c    them is covered with shame:  for she said:  I will go after my lovers,
@c    that give me my bread, and my water, my wool, and my flax, my oil, and
@c    my drink.

@c    2:6. Wherefore, behold, I will hedge up thy way with thorns, and I will
@c    stop it up with a wall, and she shall not find her paths.

@c    2:7. And she shall follow after her lovers, and shall not overtake
@c    them:  and she shall seek them, and shall not find, and she shall say:  I
@c    will go, and return to my first husband:  because it was better with me
@c    then than now.

@c    2:8. And she did not know that I gave her corn, and wine, and oil, and
@c    multiplied her silver, and gold, which they have used in the service of
@c    Baal.

@c    2:9. Therefore will I return, and take away my corn in its season, and
@c    my wine in its season, and I will set at liberty my wool, and my flax,
@c    which covered her disgrace.

@c    2:10. And now I will lay open her folly in the eyes of her lovers:  and
@c    no man shall deliver her out of my hand:

@c    2:11. And I will cause all her mirth to cease, her solemnities, her new
@c    moons, her sabbaths, and all her festival times.

@c    2:12. And I will destroy her vines, and her fig trees, of which she
@c    said:  These are my rewards, which my lovers have given me:  and I will
@c    make her as a forest and the beasts of the field shall devour her.

@c    2:13. And I will visit upon her the days of Baalim, to whom she burnt
@c    incense, and decked herself out with her earrings, and with her jewels,
@c    and went after her lovers, and forgot me, saith the Lord.

@c    2:14. Therefore, behold I will allure her, and will lead her into the
@c    wilderness:  and I will speak to her heart.

@c    I will allure her, etc. . .After all her disloyalties, I will still
@c    allure her by my grace etc., and send her vinedressers, viz., the
@c    apostles:  originally her own children, who shall open to her the gates
@c    of hope; as heretofore at her coming into the land of promise, she had
@c    all good success after she had satisfied the divine justice by the
@c    execution of Achan in the valley of Achor.  Jos. 7.

@c    2:15. And I will give her vinedressers out of the same place, and the
@c    valley of Achor for an opening of hope:  and she shall sing there
@c    according to the days of her youth, and according to the days of her
@c    coming up out of the land of Egypt.

@c    2:16. And it shall be in that day, saith the Lord:  That she shall call
@c    me:  My husband, and she shall call me no more Banli.

@c    My husband. . .In Hebrew, Ishi.  Baali, my lord.  The meaning of this
@c    verse is:  that whereas Ishi and Baali were used indifferently in those
@c    days by wives speaking to their husbands; the synagogue, whom God was
@c    pleased to consider as his spouse, should call him only Ishi, and
@c    abstain from the name of Baali, because of its affinity with the idol
@c    Baal.

@c    2:17. And I will take away the names of Baalim out of her mouth, and
@c    she shall no more remember their name.

@c    Baalim. . .It is the plural number of Baal:  for there were divers idols
@c    of Baal.

@c    2:18. And in that day I will make a covenant with them, with the beasts
@c    of the field, and with the fowls of the air, and with the creeping
@c    things of the earth:  and I will destroy the bow, and the sword, and war
@c    out of the land:  and I will make them sleep secure.

@c    2:19. And I will espouse thee to me for ever:  and I will espouse thee
@c    to me in justice, and judgment, and in mercy, and in commiserations.

@c    I will espouse thee, etc. . .This relates to the happy espousals of
@c    Christ with his church:  which shall never be dissolved.

@c    2:20. And I will espouse thee to me in faith:  and thou shalt know that
@c    I am the Lord.

@c    2:21. And it shall come to pass in that day:  I will hear, saith the
@c    Lord, I will hear the heavens, and they shall hear the earth.

@c    Hear the heavens, etc. . .All shall conspire in favour of the church,
@c    which in the following verse is called Jezrahel, that is, the seed of
@c    God.

@c    2:22. And the earth shall hear the corn, and the wine, and the oil, and
@c    these shall hear Jezrahel.

@c    2:23. And I will sow her unto me in the earth, and I will have mercy on
@c    her that was without mercy.

@c    2:24. And I will say to that which is not my people:  Thou art my
@c    people:  and they shall say:  Thou art my God.

@c    That which was not my people, etc. . .This relates to the conversion of
@c    the Gentiles.



@c    Osee Chapter 3


@c    The prophet is commanded again to love an adulteress; to signify God's
@c    love to the synagogue.  The wretched state of the Jews for a long time,
@c    till at last they shall be converted.

@c    3:1. And the Lord said to me:  Go yet again, and love a woman beloved of
@c    her friend, and an adulteress:  as the Lord loveth the children of
@c    Israel, and they look to strange gods, and love the husks of the
@c    grapes.

@c    3:2. And I bought her to me for fifteen pieces of silver, and for a
@c    core of barley, and for half a core of barley.

@c    3:3. And I said to her:  Thou shalt wait for me many days:  thou shalt
@c    not play the harlot, and thou shalt be no man's, and I also will wait
@c    for thee.

@c    3:4. For the children of Israel shall sit many days without king, and
@c    without prince, and without sacrifice, and without altar, and without
@c    ephod, and without theraphim.

@c    Theraphim. . .Images or representations.

@c    3:5. And after this the children of Israel shall return and shall seek
@c    the Lord, their God, and David, their king:  and they shall fear the
@c    Lord, and his goodness, in the last days.

@c    David their king. . .That is, Christ, who is of the house of David.



@c    Osee Chapter 4


@c    God's judgment against the sins of Israel:  Juda is warned not to follow
@c    their example.

@c    4:1. Hear the word of the Lord, ye children of Israel, for the Lord
@c    shall enter into judgment with the inhabitants of the land:  for there
@c    is no truth, and there is no mercy, and there is no knowledge of God in
@c    the land.

@c    4:2. Cursing, and lying, and killing, and theft, and adultery, have
@c    overflowed, and blood hath touched blood.

@c    4:3. Therefore shall the land mourn, and every one that dwelleth in it
@c    shall languish with the heat of the field, and with the fowls of the
@c    air:  yea, the fishes of the sea also shall be gathered together.

@c    4:4. But yet let not any man judge:  and let not a man be rebuked:  for
@c    thy people are as they that contradict the priest.

@c    Let not any man judge, etc. . .As if he would say:  It is in vain to
@c    strive with them, or reprove them, they are so obstinate in evil.

@c    4:5. And thou shalt fall today, and the prophet also shall fall with
@c    thee:  in the night I have made thy mother to be silent.

@c    4:6. My people have been silent, because they had no knowledge:  because
@c    thou hast rejected knowledge, I will reject thee, that thou shalt not
@c    do the office of priesthood to me:  and thou hast forgotten the law of
@c    thy God, I also will forget thy children.

@c    4:7. According to the multitude of them, so have they sinned against
@c    me:  I will change their glory into shame.

@c    4:8. They shall eat the sins of my people, and shall lift up their
@c    souls to their iniquity.

@c    4:9. And there shall be like people like priest:  and I will visit their
@c    ways upon them, and I will repay them their devices.

@c    4:10. And they shall eat and shall not be filled:  they have committed
@c    fornication, and have not ceased:  because they have forsaken the Lord
@c    in not observing the law.

@c    4:11. Fornication, and wine, and drunkenness, take away the
@c    understanding.

@c    4:12. My people have consulted their stocks, and their staff hath
@c    declared unto them:  for the spirit of fornication hath deceived them,
@c    and they have committed fornication against their God.

@c    4:13. They offered sacrifice upon the tops of the mountains, and burnt
@c    incense upon the hills:  under the oak, and the poplar, and the
@c    turpentine tree, because the shadow thereof was good:  therefore shall
@c    your daughters commit fornication, aud your spouses shall be
@c    adulteresses.

@c    4:14. I will not visit upon your daughters, when they shall commit
@c    fornication, and upon your spouses when they shall commit adultery:
@c    because themselves conversed with harlots, and offered sacrifice with
@c    the effeminate, and the people that doth not understand shall be
@c    beaten.

@c    4:15. If thou play the harlot, O Israel, at least let not Juda offend:
@c    and go ye not into Galgal, and come not up into Bethaven, and do not
@c    swear:  The Lord liveth.

@c    Galgal and Bethaven. . .Places where idols were worshipped.  Bethel,
@c    which signifies the house of God, is called by the prophet, Bethaven,
@c    that is, the house of vanity, from Jeroboam's golden calf that was
@c    worshipped there.

@c    4:16. For Israel hath gone astray like a wanton heifer now will the
@c    Lord feed them, as a lamb in a spacious place.

@c    4:17. Ephraim is a partaker with idols, let him alone.

@c    4:18. Their banquet is separated, they have gone astray by fornication:
@c    they that should have protected them have loved to bring shame upon
@c    them.

@c    4:19. The wind hath bound them up in its wings, and they shall be
@c    confounded because of their sacrifices.



@c    Osee Chapter 5


@c    God's threats against the priests, the people, and princes of Israel,
@c    for their idolatry.

@c    5:1. Hear ye this, O priests, and hearken, O ye house of Israel, and
@c    give ear, O house of the king:  for there is a judgment against you,
@c    because you have been a snare to them whom you should have watched over
@c    and a net spread upon Thabor.

@c    O priests. . .What is said of priests in this prophecy is chiefly
@c    understood of the priests of the kingdom of Israel; who were not true
@c    priests of the race of Aaron; but served the calves at Bethel and Dan.

@c    5:2. And you have turned aside victims into the depth and I am the
@c    teacher of them all.

@c    5:3. I know Ephraim, and Israel is not hid from me for now Ephraim hath
@c    committed fornication, Israel is defiled.

@c    5:4. They will not set their thoughts to return to their God:  for the
@c    spirit of fornication is in the midst of them, and they have not known
@c    the Lord.

@c    5:5. And the pride of Israel shall answer in his face:  and Israel, and
@c    Ephraim shall fall in their iniquity, Juda also shall fall with them.

@c    5:6. With their flocks and with their herds, they shall go to seek the
@c    Lord, and shall not find him:  he is withdrawn from them.

@c    5:7. They have transgressed against the Lord:  for they have begotten
@c    children that are strangers:  now shall a month devour them with their
@c    portions.

@c    Children that are strangers. . .That is, aliens from God:  and therefore
@c    they are threatened with speedy destruction.

@c    5:8. Blow ye the cornet in Gabaa, the trumpet in Rama:  howl ye in
@c    Bethaven, behind thy back, O Benjamin.

@c    5:9. Ephraim shall be in desolation in the day of rebuke:  among the
@c    tribes of Israel I have shewn that which shall surely be.

@c    5:10. The princes of Juda are become as they that take up the bound:  I
@c    will pour out my wrath upon them like water.

@c    As they that take up the bound. . .That is, they that remove the
@c    boundary, encroaching on the property of their neighbors:  figuratively:
@c    going beyond the boundary of the laws of God.

@c    5:11. Ephraim is under oppression, and broken in judgment:  because he
@c    began to go after filthiness.

@c    5:12. And I will be like a moth to Ephraim:  and like rottenness to the
@c    house of Juda.

@c    5:13. And Ephraim saw his sickness, and Juda his band:  and Ephraim went
@c    to the Assyrian, and sent to the avenging king:  and he shall not be
@c    able to heal you, neither shall he be able to take off the band from
@c    you.

@c    5:14. For I will be like a lioness to Ephraim, and like a lion's whelp
@c    to the house of Juda:  I, I will catch, and go:  I will take away, and
@c    there is none that can rescue.

@c    5:15. I will go and return to my place:  until you are consumed, and
@c    seek my face.



@c    Osee Chapter 6


@c    Affliction shall be a means to bring many to Christ, a complaint of the
@c    untowardness of the Jews.  God loves mercy more than sacrifice.

@c    6:1. In their affliction they will rise early to me:  Come, and let us
@c    return to the Lord.

@c    6:2. For he hath taken us, and he will heal us:  he will strike, and he
@c    will cure us.

@c    6:3. He will revive us after two days:  on the third day he will raise
@c    us up, and we shall live in his sight.  We shall know, and we shall
@c    follow on, that we may know the Lord.  His going forth is prepared as
@c    the morning light, and he will come to us as the early and the latter
@c    rain to the earth.

@c    6:4. What shall I do to thee, O Ephraim?  what shall I do to thee, O
@c    Juda?  your mercy is as a morning cloud, and as the dew that goeth away
@c    in the morning.

@c    6:5. For this reason have I hewed them by the prophets, I have slain
@c    them by the words of my mouth:  and thy judgments shall go forth as the
@c    light.

@c    6:6. For I desired mercy, and not sacrifice:  and the knowledge of God
@c    more than holocausts.

@c    6:7. But they, like Adam, have transgressed the covenant, there have
@c    they dealt treacherously against me.

@c    6:8. Galaad is a city of workers of idols, supplanted with blood.

@c    Supplanted with blood. . .that is, undermined and brought to ruin, for
@c    shedding of blood:  and, as it is signified in the following verse, for
@c    conspiring with the priests (of Bethel) like robbers, to murder in the
@c    way such as passed out of Sichem to go towards the temple of Jerusalem.
@c    Or else . . .upplanted with blood. . .signifies flowing in such manner
@c    with blood, as to suffer none to walk there without imbruing the soles
@c    of their feet in blood.

@c    6:9. And like the jaws of highway robbers, they conspire with the
@c    priests who murder in the way those that pass out of Sichem:  for they
@c    have wrought wickedness.

@c    6:10. I have seen a horrible thing in the house of Israel:  the
@c    fornications of Ephraim there:  Israel is defiled.

@c    6:11. And thou also, O Juda, set thee a harvest, when I shall bring
@c    back the captivity of my people.



@c    Osee Chapter 7


@c    The manifold sins of Israel, and of their kings, hinder the Lord from
@c    healing them.

@c    7:1. When I would have healed Israel, the iniquity of Ephraim was
@c    discovered, and the wickedness of Samaria, for they have committed
@c    falsehood, and the thief is come in to steal, the robber is without.

@c    7:2. And lest they may say in their hearts, that I remember all their
@c    wickedness:  their own devices now have beset them about, they have been
@c    done before my face.

@c    7:3. They have made the king glad with their wickedness:  and the
@c    princes with their lies.

@c    Made the king glad, etc. . .To please Jeroboam, and their other kings
@c    they have given themselves up to the wicked worship of idols, which are
@c    mere falsehood and lies.

@c    7:4. They are all adulterers, like an oven heated by the baker:  the
@c    city rested a little from the mingling of the leaven, till the whole
@c    was leavened.

@c    7:5. The day of our king, the princes began to be mad with wine:  he
@c    stretched out his hand with scorners.

@c    7:6. Because they have applied their heart like an oven, when he laid
@c    snares for them:  he slept all the night baking them, in the morning he
@c    himself was heated as a flaming fire.

@c    7:7. They were all heated like an oven, and have devoured their judges:
@c    all their kings have fallen:  there is none amongst them that calleth
@c    unto me.

@c    7:8. Ephraim himself is mixed among the nations:  Ephraim is become as
@c    bread baked under the ashes, that is not turned.

@c    7:9. Strangers have devoured his strength, and he knew it not:  yea,
@c    grey hairs also are spread about upon him, and he is ignorant of it.

@c    7:10. And the pride of Israel shall be humbled before his face:  and
@c    they have not returned to the Lord their God, nor have they sought him
@c    in all these.

@c    7:11. And Ephraim is become as a dove that is decoyed, not having a
@c    heart:  they called upon Egypt, they went to the Assyrians.

@c    7:12. And when they shall go, I will spread my net upon them:  I will
@c    bring them down as the fowl of the air, I will strike them as their
@c    congregation hath heard.

@c    7:13. Woe to them, for they have departed from me:  they shall be wasted
@c    because they have transgressed against me:  and I redeemed them:  and
@c    they have spoken lies against me.

@c    7:14. And they have not cried to me with their heart, but they howled
@c    in their beds:  they have thought upon wheat and wine, they are departed
@c    from me.

@c    7:15. And I have chastised them, and strengthened their arms:  and they
@c    have imagined evil against me.

@c    7:16. They returned, that they might be without yoke:  they became like
@c    a deceitful bow:  their princes shall fall by the sword, for the rage of
@c    their tongue.  This is their derision in the land of Egypt.



@c    Osee Chapter 8


@c    The Israelites are threatened with destruction for their impiety and
@c    idolatry.

@c    8:1. Let there be a trumpet in thy throat like an eagle upon the house
@c    of the Lord:  because they have transgressed my covenant, and have
@c    violated my law.

@c    8:2. They shall call upon me:  O my God, we, Israel, know thee.

@c    8:3. Israel hath cast off the thing that is good, the enemy shall
@c    pursue him.

@c    8:4. They have reigned, but not by me:  they have been princes, and I
@c    knew not:  of their silver and their gold they have made idols to
@c    themselves, that they might perish.

@c    8:5. Thy calf, O Samaria, is cast off, my wrath is kindled against
@c    them.  How long will they be incapable of being cleansed?

@c    8:6. For itself also is the invention of Israel:  a workman made it, and
@c    it is no god:  for the calf of Samaria shall be turned to spiders' webs.

@c    8:7. For they shall sow wind, and reap a whirlwind, there is no
@c    standing stalk in it, the bud shall yield no meal; and if it should
@c    yield, strangers shall eat it.

@c    8:8. Israel is swallowed up:  now is he become among the nations like an
@c    unclean vessel.

@c    8:9. For they are gone up to Assyria, a wild ass alone by himself:
@c    Ephraim hath given gifts to his lovers.

@c    8:10. But even though they shall have hired the nations, now will I
@c    gather them together:  and they shall rest a while from the burden of
@c    the king, and the princes.

@c    8:11. Because Ephraim hath made many altars to sin:  altars are become
@c    to him unto sin.

@c    8:12. I shall write to him my manifold laws, which have been accounted
@c    as foreign.

@c    8:13. They shall offer victims, they shall sacrifice flesh, and shall
@c    eat it, and the Lord will not receive them:  now will he remember their
@c    iniquity, and will visit their sins:  they shall return to Egypt.

@c    8:14. And Israel hath forgotten his Maker, and hath built temples:  and
@c    Juda hath built many fenced cities:  and I will send a fire upon his
@c    cities, and it shall devour the houses thereof.



@c    Osee Chapter 9


@c    The distress and captivity of Israel for their sins and idolatry.

@c    9:1. Rejoice not, O Israel:  rejoice not as the nations do:  for thou
@c    hast committed fornication against thy God, thou hast loved a reward
@c    upon every cornfloor.

@c    9:2. The floor and the winepress shall not feed them, and the wine
@c    shall deceive them.

@c    9:3. They shall not dwell in the Lord's land:  Ephraim is returned to
@c    Egypt, and hath eaten unclean things among the Assyrians.

@c    9:4. They shall not offer wine to the Lord, neither shall they please
@c    him:  their sacrifices shall be like the bread of mourners:  all that
@c    shall eat it shall be defiled:  for their bread is life for their soul,
@c    it shall not enter into the house of the Lord.

@c    9:5. What will you do in the solemn day, in the day of the feast of the
@c    Lord?

@c    9:6. For behold they are gone because of destruction:  Egypt shall
@c    gather them together, Memphis shall bury them:  nettles shall inherit
@c    their beloved silver, the bur shall be in their tabernacles.

@c    9:7. The days of visitation are come, the days of repaying are come:
@c    know ye, O Israel, that the prophet was foolish, the spiritual man was
@c    mad, for the multitude of thy iniquity, and the multitude of thy
@c    madness.

@c    9:8. The watchman of Ephraim was with my God:  the prophet is become a
@c    snare of ruin upon all his ways, madness is in the house of his God.

@c    9:9. They have sinned deeply, as in the days of Gabaa:  he will remember
@c    their iniquity, and will visit their sin.

@c    9:10. I found Israel like grapes in the desert, I saw their fathers
@c    like the firstfruits of the fig tree in the top thereof:  but they went
@c    in to Beelphegor, and alienated themselves to that confusion, and
@c    became abominable, as those things were, which they loved.

@c    9:11. As for Ephraim, their glory hath flown away like bird from the
@c    birth, and from the womb, and from the conception.

@c    9:12. And though they should bring up their children, I will make them
@c    without children among men:  yea, and woe to them, when I shall depart
@c    from them.

@c    9:13. Ephraim, as I saw, was a Tyre, founded in beauty:  and Ephraim
@c    shall bring out his children to the murderer.

@c    9:14. Give them, O Lord.  What wilt thou give them?  Give them a womb
@c    without children, and dry breasts.

@c    9:15. All their wickedness is in Galgal, for there I hated them:  for
@c    the wickedness of their devices I will cast them forth out of my house:
@c    I will love them no more, all their princes are revolters.

@c    9:16. Ephraim is struck, their root is dried up, they shall yield no
@c    fruit.  And if they should have issue, I will slay the best beloved
@c    fruit of their womb.

@c    9:17. My God will cast them away, because they hearkened not to him:
@c    and they shall be wanderers among the nations.



@c    Osee Chapter 10


@c    After many benefits, great affliction shall fall upon the ten tribes,
@c    for their ingratitude to God.

@c    10:1. Israel a vine full of branches, the fruit is agreeable to it:
@c    according to the multitude of his fruit, he hath multiplied altars,
@c    according to the plenty of his land he hath abounded with idols.

@c    10:2. Their heart is divided:  now they shall perish:  he shall break
@c    down their idols, he shall destroy their altars.

@c    10:3. For now they shall say:  We have no king:  because we fear not the
@c    Lord:  and what shall a king do to us?

@c    10:4. You speak words of an unprofitable vision, and you shall make a
@c    covenant:  and judgment shall spring up as bitterness in the furrows of
@c    the field.

@c    10:5. The inhabitants of Samaria have worshipped the kine of Bethaven:
@c    for the people thereof have mourned over it, and the wardens of its
@c    temple that rejoiced over it in its glory because it is departed from
@c    it.

@c    The kine of Bethaven. . .The golden calves of Jeroboam.

@c    10:6. For itself also is carried into Assyria, a present to the
@c    avenging king:  shame shall fall upon Ephraim, and Israel shall be
@c    confounded in his own will.

@c    Itself also is carried, etc. . .One of the golden calves was given by
@c    king Manahem, to Phul, king of the Assyrians, to engage him to stand by
@c    him.

@c    10:7. Samaria hath made her king to pass as froth upon the face of the
@c    water.

@c    10:8. And the high places of the idol, the sin of Israel shall be
@c    destroyed:  the bur and the thistle shall grow up over their altars:  and
@c    they shall say to the mountains Cover us; and to the hills:  Fall upon
@c    us.

@c    10:9. From the days of Gabaa, Israel hath sinned, there they stood:  the
@c    battle in Gabaa against the children of iniquity shall not overtake
@c    them.

@c    10:10. According to my desire, I will chastise them:  and the nations
@c    shall be gathered together against them, when they shall be chastised
@c    for their two iniquities.

@c    Their two iniquities. . .Their two calves.

@c    10:11. Ephraim is a heifer taught to love to tread out corn, but I
@c    passed over upon the beauty of her neck:  I will ride upon Ephraim, Juda
@c    shall plough, Jacob shall break the furrows for himself.

@c    10:12. Sow for yourselves in justice, and reap in the mouth of mercy,
@c    break up your fallow ground:  but the time to seek the Lord is, when he
@c    shall come that shall teach you justice.

@c    10:13. You have ploughed wickedness, you have reaped iniquity, you have
@c    eaten the fruit of lying:  because thou hast trusted in thy ways, in the
@c    multitude of thy strong ones.

@c    10:14. A tumult shall arise among thy people:  and all thy fortresses
@c    shall be destroyed as Salmana was destroyed, by the house of him that
@c    judged Baal in the day of battle, the mother being dashed in pieces
@c    upon her children.

@c    As Salmana, king of the Midianites, was destroyed by the house, that
@c    is, by the followers of him that judged Baal; that is, of Gideon, who
@c    threw down the altar of Baal; and was therefore called Jerubaal.  See
@c    Judges 6 and 8.

@c    10:15. So hath Bethel done to you, because of the evil of your
@c    iniquities.



@c    Osee Chapter 11


@c    God proceeds in threatening Israel for their ingratitude:  yet he will
@c    not utterly destroy them.

@c    11:1. As the morning passeth, so hath the king of Israel passed away.
@c    Because Israel was a child, and I loved him:  and I called my son out of
@c    Egypt.

@c    I called my son. . .Viz., Israel.  But as the calling of Israel out of
@c    Egypt, was a figure of the calling of Christ from thence; therefore
@c    this text is also applicable to Christ, as we learn from Matthew 2.15.

@c    11:2. As they called them, they went away from before their face:  they
@c    offered victims to Baalim, and sacrificed to idols.

@c    They called. . .Viz., Moses and Aaron called; but they went away after
@c    other gods and would not hear.

@c    11:3. And I was like a foster father to Ephraim, I carried them in my
@c    arms:  and they knew not that I healed them.

@c    11:4. I will draw them with the cords of Adam, with the bands of love:
@c    and I will be to them as one that taketh off the yoke on their jaws:
@c    and I put his meat to him that he might eat.

@c    11:5. He shall not return into the land of Egypt, but the Assyrian
@c    shall be his king:  because they would not be converted.

@c    11:6. The sword hath begun in his cities, and it shall consume his
@c    chosen men, and shall devour their heads.

@c    11:7. And my people shall long for my return:  but a yoke shall be put
@c    upon them together, which shall not be taken off.

@c    11:8. How shall I deal with thee, O Ephraim, shall I protect thee, O
@c    Israel?  how shall I make thee as Adama, shall I set thee as Seboim?  my
@c    heart is turned within me, my repentance is stirred up.

@c    Adama, etc. . .Adama and Seboim were two cities in the neighborhood of
@c    Sodom:  and underwent the like destruction.

@c    11:9. I will not execute the fierceness of my wrath:  I will not return
@c    to destroy Ephraim:  because I am God, and not man:  the holy one in the
@c    midst of thee, and I will not enter into the city.

@c    11:10. They shall walk after the Lord, he shall roar as a lion:  because
@c    he shall roar, and the children of the sea shall fear.

@c    11:11. And they shall fly away like a bird out of Egypt, and like a
@c    dove out of the land of the Assyrians:  and I will place them in their
@c    own houses, saith the Lord.

@c    11:12. Ephraim hath compassed me about with denials, and the house of
@c    Israel with deceit:  but Juda went down as a witness with God, and is
@c    faithful with the saints.



@c    Osee Chapter 12


@c    Israel is reproved for sin.  God's favours to them.

@c    12:1. Ephraim feedeth on the wind, and followeth the burning heat:  all
@c    the day long he multiplied lies and desolation:  and he hath made a
@c    covenant with the Assyrians, and carried oil into Egypt.

@c    12:2. Therefore there is a judgment of the Lord with Juda, and a
@c    visitation for Jacob:  he will render to him according to his ways, and
@c    according to his devices.

@c    12:3. In the womb he supplanted his brother:  and by his strength he had
@c    success with an angel.

@c    12:4. And he prevailed over the angel, and was strengthened:  he wept,
@c    and made supplication to him:  he found him in Bethel, and there he
@c    spoke with us.

@c    12:5. Even the Lord God of hosts, the Lord is his memorial.

@c    12:6. Therefore turn thou to thy God:  keep mercy and judgment, and hope
@c    in thy God always.

@c    12:7. He is like Chanaan, there is a deceitful balance in his hand, he
@c    hath loved oppression.

@c    12:8. And Ephraim said:  But yet I am become rich, I have found me an
@c    idol:  all my labours shall not find me the iniquity that I have
@c    committed.

@c    12:9. And I that am the Lord thy God from the land of Egypt, will yet
@c    cause thee to dwell in tabernacles, as in the days of the feast.

@c    12:10. And I have spoken by the prophets, and I have multiplied
@c    visions, and I have used similitudes by the ministry of the prophets.

@c    12:11. If Galaad be an idol, then in vain were they in Galgal offering
@c    sacrifices with bullocks:  for their altars also are as heaps in the
@c    furrows of the field.

@c    If Galaad be an idol, etc. . .That is, if Galaad with all its idols and
@c    sacrifices be like a mere idol itself, being brought to nothing by
@c    Theglathphalasar:  how vain is it to expect, that the idols worshipped
@c    in Galgal shall be of any service to the tribes that remain.

@c    12:12. Jacob fled into the country of Syria, and Israel served for a
@c    wife, and was a keeper for a wife.

@c    12:13. But the Lord by a prophet brought Israel out of Egypt:  and he
@c    was preserved by a prophet.

@c    12:14. Ephraim hath provoked me to wrath with his bitterness, and his
@c    blood shall come upon him, and his Lord will render his reproach unto
@c    him.



@c    Osee Chapter 13


@c    The judgments of God upon Israel for their sins.  Christ shall one day
@c    redeem them.

@c    13:1. When Ephraim spoke, a horror seized Israel:  and he sinned in
@c    Baal, and died.

@c    13:2. And now they have sinned more and more:  and they have made to
@c    themselves a molten thing of their silver as the likeness of idols:  the
@c    whole is the work of craftsmen:  to these that say:  Sacrifice men, ye
@c    that adore calves.

@c    13:3. Therefore they shall be as a morning cloud, and as the early dew
@c    that passeth away, as the dust that is driven with a whirlwind out of
@c    the floor, and as the smoke out of the chimney.

@c    13:4. But I am the Lord thy God from the land of Egypt:  and thou shalt
@c    know no God but me, and there is no saviour beside me.

@c    13:5. I knew thee in the desert, in the land of the wilderness.

@c    13:6. According to their pastures they were filled, and were made full:
@c    and they lifted up their heart, and have forgotten me.

@c    13:7. And I will be to them as a lioness, as a leopard in the way of
@c    the Assyrians.

@c    13:8. I will meet them as a bear that is robbed of her whelps, and I
@c    will rend the inner parts of their liver:  and I will devour them there
@c    as a lion, the beast of the field shall tear them.

@c    13:9. Destruction is thy own, O Israel:  thy help is only in me.

@c    13:10. Where is thy king?  now especially let him save thee in all thy
@c    cities:  and thy judges, of whom thou saidst:  Give me kings and princes.

@c    13:11. I will give thee a king in my wrath, and will take him away in
@c    my indignation.

@c    13:12. The iniquity of Ephraim is bound up, his sin is hidden.

@c    13:13. The sorrows of a woman in labour shall come upon him, he is an
@c    unwise son:  for now he shall not stand in the breach of the children.

@c    13:14. I will deliver them out of the hand of death.  I will redeem them
@c    from death:  O death, I will be thy death; O hell, I will be thy bite:
@c    comfort is hidden from my eyes.

@c    13:15. Because he shall make a separation between brothers:  the Lord
@c    will bring a burning wind that shall rise from the desert, and it shall
@c    dry up his springs, and shall make his fountain desolate, and he shall
@c    carry off the treasure of every desirable vessel.



@c    Osee Chapter 14


@c    Samaria shall be destroyed.  An exhortation to repentance:  God's favour
@c    through Christ to the penitent.

@c    14:1. Let Samaria perish, because she hath stirred up her God to
@c    bitterness:  let them perish by the sword, let their little ones be
@c    dashed, and let the women with child be ripped up.

@c    Perish, because she hath stirred up her God to bitterness. . .It is not
@c    a curse or imprecation, but a prophecy of what should come to pass.

@c    14:2. Return, O Israel, to the Lord thy God:  for thou hast fallen down
@c    by thy iniquity.

@c    14:3. Take with you words, and return to the Lord, and say to him:  Take
@c    away all iniquity, and receive the good:  and we will render the calves
@c    of our lips.

@c    14:4. Assyria shall not save us, we will not ride upon horses, neither
@c    will we say any more:  The works of our hands are our gods:  for thou
@c    wilt have mercy on the fatherless that is in thee.

@c    14:5. I will heal their breaches, I will love them freely:  for my wrath
@c    is turned away from them.

@c    14:6. I will be as the dew, Israel shall spring as the lily, and his
@c    root shall shoot forth as that of Libanus.

@c    14:7. His branches shall spread, and his glory shall be as the olive
@c    tree:  and his smell as that of Libanus.

@c    14:8. They shall be converted that sit under his shadow:  they shall
@c    live upon wheat, and they shall blossom as a vine:  his memorial shall
@c    be as the wine of Libanus.

@c    14:9. Ephraim shall say, What have I to do any more with idols?  I will
@c    hear him, and I will make him flourish like a green fir tree:  from me
@c    is thy fruit found.

@c    14:10. Who is wise, and he shall understand these things?  prudent, and
@c    he shall know these things?  for the ways of the Lord are right, and the
@c    just shall walk in them:  but the transgressors shall fall in them.
