@c    THE BOOK OF PSALMS



@c    The psalms are called by the Hebrews TEHILLIM, that is, Hymns of
@c    Praise.  The author, of a great part of them at least, was king David:
@c    but many are of opinion that some of them were made by Asaph, and
@c    others whose names are prefixed in the titles.



@c    Psalms Chapter 1


@c    Beatus vir.

@c    The happiness of the just and the evil state of the wicked.

@c    1:1. Blessed is the man who hath not walked in the counsel of the
@c    ungodly, nor stood in the way of sinners, nor sat in the chair of
@c    pestilence:

@c    1:2. But his will is in the law of the Lord, and on his law he shall
@c    meditate day and night.

@c    1:3. And he shall be like a tree which is planted near the running
@c    waters, which shall bring forth its fruit, in due season.  And his leaf
@c    shall not fall off:  and all whatsoever he shall do shall prosper.

@c    1:4. Not so the wicked, not so:  but like the dust, which the wind
@c    driveth from the face of the earth.

@c    1:5. Therefore the wicked shall not rise again in judgment:  nor sinners
@c    in the council of the just.

@c    1:6. For the Lord knoweth the way of the just:  and the way of the
@c    wicked shall perish.



@c    Psalms Chapter 2


@c    Quare fremuerunt.

@c    The vain efforts of persecutors against Christ and his church.

@c    2:1. Why have the Gentiles raged, and the people devised vain things?

@c    2:2. The kings of the earth stood up, and the princes met together,
@c    against the Lord, and against his Christ.

@c    2:3. Let us break their bonds asunder:  and let us cast away their yoke
@c    from us.

@c    2:4. He that dwelleth in heaven shall laugh at them:  and the Lord shall
@c    deride them.

@c    2:5. Then shall he speak to them in his anger, and trouble them in his
@c    rage.

@c    2:6. But I am appointed king by him over Sion, his holy mountain,
@c    preaching his commandment.

@c    2:7. The Lord hath said to me:  Thou art my son, this day have I
@c    begotten thee.

@c    2:8. Ask of me, and I will give thee the Gentiles for thy inheritance,
@c    and the utmost parts of the earth for thy possession.

@c    2:9. Thou shalt rule them with a rod of iron, and shalt break them in
@c    pieces like a potter's vessel.

@c    2:10. And now, O ye kings, understand:  receive instruction, you that
@c    judge the earth.

@c    2:11. Serve ye the Lord with fear:  and rejoice unto him with trembling.

@c    2:12. Embrace discipline, lest at any time the Lord be angry, and you
@c    perish from the just way.

@c    2:13. When his wrath shall be kindled in a short time, blessed are all
@c    they that trust in him.



@c    Psalms Chapter 3


@c    Domine, quid multiplicati.

@c    The prophet's danger and delivery from his son Absalom:  mystically, the
@c    passion and resurrection of Christ.

@c    3:1. The psalm of David when he fled from the face of his son Absalom.

@c    3:2. Many say to my soul:  There is no salvation for him in his God.

@c    3:4. But thou, O Lord, art my protector, my glory, and the lifter up of
@c    my head.

@c    3:5. I have cried to the Lord with my voice:  and he hath heard me from
@c    his holy hill.

@c    3:6. I have slept and have taken my rest:  and I have risen up, because
@c    the Lord hath protected me.

@c    3:7. I will not fear thousands of the people surrounding me:  arise, O
@c    Lord; save me, O my God.

@c    3:8. For thou hast struck all them who are my adversaries without
@c    cause:  thou hast broken the teeth of sinners.

@c    3:9. Salvation is of the Lord:  and thy blessing is upon thy people.



@c    Psalms Chapter 4


@c    Cum invocarem.

@c    The prophet teacheth us to flee to God in tribulation, with confidence
@c    in him.

@c    4:1. Unto the end, in verses.  A psalm for David.

@c    Unto the end. . .Or, as St. Jerome renders it, victori, to him that
@c    overcometh:  which some understand of the chief musician; to whom they
@c    suppose the psalms, which bear that title, were given to be sung:  we
@c    rather understand the psalms thus inscribed to refer to Christ, who is
@c    the end of the law, and the great conqueror of death and hell, and to
@c    the New Testament.--Ibid.  In verses, in carminibus. . .In the Hebrew, it
@c    is neghinoth, supposed by some to be a musical instrument, with which
@c    this psalm was to be sung.--Ibid.  For David, or to David. . .That is,
@c    inspired to David himself, or to be sung.

@c    4:2. When I called upon him, the God of my justice heard me:  when I was
@c    in distress, thou hast enlarged me.  Have mercy on me:  and hear my
@c    prayer.

@c    4:3. O ye sons of men, how long will you be dull of heart?  why do you
@c    love vanity, and seek after lying?

@c    4:4. Know ye also that the Lord hath made his holy one wonderful:  the
@c    Lord will hear me when I shall cry unto him.

@c    4:5. Be ye angry, and sin not:  the things you say in your hearts, be
@c    sorry for them upon your beds.

@c    4:6. Offer up the sacrifice of justice, and trust in the Lord:  many
@c    say, Who sheweth us good things?

@c    4:7. The light of thy countenance, O Lord, is signed upon us:  thou hast
@c    given gladness in my heart.

@c    4:8. By the fruit of their corn, their wine, and oil, they rest:

@c    4:9. In peace in the self same I will sleep, and I will rest:

@c    4:10. For thou, O Lord, singularly hast settled me in hope.



@c    Psalms Chapter 5


@c    Verba mea auribul.

@c    A prayer to God against the iniquities of men.

@c    5:1. Unto the end, for her that obtaineth the inheritance.  A psalm for
@c    David.

@c    For her that obtaineth the inheritance. . .That is, for the church of
@c    Christ.

@c    5:2. Give ear, O Lord, to my words, understand my cry.

@c    5:3. Hearken to the voice of my prayer, O my King and my God.

@c    5:4. For to thee will I pray:  O Lord, in the morning thou shalt hear my
@c    voice.

@c    5:5. In the morning I will stand before thee, and I will see:  because
@c    thou art not a God that willest iniquity.

@c    5:6. Neither shall the wicked dwell near thee:  nor shall the unjust
@c    abide before thy eyes.

@c    5:7. Thou hatest all the workers of iniquity:  thou wilt destroy all
@c    that speak a lie.  The bloody and the deceitful man the Lord will abhor.

@c    5:8. But as for me in the multitude of thy mercy, I will come into thy
@c    house; I will worship towards thy holy temple, in thy fear.

@c    5:9. Conduct me, O Lord, in thy justice:  because of my enemies, direct
@c    my way in thy sight.

@c    5:10. For there is no truth in their mouth:  their heart is vain.

@c    5:11. Their throat is an open sepulchre:  they dealt deceitfully with
@c    their tongues:  judge them, O God.  Let them fall from their devices:
@c    according to the multitude of their wickednesses cast them out:  for
@c    they have provoked thee, O Lord.

@c    5:12. But let all them be glad that hope in thee:  they shall rejoice
@c    for ever, and thou shalt dwell in them.  And all they that love thy name
@c    shall glory in thee.

@c    5:13. For thou wilt bless the just.  O Lord, thou hast crowned us, as
@c    with a shield of thy good will.



@c    Psalms Chapter 6


@c    Domine, ne in furore.

@c    A prayer of a penitent sinner, under the scourge of God.  The first
@c    penitential psalm.

@c    6:1. Unto the end, in verses, a psalm for David, for the octave.

@c    For the octave. . .That is, to be sung on an instrument of eight
@c    strings.  St. Augustine understands it mystically, of the last
@c    resurrection, and the world to come; which is, as it were, the octave,
@c    or eighth day, after the seven days of this mortal life:  and for this
@c    octave, sinners must dispose themselves, like David, by bewailing their
@c    sins, whilst they are here upon earth.

@c    6:2. O Lord, rebuke me not in thy indignation, nor chastise me in thy
@c    wrath.

@c    6:3. Have mercy on me, O Lord, for I am weak:  heal me, O Lord, for my
@c    bones are troubled.

@c    6:4. And my soul is troubled exceedingly:  but thou, O Lord, how long?

@c    6:5. Turn to me, O Lord, and deliver my soul:  O save me for thy mercy's
@c    sake.

@c    6:6. For there is no one in death, that is mindful of thee:  and who
@c    shall confess to thee in hell?

@c    6:7. I have laboured in my groanings, every night I will wash my bed:  I
@c    will water my couch with my tears.

@c    6:8. My eye is troubled through indignation:  I have grown old amongst
@c    all my enemies.

@c    6:9. Depart from em, all ye workers of iniquity:  for the Lord hath
@c    heard the voice of my weeping.

@c    6:10. The Lord hath heard my supplication:  the Lord hath received my
@c    prayer.

@c    6:11. Let all my enemies be ashamed, and be very much troubled:  let
@c    them be turned back, and be ashamed very speedily.



@c    Psalms Chapter 7


@c    Domine, Deus meus.

@c    David, trusting in the justice of his cause, prayeth for God's help
@c    against his enemies.

@c    7:1. The psalm of David, which he sung to the Lord, for the words of
@c    Chusi, the son of Jemini.

@c    7:2. O Lord, my God, in thee have I put my trust; same me from all them
@c    that persecute me, and deliver me.

@c    7:3. Lest at any time he seize upon my soul like a lion, while there is
@c    no one to redeem me, nor to save.

@c    7:4. O Lord, my God, if I have done this thing, if there be iniquity in
@c    my hands:

@c    7:5. If I have rendered to them that repaid me evils, let me deservedly
@c    fall empty before my enemies.

@c    7:6. Let the enemy pursue my soul, and take it, and tread down my life,
@c    on the earth, and bring down my glory to the dust.

@c    7:7. Rise up, O Lord, in thy anger:  and be thou exalted in the borders
@c    of my enemies.  And arise, O Lord, my God, in the precept which thou
@c    hast commanded:

@c    7:8. And a congregation of people shall surround thee.  And for their
@c    sakes return thou on high.

@c    7:9. The Lord judgeth the people.  Judge me, O Lord, according to my
@c    justice, and according to my innocence in me.

@c    7:10. The wickedness of sinners shall be brought to nought; and thou
@c    shalt direct the just:  the searcher of hearts and reins is God.  Just

@c    7:11. Is my help from the Lord; who saveth the upright of heart.

@c    7:12. God is a just judge, strong and patient:  is he angry every day?

@c    7:13. Except you will be converted, he will brandish his sword; he hath
@c    bent his bow, and made it ready.

@c    7:14. And in it he hath prepared to instruments of death, he hath made
@c    ready his arrows for them that burn.

@c    For them that burn. . .That is, against the persecutors of his saints.

@c    7:15. Behold he hath been in labour with injustice:  he hath conceived
@c    sorrow, and brought forth iniquity.

@c    7:16. He hath opened a pit and dug it:  and he is fallen into the hole
@c    he made.

@c    7:17. His sorrow shall be turned on his own head:  and his iniquity
@c    shall come down upon his crown.

@c    7:18. I will give glory to the Lord according to his justice:  and will
@c    sing to the name of the Lord the most high.



@c    Psalms Chapter 8


@c    Domine, Dominus noster.

@c    God is wonderful in his works; especially in mankind, singularly
@c    exalted by the incarnation of Christ.

@c    8:1. Unto the end, for the presses:  a psalm for David.

@c    The presses. . .In Hebrew, Gittith, supposed to be a musical instrument.

@c    8:2. O Lord, our Lord, how admirable is thy name in the whole earth!
@c    For thy magnificence is elevated above the heavens.

@c    8:3. Out of the mouth of infants and of sucklings thou hast perfected
@c    praise, because of thy enemies, that thou mayst destroy the enemy and
@c    the avenger.

@c    8:4. For I will behold thy heavens, the works of thy fingers:  the moon
@c    and the stars which thou hast founded.

@c    8:5. What is man, that thou art mindful of him?  or the son of man, that
@c    thou visitest him?

@c    8:6. Thou hast made him a little less than the angels, thou hast
@c    crowned him with glory and honour:

@c    8:7. And hast set him over the works of thy hands.

@c    8:8. Thou hast subjected all things under his feet, all sheep and oxen:
@c    moreover, the beasts also of the fields.

@c    8:9. The birds of the air, and the fishes of the sea, that pass through
@c    the paths of the sea.

@c    8:10. O Lord, our Lord, how admirable is thy name in the whole earth!



@c    Psalms Chapter 9


@c    Confitebor tibi, Domine.  The church praiseth God for his protection
@c    against her enemies.

@c    9:1. Unto the end, for the hidden things of the Son.  A psalm for David.

@c    The hidden things of the Son. . .The humility and sufferings of Christ,
@c    the Son of God; and of good Christians, who are his sons by adoption;
@c    are called hidden things, with regard to the children of this world,
@c    who know not the value and merit of them.

@c    9:2. I will give praise to thee, O Lord, with my whole heart:  I will
@c    relate all thy wonders.

@c    9:3. I will be glad, and rejoice in thee:  I will sing to thy name, O
@c    thou most high.

@c    9:4. When my enemy shall be turned back:  they shall be weakened, and
@c    perish before thy face.

@c    9:5. For thou hast maintained my judgment and my cause:  thou hast sat
@c    on the throne, who judgest justice.

@c    9:6. Thou hast rebuked the Gentiles, and the wicked one hath perished;
@c    thou hast blotted out their name for ever and ever.

@c    9:7. The swords of the enemy have failed unto the end:  and their cities
@c    thou hast destroyed.  Their memory hath perished with a noise:

@c    9:8. But the Lord remaineth for ever.  He hath prepared his throne in
@c    judgment:

@c    9:9. And he shall judge the world in equity, he shall judge the people
@c    in justice.

@c    9:10. And the Lord is become a refuge for the poor:  a helper in due
@c    time in tribulation.

@c    9:11. And let them trust in thee who know thy name:  for thou hast not
@c    forsaken them that seek thee, O Lord.

@c    9:12. Sing ye to the Lord, who dwelleth in Sion:  declare his ways among
@c    the Gentiles:

@c    9:13. For requiring their blood, he hath remembered them:  he hath not
@c    forgotten the cry of the poor.

@c    9:14. Have mercy on me, O Lord:  see my humiliation which I suffer from
@c    my enemies.

@c    9:15. Thou that liftest me up from the gates of death, that I may
@c    declare all thy praises in the gates of the daughter of Sion.

@c    9:16. I will rejoice in thy salvation:  the Gentiles have stuck fast in
@c    the destruction which they prepared.  Their foot hath been taken in the
@c    very snare which they hid.

@c    9:17. The Lord shall be known when he executeth judgments:  the sinner
@c    hath been caught in the works of his own hands.

@c    9:18. The wicked shall be turned into hell, all the nations that forget
@c    God.

@c    9:19. For the poor man shall not be forgotten to the end:  the patience
@c    of the poor shall not perish for ever.

@c    9:20. Arise, O Lord, let not man be strengthened:  let the Gentiles be
@c    judged in thy sight.

@c    9:21. Appoint, O Lord, a lawgiver over them:  that the Gentiles may know
@c    themselves to be but men.

@c    Here the late Hebrew doctors divide this psalm into two, making ver. 22
@c    the beginning of Psalm 10.  And again they join Psalms 146 and 147 into
@c    one, in order that the whole number of psalms should not exceed 150.
@c    And in this manner the psalms are numbered in the Protestant Bible.

@c    Psalm 10 according to the Hebrews.

@c    9a:1. Why, O Lord, hast thou retired afar off?  why dost thou slight us
@c    in our wants, in the time of trouble?

@c    9a:2. Whilst the wicked man is proud, the poor is set on fire:  they are
@c    caught in the counsels which they devise.

@c    9a:3. For the sinner is praised in the desires of his soul:  and the
@c    unjust man is blessed.

@c    9a:4. The sinner hath provoked the Lord, according to the multitude of
@c    his wrath, he will not seek him:

@c    9a:5. God is not before his eyes:  his ways are filthy at all times.  Thy
@c    judgments are removed form his sight:  he shall rule over all his
@c    enemies.

@c    9a:6. For he hath said in his heart:  I shall not be moved from
@c    generation to generation, and shall be without evil.

@c    9a:7. His mouth is full of cursing, and of bitterness, and of deceit:
@c    under his tongue are labour and sorrow.

@c    9a:8. He sitteth in ambush with the rich, in private places, that he may
@c    kill the innocent.

@c    9a:9. His eyes are upon the poor man:  he lieth in wait, in secret, like
@c    a lion in his den.  He lieth in ambush, that he may catch the poor man:
@c    so catch the poor, whilst he draweth him to him.

@c    9a:10. In his net he will bring him down, he will crouch and fall, when
@c    he shall have power over the poor.

@c    9a:11. For he hath said in his heart:  God hath forgotten, he hath turned
@c    away his face, not to see to the end.

@c    9a:12. Arise, O Lord God, let thy hand be exalted:  forget not the poor.

@c    9a:13. Wherefore hath the wicked provoked God?  for he hath said in his
@c    heart:  He will not require it.

@c    9a:14. Thou seest it, for thou considerest labour and sorrow:  that thou
@c    mayst deliver them into thy hands.  To thee is the poor man left:  thou
@c    wilt be a helper to the orphan.

@c    9a:15. Break thou the arm of the sinner and of the malignant:  his sin
@c    shall be sought, and shall not be found.

@c    9a:16. The Lord shall reign to eternity, yea, for ever and ever:  ye
@c    Gentiles shall perish from his land.

@c    9a:17. The Lord hath heard the desire of the poor:  thy ear hath heard
@c    the preparation of their heart.

@c    9a:18. To judge for the fatherless and for the humble, that man may no
@c    more presume to magnify himself upon earth.



@c    Psalms Chapter 10


@c    In Domino confido.

@c    The just man's confidence in God in the midst of persecutions.

@c    10:1. Unto the end.  A psalm to David.

@c    10:2. In the Lord I put my trust:  how then do you say to my soul:  Get
@c    thee away from hence to the mountain, like a sparrow.

@c    10:3. For, lo, the wicked have bent their bow:  they have prepared their
@c    arrows in the quiver, to shoot in the dark the upright of heart.

@c    10:4. For they have destroyed the things which thou hast made:  but what
@c    has the just man done?

@c    10:5. The Lord is in his holy temple, the Lord's throne is in heaven.
@c    His eyes look on the poor man:  his eyelids examine the sons of men.

@c    10:6. The Lord trieth the just and the wicked:  but he that loveth
@c    iniquity, hateth his own soul.

@c    10:7. He shall rain snares upon sinners:  fire and brimstone, and storms
@c    of winds, shall be the portion of their cup.

@c    10:8. For the Lord is just, and hath loved justice:  his countenance
@c    hath beheld righteousness.



@c    Psalms Chapter 11


@c    Salvum me fac.

@c    The prophet calls for God's help against the wicked.

@c    11:1. Unto the end:  for the octave, a psalm for David.

@c    11:2. Save me, O Lord, for there is now no saint:  truths are decayed
@c    from among the children of men.

@c    11:3. They have spoken vain things, every one to his neighbour:  with
@c    deceitful lips, and with a double heart have they spoken.

@c    11:4. May the Lord destroy all deceitful lips, and the tongue that
@c    speaketh proud things.

@c    11:5. Who have said:  We will magnify our tongue:  our lips are our own:
@c    who is Lord over us?

@c    11:6. By reason of the misery of the needy, and the groans of the poor,
@c    now will I arise, saith the Lord.  I will set him in safety:  I will deal
@c    confidently in his regard.

@c    11:7. The words of the Lord are pure words:  as silver tried by the
@c    fire, purged from the earth, refined seven times.

@c    11:8. Thou, O Lord, wilt preserve us:  and keep us from this generation
@c    for ever.

@c    11:9. The wicked walk round about:  according to thy highness, thou hast
@c    multiplied the children of men.



@c    Psalms Chapter 12


@c    Usquequo, Domine.

@c    A prayer in tribulation.

@c    12:1. Unto the end, a psalm for David.  How long, O Lord, wilt thou
@c    forget me unto the end?  how long dost thou turn away thy face from me?

@c    12:2. How long shall I take counsels in my soul, sorrow in my heart all
@c    the day?

@c    12:3. How long shall my enemy be exalted over Me?

@c    12:4. Consider, and hear me, O Lord, my God.  Enlighten my eyes, that I
@c    never sleep in death:

@c    12:5. Lest at any time my enemy say:  I have prevailed against him.  They
@c    that trouble me, will rejoice when I am moved:

@c    12:6. But I have trusted in thy mercy.  My heart shall rejoice in thy
@c    salvation:  I will sing to the Lord, who giveth me good things:  yea, I
@c    will sing to the name of the Lord, the most high.



@c    Psalms Chapter 13


@c    Dixit insipiens.

@c    The general corruption of man before our redemption by Christ.

@c    13:1. Unto the end, a psalm for David.  The fool hath said in his heart:
@c    There is no God.  They are corrupt, and are become abominable in their
@c    ways:  there is none that doth good, no not one.

@c    13:2. The Lord hath looked down from heaven upon the children of men,
@c    to see if there be any that understand and seek God.

@c    13:3. They are all gone aside, they are become unprofitable together:
@c    there is none that doth good:  no not one.  Their throat is an open
@c    sepulchre; with their tongues they acted deceitfully:  the poison of
@c    asps is under their lips.  Their mouth is full of cursing and
@c    bitterness; their feet are swift to shed blood.  Destruction and
@c    unhappiness in their ways; and the way of peace they have not known:
@c    there is no fear of God before their eyes.

@c    13:4. Shall not all they know that work iniquity, who devour my people
@c    as they eat bread?

@c    13:5. They have not called upon the Lord:  there have they trembled for
@c    fear, where there was no fear.

@c    13:6. For the Lord is in the just generation:  you have confounded the
@c    counsel of the poor man; but the Lord is his hope.

@c    13:7. Who shall give out of Sion the salvation of Israel?  when the Lord
@c    shall have turned away the captivity of his people, Jacob shall
@c    rejoice, and Israel shall be glad.



@c    Psalms Chapter 14


@c    Domine, quis habitabit.

@c    What kind of men shall dwell in the heavenly Sion.

@c    14:1. A psalm for David.  Lord, who shall dwell in thy tabernacle?  or
@c    who shall rest in thy holy hill?

@c    14:2. He that walketh without blemish, and worketh justice:

@c    14:3. He that speaketh truth in his heart, who hath not used deceit in
@c    his tongue:  Nor hath done evil to his neighbour:  nor taken up a
@c    reproach against his neighbours.

@c    14:4. In his sight the malignant is brought to nothing:  but he
@c    glorifieth them that fear the Lord.  He that sweareth to his neighbour,
@c    and deceiveth not;

@c    14:5. He that hath not put out his money to usury, nortaken bribes
@c    against the innocent:  He that doth these things, shall not be moved for
@c    ever.



@c    Psalms Chapter 15


@c    Conserva me, Domine.

@c    Christ's future victory and triumph over the world and death.

@c    15:1. The inscription of a title to David himself.  Preserve me, O Lord,
@c    for I have put my trust in thee.

@c    The inscription of a title. . .That is, of a pillar or monument,
@c    staylographia:  which is as much as to say, that this psalm is most
@c    worthy to be engraved on an everlasting monument.

@c    15:2. I have said to the Lord, thou art my God, for thou hast no need
@c    of my goods.

@c    15:3. To the saints, who are in his land, he hath made wonderful all my
@c    desires in them.

@c    15:4. Their infirmities were multiplied:  afterwards they made haste.  I
@c    will not gather together their meetings for bloodofferings:  nor will I
@c    be mindful of their names by my lips.

@c    15:5. The Lord is the portion of my inheritance and of my cup:  it is
@c    thou that wilt restore my inheritance to me.

@c    15:6. The lines are fallen unto me in goodly places:  for my inheritance
@c    is goodly to me.

@c    15:7. I will bless the Lord, who hath given me understanding:  moreover,
@c    my reins also have corrected me even till night.

@c    15:8. I set the Lord always in my sight:  for he is at my right hand,
@c    that I be not moved.

@c    15:9. Therefore my heart hath been glad, and my tongue hath rejoiced:
@c    moreover, my flesh also shall rest in hope.

@c    15:10. Because thou wilt not leave my soul in hell; nor wilt thou give
@c    thy holy one to see corruption.

@c    15:11. Thou hast made known to me the ways of life, thou shalt fill me
@c    with joy with thy countenance:  at thy right hand are delights even to
@c    the end.



@c    Psalms Chapter 16


@c    Exaudi, Domine, justitiam.

@c    A just man's prayer in tribulation against the malice of his enemy.

@c    16:1. The prayer of David.  Hear, O Lord, my justice:  attend to my
@c    supplication.  Give ear unto my prayer, which proceedeth not from
@c    deceitful lips.

@c    16:2. Let my judgment come forth from thy countenance:  let thy eyes
@c    behold the things that are equitable.

@c    16:3. Thou hast proved my heart, and visited it by night, thou hast
@c    tried me by fire:  and iniquity hath not been found in me.

@c    16:4. That my mouth may not speak the works of men:  for the sake of the
@c    words of thy lips, I have kept hard ways.

@c    16:5. Perfect thou my goings in thy paths:  that my footsteps be not
@c    moved.

@c    16:6. I have cried to thee, for thou, O God, hast heard me:  O incline
@c    thy ear unto me, and hear my words.

@c    16:7. Shew forth thy wonderful mercies; thou who savest them that trust
@c    in thee.

@c    16:8. From them that resist thy right hand keep me, as the apple of thy
@c    eye.  Protect me under the shadow of thy wings.

@c    16:9. From the face of the wicked who have afflicted me.  My enemies
@c    have surrounded my soul:

@c    16:10. They have shut up their fat:  their mouth hath spoken proudly.

@c    Their fat. . .That is, their bowels of compassion:  for they have none
@c    for me.

@c    16:11. They have cast me forth, and now they have surrounded me:  they
@c    have set their eyes bowing down to the earth.

@c    16:12. They have taken me, as a lion prepared for the prey; and as a
@c    young lion dwelling in secret places.

@c    16:13. Arise, O Lord, disappoint him and supplant him; deliver my soul
@c    from the wicked one; thy sword

@c    16:14. From the enemies of thy hand.  O Lord, divide them from the few
@c    of the earth in their life:  their belly is filled from thy hidden
@c    stores.  They are full of children:  and they have left to their little
@c    ones the rest of their substance.

@c    Divide them from the few, etc. . .That is, cut them off from the earth,
@c    and the few trifling things thereof; which they are so proud of, or
@c    divide them from the few; that is, from thy elect, who are but few;
@c    that they may no longer have it in their power to oppress them.  It is
@c    not meant by way of a curse or imprecation; but, as many other the like
@c    passages in the psalms, by way of a prediction, or prophecy of what
@c    should come upon them, in punishment of their wickedness.  Ibid.  Thy
@c    hidden stores. . .Thy secret treasures, out of which thou furnishest
@c    those earthly goods, which, with a bountiful hand thou hast distributed
@c    both to the good and the bad.

@c    16:15. But as for me, I will appear before thy sight in justice:  I
@c    shall be satisfied when thy glory shall appear.



@c    Psalms Chapter 17


@c    Diligam te, Domine.

@c    David's thanks to God for his delivery from all his enemies.

@c    17:1. Unto the end, for David, the servant of the Lord, who spoke to
@c    the Lord the words of this canticle, in the day that the Lord delivered
@c    him from the hand of all his enemies, and from the hand of Saul:  and he
@c    said:

@c    17:2. I will love thee, O Lord, my strength:

@c    17:3. The Lord is my firmament, my refuge, and my deliverer.  My God is
@c    my helper, and in him will I put my trust.  My protector, and the horn
@c    of my salvation, and my support.

@c    17:4. Praising, I will call upon the Lord:  and I shall be saved from my
@c    enemies.

@c    17:5. The sorrows of death surrounded me:  and the torrents of iniquity
@c    troubled me.

@c    17:6. The sorrows of hell encompassed me:  and the snares of death
@c    prevented me.

@c    17:7. In my affliction I called upon the Lord, and I cried to my God:
@c    And he heard my voice from his holy temple:  and my cry before him came
@c    into his ears.

@c    17:8. The earth shook and trembled:  the foundations of the mountains
@c    were troubled and were moved, because he was angry with them.

@c    17:9. There went up a smoke in his wrath:  and a fire flamed from his
@c    face:  coals were kindled by it.

@c    17:10. He bowed the heavens, and came down, and darkness was under his
@c    feet.

@c    17:11. And he ascended upon the cherubim, and he flew; he flew upon the
@c    wings of the winds.

@c    17:12. And he made darkness his covert, his pavilion round about him:
@c    dark waters in the clouds of the air.

@c    17:13. At the brightness that was before him the clouds passed, hail
@c    and coals of fire.

@c    17:14. And the Lord thundered from heaven, and the Highest gave his
@c    voice:  hail and coals of fire.

@c    17:15. And he sent forth his arrows, and he scattered them:  he
@c    multiplied lightnings, and troubled them.

@c    17:16. Then the fountains of waters appeared, and the foundations of
@c    the world were discovered:  At thy rebuke, O Lord, at the blast of the
@c    spirit of thy wrath.

@c    17:17. He sent from on high, and took me:  and received me out of many
@c    waters.

@c    17:18. He delivered me from my strongest enemies, and from them that
@c    hated me:  for they were too strong for me.

@c    17:19. They prevented me in the day of my affliction:  and the Lord
@c    became my protector.

@c    17:20. And he brought me forth into a large place:  he saved me, because
@c    he was well pleased with me.

@c    17:21. And the Lord will reward me according to my justice; and will
@c    repay me according to the cleanness of my hands:

@c    17:22. Because I have kept the ways of the Lord; and have not done
@c    wickedly against my God.

@c    17:23. For all his judgments are in my sight:  and his justices I have
@c    not put away from me.

@c    17:24. And I shall be spotless with him:  and shall keep myself from my
@c    iniquity.

@c    17:25. And the Lord will reward me according to my justice:  and
@c    according to the cleanness of my hands before his eyes.

@c    17:26. With the holy thou wilt be holy; and with the innocent man thou
@c    wilt be innocent:

@c    17:27. And withe the elect thou wilt be elect:  and with the perverse
@c    thou wilt be perverted.

@c    17:28. For thou wilt save the humble people; but wilt bring down the
@c    eyes of the proud.

@c    17:29. For thou lightest my lamp, O Lord:  O my God, enlighten my
@c    darkness.

@c    17:30. For by thee I shall be delivered from temptation; and through my
@c    God I shall go over a wall.

@c    17:31. As for my God, his way is undefiled:  the words of the Lord are
@c    fire-tried:  he is the protector of all that trust in him.

@c    17:32. For who is God but the Lord?  or who is God but our God?

@c    17:33. God, who hath girt me with strength; and made my way blameless.

@c    17:34. Who hath made my feet like the feet of harts:  and who setteth me
@c    upon high places.

@c    17:35. Who teacheth my hands to war:  and thou hast made my arms like a
@c    brazen bow.

@c    17:36. And thou hast given me the protection of thy salvation:  and thy
@c    right hand hath held me up:  And thy discipline hath corrected me unto
@c    the end:  and thy discipline, the same shall teach me.

@c    17:37. Thou hast enlarged my steps under me; and my feet are not
@c    weakened.

@c    17:38. I will pursue after my enemies, and overtake them:  and I will
@c    not turn again till they are consumed.

@c    17:39. I will break them, and they shall not be able to stand:  they
@c    shall fall under my feet.

@c    17:40. And thou hast girded me with strength unto battle; and hast
@c    subdued under me them that rose up against me.

@c    17:41. And thou hast made my enemies furn their back upon me, and hast
@c    destroyed them that hated me.

@c    17:42. They cried, but there was none to save them, to the Lord:  but he
@c    heard them not.

@c    17:43. And I shall beat them as small as the dust before the wind; I
@c    shall bring them to nought, like the dirt in the streets.

@c    17:44. Thou wilt deliver me from the contradictions of the people; thou
@c    wilt make me head of the Gentiles.

@c    17:45. A people which I knew not, hath served me:  at the hearing of the
@c    ear they have obeyed me.

@c    17:46. The children that are strangers have lied to me, strange
@c    children have faded away, and have halted from their paths.

@c    17:47. The Lord liveth, and blessed by my God, and let the God of my
@c    salvation be exalted.

@c    17:48. O God, who avengest me, and subduest the people under me, my
@c    deliverer from my enraged enemies.

@c    17:49. And thou wilt lift me up above them that rise up against me:
@c    from the unjust man thou wilt deliver me.

@c    17:50. Therefore will I give glory to thee, O Lord, among the nations,
@c    and I will sing a psalm to thy name.

@c    17:51. Giving great deliverance to his king, and shewing mercy to
@c    David, his anointed:  and to his seed for ever.



@c    Psalms Chapter 18


@c    Coeli enarrant.

@c    The works of God shew forth his glory:  his law is greatly to be
@c    esteemed and loved.

@c    18:1. Unto the end.  A Psalm for David.

@c    18:2. The heavens shew forth the glory of God, and the firmament
@c    declareth the work of his hands.

@c    18:3. Day to day uttereth speech, and night to night sheweth knowledge.

@c    18:4. There are no speeches nor languages, where their voices are not
@c    heard.

@c    18:5. Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth:  and their words
@c    unto the ends of the world.

@c    18:6. He hath set his tabernacle in the sun:  and he as a bridegroom
@c    coming out of his bridechamber, Hath rejoiced as a giant to run the
@c    way:

@c    18:7. His going out is from the end of heaven, And his circuit even to
@c    the end thereof:  and there is no one that can hide himself from his
@c    heat.

@c    18:8. The law of the Lord is unspotted, converting souls:  the testimony
@c    of the Lord is faithful, giving wisdom to little ones.

@c    18:9. The justices of the Lord are right, rejoicing hearts:  the
@c    commandment of the Lord is lightsome, enlightening the eyes.

@c    18:10. The fear of the Lord is holy, enduring for ever and ever:  the
@c    judgments of the Lord are true, justified in themselves.

@c    18:11. More to be desired than gold and many precious stones:  and
@c    sweeter than honey and the honeycomb.

@c    18:12. For thy servant keepeth them, and in keeping them there is a
@c    great reward.

@c    18:13. Who can understand sins?  from my secret ones cleanse me, O Lord:

@c    18:14. And from those of others spare thy servant.  If they shall have
@c    no dominion over me, then shall I be without spot:  and I shall be
@c    cleansed form the greatest sin.

@c    18:15. And the words of my mouth shall be such as may please:  and the
@c    meditation of my heart always in thy sight.  O Lord, my helper and my
@c    Redeemer.



@c    Psalms Chapter 19


@c    Exaudiat te Dominus.

@c    A prayer for the king.

@c    19:1. Unto the end.  A psalm for David.

@c    19:2. May the Lord hear thee in the day of tribulation:  may the name of
@c    the God of Jacob protect thee.

@c    19:3. May he send thee help from the sanctuary:  and defend thee out of
@c    Sion.

@c    19:4. May he be mindful of all thy sacrifices:  and may thy whole
@c    burntoffering be made fat.

@c    19:5. May he give thee according to thy own heart; and confirm all thy
@c    counsels.

@c    19:6. We will rejoice in thy salvation; and in the name of our God we
@c    shall be exalted.

@c    19:7. The Lord fulfil all thy petitions:  now have I known that the Lord
@c    hath saved his anointed.  He will hear him from his holy heaven:  the
@c    salvation of his right hand is in powers.

@c    The salvation of his right hand is in powers. . .That is, in strength.
@c    His right hand is strong and mighty to save them that trust in him.

@c    19:8. Some trust in chariots, and some in horses:  but we will call upon
@c    the name of the Lord, our God.

@c    19:9. They are bound, and have fallen:  but we are risen, and are set
@c    upright.  O Lord, save the king:  and hear us in the day that we shall
@c    call upon thee.



@c    Psalms Chapter 20


@c    Domine, in virtute.

@c    Praise to God for Christ's exaltation after his passion.

@c    20:1. Unto the end.  A psalm for David.

@c    20:2. In thy strength, O Lord, the king shall joy; and in thy salvation
@c    he shall rejoice exceedingly.

@c    20:3. Thou hast given him his heart's desire:  and hast not withholden
@c    from him the will of his lips.

@c    20:4. For thou hast prevented him with blessings of sweetness:  thou
@c    hast set on his head a crown of precious stones.

@c    20:5. He asked life of thee:  and thou hast given him length of days for
@c    ever and ever.

@c    20:6. His glory is great in thy salvation:  glory and great beauty shalt
@c    thou lay upon him.

@c    20:7. For thou shalt give him to be a blessing for ever and ever:  thou
@c    shalt make him joyful in gladness with thy countenance.

@c    20:8. For the king hopeth in the Lord:  and through the mercy of the
@c    most High he shall not be moved.

@c    20:9. Let thy hand be found by all thy enemies:  let thy right hand find
@c    out all them that hate thee.

@c    20:10. Thou shalt make them as an oven of fire, in the time of thy
@c    anger:  the Lord shall trouble them in his wrath, and fire shall devour
@c    them.

@c    20:11. Their fruit shalt thou destroy from the earth:  and their seed
@c    from among the children of men.

@c    20:12. For they have intended evils against thee:  they have devised
@c    counsels which they have not been able to establish.

@c    20:13. For thou shalt make them turn their back:  in thy remnants thou
@c    shalt prepare their face.

@c    In thy remnants thou shalt prepare their face. . .Or thou shalt set thy
@c    remnants against their faces.  That is, thou shalt make them see what
@c    punishments remain for them hereafter from thy justice.  Instead of
@c    remnants, St. Jerome renders it funes, that is, cords or strings, viz.,
@c    of the bow of divine justice, from which God directs his arrows against
@c    the faces of his enemies.

@c    20:14. Be thou exalted, O Lord, in thy own strength:  we will sing and
@c    praise thy power.



@c    Psalms Chapter 21


@c    Deus Deus meus.

@c    Christ's passion:  and the conversion of the Gentiles.

@c    21:1. Unto the end, for the morning protection, a psalm for David.

@c    21:2. O God my God, look upon me:  why hast thou forsaken me?  Far from
@c    my salvation are the words of my sins.

@c    The words of my sins. . .That is, the sins of the world, which I have
@c    taken upon myself, cry out against me, and are the cause of all my
@c    sufferings.

@c    21:3. O my God, I shall cry by day, and thou wilt not hear:  and by
@c    night, and it shall not be reputed as folly in me.

@c    21:4. But thou dwellest in the holy place, the praise of Israel.

@c    21:5. In thee have our fathers hoped:  they have hoped, and thou hast
@c    delivered them.

@c    21:6. They cried to thee, and they were saved:  they trusted in thee,
@c    and were not confounded.

@c    21:7. But I am a worm, and no man:  the reproach of men, and the outcast
@c    of the people.

@c    21:8. All they that saw me have laughed me to scorn:  they have spoken
@c    with the lips, and wagged the head.

@c    21:9. He hoped in the Lord, let him deliver him:  let him save him,
@c    seeing he delighteth in him.

@c    21:10. For thou art he that hast drawn me out of the womb:  my hope from
@c    the breasts of my mother.

@c    21:11. I was cast upon thee from the womb.  From my mother's womb thou
@c    art my God,

@c    21:12. Depart not from me.  For tribulation is very near:  for there is
@c    none to help me.

@c    21:13. Many calves have surrounded me:  fat bulls have besieged me.

@c    21:14.They have opened their mouths against me, as a lion ravening and
@c    roaring.

@c    21:15. I am poured out like water; and all my bones are scattered.  My
@c    heart is become like wax melting in the midst of my bowels.

@c    21:16. My strength is dried up like a potsherd, and my tongue hath
@c    cleaved to my jaws:  and thou hast brought me down into the dust of
@c    death.

@c    21:17. For many dogs have encompassed me:  the council of the malignant
@c    hath besieged me.  They have dug my hands and feet.

@c    21:18. They have numbered all my bones.  And they have looked and stared
@c    upon me.

@c    21:19. They parted my garments amongst them; and upon my vesture they
@c    cast lots.

@c    21:20. But thou, O Lord, remove not thy help to a distance from me;
@c    look towards my defence.

@c    21:21. Deliver, O God, my soul from the sword:  my only one from the
@c    hand of the dog.

@c    21:22. Save me from the lion's mouth; and my lowness from the horns of
@c    the unicorns.

@c    21:23. I will declare thy name to my brethren:  in the midst of the
@c    church will I praise thee.

@c    21:24. Ye that fear the Lord, praise him:  all ye the seed of Jacob,
@c    glorify him.

@c    21:25. Let all the seed of Israel fear him:  because he hath not
@c    slighted nor despised the supplication of the poor man.  Neither hath he
@c    turned away his face form me:  and when I cried to him he heard me.

@c    21:26. With thee is my praise in a great church:  I will pay my vows in
@c    the sight of them that fear him.

@c    21:27. The poor shall eat and shall be filled:  and they shall praise
@c    the Lord that seek him:  their hearts shall live for ever and ever.

@c    21:28. All the ends of the earth shall remember, and shall be converted
@c    to the Lord:  And all the kindreds of the Gentiles shall adore in his
@c    sight.

@c    21:29. For the kingdom is the Lord's; and he shall have dominion over
@c    the nations.

@c    21:30. All the fat ones of the earth have eaten and have adored:  all
@c    they that go down to the earth shall fall before him.

@c    21:31. And to him my soul shall live:  and my seed shall serve him.

@c    21:32. There shall be declared to the Lord a generation to come:  and
@c    the heavens shall shew forth his justice to a people that shall be
@c    born, which the Lord hath made.



@c    Psalms Chapter 22


@c    Dominus regit me.

@c    God's spiritual benefits to faithful souls.

@c    22:1. A psalm for David.  The Lord ruleth me:  and I shall want nothing.

@c    Ruleth me. . .In Hebrew, Is my shepherd, viz., to feed, guide, and
@c    govern me.

@c    22:2. He hath set me in a place of pasture.  He hath brought me up, on
@c    the water of refreshment:

@c    22:3. He hath converted my soul.  He hath led me on the paths of
@c    justice, for his own name's sake.

@c    22:4. For though I should walk in the midst of the shadow of death, I
@c    will fear no evils, for thou art with me.  Thy rod and thy staff, they
@c    have comforted me.

@c    22:5. Thou hast prepared a table before me against them that afflict
@c    me.  Thou hast anointed my head with oil; and my chalice which
@c    inebreateth me, how goodly is it!

@c    22:6. And thy mercy will follow me all the days of my life.  And that I
@c    may dwell in the house of the Lord unto length of days.



@c    Psalms Chapter 23


@c    Domini est terra.

@c    Who are they that shall ascend to heaven:  Christ's triumphant ascension
@c    thither.

@c    23:1. On the first day of the week, a psalm for David.  The earth is the
@c    Lord's and the fulness thereof:  the world, and all they that dwell
@c    therein.

@c    23:2. For he hath founded it upon the seas; and hath prepared it upon
@c    the rivers.

@c    23:3. Who shall ascend into the mountain of the Lord:  or who shall
@c    stand in his holy place?

@c    23:4. The innocent in hands, and clean of heart, who hath not taken his
@c    soul in vain, nor sworn deceitfully to his neighbour.

@c    23:5. He shall receive a blessing from the Lord, and mercy from God his
@c    Saviour.

@c    23:6. This is the generation of them that seek him, of them that seek
@c    the face of the God of Jacob.

@c    23:7. Lift up your gates, O ye princes, and be ye lifted up, O eternal
@c    gates:  and the King of Glory shall enter in.

@c    23:8. Who is this King of Glory?  the Lord who is strong and mighty:  the
@c    Lord mighty in battle.

@c    23:9. Lift up your gates, O ye princes, and be ye lifted up, O eternal
@c    gates:  and the King of Glory shall enter in.

@c    23:10. Who is this King of Glory?  the Lord of hosts, he is the King of
@c    Glory.



@c    Psalms Chapter 24


@c    Ad te, Domine, levavi.

@c    A prayer for grace, mercy, and protection against our enemies.

@c    24:1. Unto the end, a psalm for David.  To thee, O Lord, have I lifted
@c    up my soul.

@c    24:2. In thee, O my God, I put my trust; let me not be ashamed.

@c    24:3. Neither let my enemies laugh at me:  for none of them that wait on
@c    thee shall be confounded.

@c    24:4. Let all them be confounded that act unjust things without cause.
@c    Shew, O Lord, thy ways to me, and teach me thy paths.

@c    24:5. Direct me in thy truth, and teach me; for thou art God my
@c    Saviour; and on thee have I waited all the day long.

@c    24:6. Remember, O Lord, thy bowels of compassion; and thy mercies that
@c    are from the beginning of the world.

@c    24:7. The sins of my youth and my ignorances do not remember.  According
@c    to thy mercy remember thou me:  for thy goodness' sake, O Lord.

@c    24:8. The Lord is sweet and righteous:  therefore he will give a law to
@c    sinners in the way.

@c    24:9. He will guide the mild in judgment:  he will teach the meek his
@c    ways.

@c    24:10. All the ways of the Lord are mercy and truth, to them that seek
@c    after his covenant and his testimonies.

@c    24:11. For thy name's sake, O Lord, thou wilt pardon my sin:  for it is
@c    great.

@c    24:12. Who is the man that feareth the Lord?  He hath appointed him a
@c    law in the way he hath chosen.

@c    24:13. His soul shall dwell in good things:  and his seed shall inherit
@c    the land.

@c    24:14. The Lord is a firmament to them that fear him:  and his covenant
@c    shall be made manifest to them.

@c    24:15. My eyes are ever towards the Lord:  for he shall pluck my feet
@c    out of the snare.

@c    24:16. Look thou upon me, and have mercy on me; for I am alone and
@c    poor.

@c    24:17. The troubles of my heart are multiplied:  deliver me from my
@c    necessities.

@c    24:18. See my abjection and my labour; and forgive me all my sins.

@c    24:19. Consider my enemies for they are multiplied, and have hated me
@c    with an unjust hatred.

@c    24:20. Deep thou my soul, and deliver me:  I shall not be ashamed, for I
@c    have hoped in thee.

@c    24:21. The innocent and the upright have adhered to me:  because I have
@c    waited on thee.

@c    24:22. Deliver Israel, O God, from all his tribulations.



@c    Psalms Chapter 25


@c    Judica me, Domine.

@c    David's prayer to God in his distress, to be delivered, that he may
@c    come to worship him in his tabernacle.

@c    25:1. Unto the end, a psalm for David.  Judge me, O Lord, for I have
@c    walked in my innocence:  and I have put my trust in the Lord, and shall
@c    not be weakened.

@c    25:2. Prove me, O Lord, and try me; burn my reins and my heart.

@c    25:3. For thy mercy is before my eyes; and I am well pleased with thy
@c    truth.

@c    25:4. I have not sat with the council of vanity:  neither will I go in
@c    with the doers of unjust things.

@c    25:5. I have hated the assembly of the malignant; and with the wicked I
@c    will not sit.

@c    25:6. I will wash my hands among the innocent; and will compass thy
@c    altar, O Lord:

@c    25:7. That I may hear the voice of thy praise:  and tell of all thy
@c    wondrous works.

@c    25:8. I have loved, O Lord, the beauty of thy house; and the place
@c    where thy glory dwelleth.

@c    25:9. Take not away my soul, O God, with the wicked:  nor my life with
@c    bloody men:

@c    25:10. In whose hands are iniquities:  their right hand is filled with
@c    gifts.

@c    25:11. But as for me, I have walked in my innocence:  redeem me, and
@c    have mercy on me.

@c    25:12. My foot hath stood in the direct way:  in the churches I will
@c    bless thee, O Lord.



@c    Psalms Chapter 26


@c    Dominus illuminatio.

@c    David's faith and hope in God.

@c    26:1. The psalm of David before he was anointed.  The Lord is my light
@c    and my salvation, whom shall I fear?  The Lord is the protector of my
@c    life:  of whom shall I be afraid?

@c    26:2. Whilst the wicked draw near against me, to eat my flesh.  My
@c    enemies that trouble me, have themselves been weakened, and have
@c    fallen.

@c    26:3. If armies in camp should stand together against me, my heart
@c    shall not fear.  If a battle should rise up against me, in this will I
@c    be confident.

@c    26:4. One thing I have asked of the Lord, this will I seek after; that
@c    I may dwell in the house of the Lord all the days of my life.  That I
@c    may see the delight of the Lord, and may visit his temple.

@c    26:5. For he hath hidden me in his tabernacle; in the day of evils, he
@c    hath protected me in the secret place of his tabernacle.

@c    26:6. He hath exalted me upon a rock:  and now he hath lifted up my head
@c    above my enemies.  I have gone round, and have offered up in his
@c    tabernacle a sacrifice of jubilation:  I will sing, and recite a psalm
@c    to the Lord.

@c    26:7. Hear, O Lord, my voice, with which I have cried to thee:  have
@c    mercy on me and hear me.

@c    26:8. My heart hath said to thee:  My face hath sought thee:  thy face, O
@c    Lord, will I still seek.

@c    26:9. Turn not away thy face from me; decline not in thy wrath from thy
@c    servant.  Be thou my helper, forsake me not; do not thou despise me, O
@c    God my Saviour.

@c    26:10. For my father and my mother have left me:  but the Lord hath
@c    taken me up.

@c    26:11. Set me, O Lord, a law in thy way, and guide me in the right
@c    path, because of my enemies.

@c    26:12. Deliver me not over to the will of them that trouble me; for
@c    unjust witnesses have risen up against me; and iniquity hath lied to
@c    itself.

@c    26:13. I believe to see the good things of the Lord in the land of the
@c    living.

@c    26:14. Expect the Lord, do manfully, and let thy heart take courage,
@c    and wait thou for the Lord.



@c    Psalms Chapter 27


@c    Ad te, Domine, clamabo.

@c    David's prayer that his enemies may not prevail over him.

@c    27:1. A psalm for David himself.  Unto thee will I cry, O Lord:  O my
@c    God, be not thou silent to me:  lest if thou be silent to me, I become
@c    like them that go down into the pit.

@c    27:2. Hear, O Lord, the voice of my supplication, when I pray to thee;
@c    when I lift up my hands to thy holy temple.

@c    27:3. Draw me not away together with the wicked; and with the workers
@c    of iniquity destroy me not:  Who speak peace with their neighbour, but
@c    evils are in their hearts.

@c    27:4. Give them according to their works, and according to the
@c    wickedness of their inventions.  According to the works of their hands
@c    give thou to them:  render to them their reward.

@c    27:5. Because they have not understood the works of the Lord, and the
@c    operations of his hands:  thou shalt destroy them, and shalt not build
@c    them up.

@c    27:6. Blessed be the Lord, for he hath heard the voice of my
@c    supplication.

@c    27:7. The Lord is my helper and my protector:  in him hath my heart
@c    confided, and I have been helped.  And my flesh hath flourished again,
@c    and with my will I will give praise to him.

@c    27:8. The Lord is the strength of his people, and the protector of the
@c    salvation of his anointed.

@c    27:9. Save, O Lord, thy people, and bless thy inheritance:  and rule
@c    them and exalt them for ever.



@c    Psalms Chapter 28


@c    Afferte Domino.

@c    An invitation to glorify God, with a commemoration of his mighty works.

@c    28:1. A psalm for David, at the finishing of the tabernacle.  Bring to
@c    the Lord, O ye children of God:  bring to the Lord the offspring of
@c    rams.

@c    28:2. Bring to the Lord glory and honour:  bring to the Lord glory to
@c    his name:  adore ye the Lord in his holy court.

@c    28:3. The voice of the Lord is upon the waters; the God of majesty hath
@c    thundered, The Lord is upon many waters.

@c    28:4. The voice of the Lord is in power; the voice of the Lord in
@c    magnificence.

@c    28:5. The voice of the Lord breaketh the cedars:  yea, the Lord shall
@c    break the cedars of Libanus.

@c    28:6. And shall reduce them to pieces, as a calf of Libanus, and as the
@c    beloved son of unicorns.

@c    Shall reduce them to pieces, etc. . .In Hebrew, shall make them to skip
@c    like a calf.  The psalmist here describes the effects of thunder (which
@c    he calls the voice of the Lord) which sometimes breaks down the tallest
@c    and strongest trees; and makes their broken branches skip, etc.  All
@c    this is to be understood mystically of the powerful voice of God's word
@c    in his church; which has broken the pride of the great ones of this
@c    world, and brought many of them meekly and joyfully to submit their
@c    necks to the sweet yoke of Christ.

@c    28:7. The voice of the Lord divideth the flame of fire:

@c    28:8. The voice of the Lord shaketh the desert:  and the Lord shall
@c    shake the desert of Cades.

@c    28:9. The voice of the Lord prepareth the stags:  and he will discover
@c    the thick woods:  and in his temple all shall speak his glory.

@c    28:10. The Lord maketh the flood to dwell:  and the Lord shall sit king
@c    for ever.  The Lord will give strength to his people:  the Lord will
@c    bless his people with peace.



@c    Psalms Chapter 29


@c    Exaltabo te, Domine.

@c    David praiseth God for his deliverance, and his merciful dealings with
@c    him.

@c    29:1. A psalm of a canticle, at the dedication of David's house.

@c    29:2. I will extol thee, O Lord, for thou hast upheld me:  and hast not
@c    made my enemies to rejoice over me.

@c    29:3. O Lord my God, I have cried to thee, and thou hast healed me.

@c    29:4. Thou hast brought forth, O Lord, my soul from hell:  thou hast
@c    saved me from them that go down into the pit.

@c    29:5. Sing to the Lord, O ye his saints:  and give praise to the memory
@c    of his holiness.

@c    29:6. For wrath is in his indignation; and life in his good will.  In
@c    the evening weeping shall have place, and in the morning gladness.

@c    29:7. And in my abundance I said:  I shall never be moved.

@c    29:8. O Lord, in thy favour, thou gavest strength to my beauty.  Thou
@c    turnedst away thy face from me, and I became troubled.

@c    29:9. To thee, O Lord, will I cry:  and I will make supplication to my
@c    God.

@c    29:10. What profit is there in my blood, whilst I go down to
@c    corruption?  Shall dust confess to thee, or declare thy truth?

@c    29:11. The Lord hath heard, and hath had mercy on me:  the Lord became
@c    my helper.

@c    29:12. Thou hast turned for me my mourning into joy:  thou hast cut my
@c    sackcloth, and hast compassed me with gladness:

@c    29:13. To the end that my glory may sing to thee, and I may not regret:
@c    O Lord my God, I will give praise to thee for ever.



@c    Psalms Chapter 30


@c    In te, Domine, speravi.

@c    A prayer of a just man under affliction.

@c    30:1. Unto the end, a psalm for David, in an ecstasy.

@c    30:2. In thee, O Lord, have I hoped, let me never be confounded:
@c    deliver me in thy justice.

@c    30:3. Bow down thy ear to me:  make haste to deliver me.  Be thou unto me
@c    a God, a protector, and a house of refuge, to save me.

@c    30:4. For thou art my strength and my refuge; and for thy name's sake
@c    thou wilt lead me, and nourish me.

@c    30:5. Thou wilt bring me out of this snare, which they have hidden for
@c    me:  for thou art my protector.

@c    30:6. Into thy hands I commend my spirit:  thou hast redeemed me, O
@c    Lord, the God of truth.

@c    30:7. Thou hast hated them that regard vanities, to no purpose.  But I
@c    have hoped in the Lord:

@c    30:8. I will be glad and rejoice in thy mercy.  For thou hast regarded
@c    my humility, thou hast saved my soul out of distresses.

@c    30:9. And thou hast not shut me up in the hands of the enemy:  thou hast
@c    set my feet in a spacious place.

@c    30:10. Have mercy on me, O Lord, for I am afflicted:  my eye is troubled
@c    with wrath, my soul, and my belly:

@c    30:11. For my life is wasted with grief:  and my years in sighs.  My
@c    strength is weakened through poverty and my bones are disturbed.

@c    30:12. I am become a reproach among all my enemies, and very much to my
@c    neighbours; and a fear to my acquaintance.  They that saw me without
@c    fled from me.

@c    30:13. I am forgotten as one dead from the heart.  I am become as a
@c    vessel that is destroyed.

@c    30:14. For I have heard the blame of many that dwell round about.  While
@c    they assembled together against me, they consulted to take away my
@c    life.

@c    30:15. But I have put my trust in thee, O Lord:  I said:  Thou art my
@c    God.

@c    30:16. My lots are in thy hands.  Deliver me out of the hands of my
@c    enemies; and from them that persecute me.

@c    30:17. Make thy face to shine upon thy servant; save me in thy mercy.

@c    30:18. Let me not be confounded, O Lord, for I have called upon thee.
@c    Let the wicked be ashamed, and be brought down to hell.

@c    30:19. Let deceitful lips be made dumb.  Which speak iniquity against
@c    the just, with pride and abuse.

@c    30:20. O how great is the multitude of thy sweetness, O Lord, which
@c    thou hast hidden for them that fear thee!  Which thou hast wrought for
@c    them that hope in thee, in the sight of the sons of men.

@c    30:21. Thou shalt hide them in the secret of thy face, from the
@c    disturbance of men.  Thou shalt protect them in thy tabernacle from the
@c    contradiction of tongues.

@c    30:22. Blessed be the Lord, for he hath shewn his wonderful mercy to me
@c    in a fortified city.

@c    30:23. But I said in the excess of my mind:  I am cast away from before
@c    thy eyes.  Therefore thou hast heard the voice of my prayer, when I
@c    cried to thee.

@c    30:24. O love the Lord, all ye his saints:  for the Lord will require
@c    truth, and will repay them abundantly that act proudly.

@c    30:25. Do ye manfully, and let your heart be strengthened, all ye that
@c    hope in the Lord.



@c    Psalms Chapter 31


@c    Beati quorum.

@c    The second penitential psalm.

@c    31:1. To David himself, understanding.  Blessed are they whose
@c    iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are covered.

@c    31:2. Blessed is the man to whom the Lord hath not imputed sin, and in
@c    whose spirit there is no guile.

@c    31:3. Because I was silent my bones grew old; whilst I cried out all
@c    the day long.

@c    Because I was silent, etc. . .That is, whilst I kept silence, by
@c    concealing, or refusing to confess my sins, thy hand was heavy upon me,
@c    etc.

@c    31:4. For day and night thy hand was heavy upon me:  I am turned in my
@c    anguish, whilst the thorn is fastened.

@c    I am turned, etc. . .That is, I turn and roll about in my bed to seek
@c    for ease in my pain whilst the thorn of thy justice pierces my flesh,
@c    and sticks fast in me.  Or, I am turned:  that is, I am converted to
@c    thee, my God, by being brought to a better understanding by thy
@c    chastisements.  In the Hebrew it is, my moisture is turned into the
@c    droughts of the summer.

@c    31:5. I have acknowledged my sin to thee, and my injustice I have not
@c    concealed.  I said I will confess against my self my injustice to the
@c    Lord:  and thou hast forgiven the wickedness of my sin.

@c    31:6. For this shall every one that is holy pray to thee in a
@c    seasonable time.  And yet in a flood of many waters, they shall not come
@c    nigh unto him.

@c    31:7. Thou art my refuge from the trouble which hath encompassed me:  my
@c    joy, deliver me from them that surround me.

@c    31:8. I will give thee understanding, and I will instruct thee in this
@c    way, in which thou shalt go:  I will fix my eyes upon thee.

@c    31:9. Do not become like the horse and the mule, who have no
@c    understanding.  With bit and bridle bind fast their jaws, who come not
@c    near unto thee.

@c    31:10. Many are the scourges of the sinner, but mercy shall encompass
@c    him that hopeth in the Lord.

@c    31:11. Be glad in the Lord, and rejoice, ye just, and glory, all ye
@c    right of heart.



@c    Psalms Chapter 32


@c    Exultate, justi.

@c    An exhortation to praise God, and to trust in him.

@c    32:1. A psalm for David.  Rejoice in the Lord, O ye just:  praise
@c    becometh the upright.

@c    32:2. Give praise to the Lord on the harp; sing to him with the
@c    psaltery, the instrument of ten strings.

@c    32:3. Sing to him a new canticle, sing well unto him with a loud noise.

@c    32:4. For the word of the Lord is right, and all his works are done
@c    with faithfulness.

@c    32:5. He loveth mercy and judgment; the earth is full of the mercy of
@c    the Lord.

@c    32:6. By the word of the Lord the heavens were established; and all the
@c    power of them by the spirit of his mouth:

@c    32:7. Gathering together the waters of the sea, as in a vessel; laying
@c    up the depths in storehouses.

@c    32:8. Let all the earth fear the Lord, and let all the inhabitants of
@c    the world be in awe of him.

@c    32:9. For he spoke and they were made:  he commanded and they were
@c    created.

@c    32:10. The Lord bringeth to nought the counsels of nations; and he
@c    rejecteth the devices of people, and casteth away the counsels of
@c    princes.

@c    32:11. But the counsel of the Lord standeth for ever:  the thoughts of
@c    his heart to all generations.

@c    32:12. Blessed is the nation whose God is the Lord:  the people whom he
@c    hath chosen for his inheritance.

@c    32:13. The Lord hath looked from heaven:  he hath beheld all the sons of
@c    men.

@c    32:14. From his habitation which he hath prepared, he hath looked upon
@c    all that dwell on the earth.

@c    32:15. He who hath made the hearts of every one of them:  who
@c    understandeth all their works.

@c    32:16. The king is not saved by a great army:  nor shall the giant be
@c    saved by his own great strength.

@c    32:17. Vain is the horse for safety:  neither shall he be saved by the
@c    abundance of his strength.

@c    32:18. Behold the eyes of the Lord are on them that fear him:  and on
@c    them that hope in his mercy.

@c    32:19. To deliver their souls from death; and feed them in famine.

@c    32:20. Our soul waiteth for the Lord:  for he is our helper and
@c    protector.

@c    32:21. For in him our heart shall rejoice:  and in his holy name we have
@c    trusted.

@c    32:22. Let thy mercy, O Lord, be upon us, as we have hooped in thee.



@c    Psalms Chapter 33


@c    Benedicam Dominum.

@c    An exhortation to the praise, and service of God.

@c    33:1. For David, when he changed his countenance before Achimelech, who
@c    dismissed him, and he went his way.  [1 Kings 21.]

@c    33:2. I will bless the Lord at all times, his praise shall be always in
@c    my mouth.

@c    33:3. In the Lord shall my soul be praised:  let the meek hear and
@c    rejoice.

@c    33:4. O magnify the Lord with me; and let us extol his name together.

@c    33:5. I sought the Lord, and he heard me; and he delivered me from all
@c    my troubles.

@c    33:6. Come ye to him and be enlightened:  and your faces shall not be
@c    confounded.

@c    33:7. This poor man cried, and the Lord heard him:  and saved him out of
@c    all his troubles.

@c    33:8. The angel of the Lord shall encamp round about them that fear
@c    him:  and shall deliver them.

@c    33:9. O taste, and see that the Lord is sweet:  blessed is the man that
@c    hopeth in him.

@c    33:10. Fear the Lord, all ye his saints:  for there is no want to them
@c    that fear him.

@c    33:11. The rich have wanted, and have suffered hunger:  but they that
@c    seek the Lord shall not be deprived of any good.

@c    33:12. Come, children, hearken to me:  I will teach you the fear of the
@c    Lord.

@c    33:13. Who is the man that desireth life:  who liveth to see good days?

@c    33:14. Keep thy tongue form evil, and thy lips from speaking guile.

@c    33:15. Turn away from evil and do good:  seek after peace and pursue it.

@c    33:16. The eyes of the Lord are upon the just:  and his ears unto their
@c    prayers.

@c    33:17. But the countenance of the Lord is against them that do evil
@c    things:  to cut off the remembrance of them from the earth.

@c    33:18. The just cried, and the Lord heard them:  and delivered them out
@c    of all their troubles.

@c    33:19. The Lord is nigh unto them that are of a contrite heart:  and he
@c    will save the humble of spirit.

@c    33:20. Many are the afflictions of the just; but out of them all will
@c    the Lord deliver them.

@c    33:21. The Lord is nigh unto them that are of a contrite heart:  and he
@c    will save the humble of spirit.

@c    33:22. The death of the wicked is very evil:  and they that hate the
@c    just shall be guilty.

@c    33:23. The Lord will redeem the souls of his servants:  and none of them
@c    that trust in him shall offend.



@c    Psalms Chapter 34


@c    Judica, Domine, nocentes me.

@c    David, in the person of Christ, prayeth against his persecutors:
@c    prophetically foreshewing the punishments that shall fall upon them.

@c    34:1. For David himself.  Judge thou, O Lord, them that wrong me:
@c    overthrow them that fight against me.

@c    34:2. Take hold of arms and shield:  and rise up to help me.

@c    34:3. Bring out the sword, and shut up the way against them that
@c    persecute me:  say to my soul:  I am thy salvation.

@c    34:4. Let them be confounded and ashamed that seek after my soul.  Let
@c    them be turned back and be confounded that devise evil against me.

@c    34:5. Let them become as dust before the wind:  and let the angel of the
@c    Lord straiten them.

@c    34:6. Let their way become dark and slippery; and let the angel of the
@c    Lord pursue them.

@c    34:7. For without cause they have hidden their net for me unto
@c    destruction:  without cause they have upbraided my soul.

@c    34:8. Let the snare which he knoweth not come upon him:  and let the net
@c    which he hath hidden catch him:  and into that very snare let them fall.

@c    34:9. But my soul shall rejoice in the Lord; and shall be delighted in
@c    his salvation.

@c    34:10. All my bones shall say:  Lord, who is like to thee?  Who
@c    deliverest the poor from the hand of them that are stronger than he;
@c    the needy and the poor from them that strip him.

@c    34:11. Unjust witnesses rising up have asked me things I knew not.

@c    34:12. They repaid me evil for good:  to the depriving me of my soul.

@c    34:13. But as for me, when they were troublesome to me, I was clothed
@c    with haircloth.  I humbled my soul with fasting; and my prayer shall be
@c    turned into my bosom.

@c    34:14. As a neighbour and as an own brother, so did I please:  as one
@c    mourning and sorrowful so was I humbled.

@c    34:15. But they rejoiced against me, and came together:  scourges were
@c    gathered together upon me, and I knew not.

@c    34:16. They were separated, and repented not:  they tempted me, they
@c    scoffed at me with scorn:  they gnashed upon me with their teeth.

@c    34:17. Lord, when wilt thou look upon me?  rescue thou my soul from
@c    their malice:  my only one from the lions.

@c    34:18. I will give thanks to thee in a great church; I will praise thee
@c    in a strong people.

@c    34:19. Let not them that are my enemies wrongfully rejoice over me:  who
@c    have hated me without cause, and wink with the eyes.

@c    34:20. For they spoke indeed peaceably to me; and speaking in the anger
@c    of the earth they devised guile.

@c    34:21. And they opened their mouth wide against me; they said:  Well
@c    done, well done, our eyes have seen it.

@c    34:22. Thou hast seen, O Lord, be not thou silent:  O Lord, depart not
@c    from me.

@c    34:23. Arise, and be attentive to my judgment:  to my cause, my God, and
@c    my Lord.

@c    34:24. Judge me, O Lord my God according to thy justice, and let them
@c    not rejoice over me.

@c    34:25. Let them not say in their hearts:  It is well, it is well, to our
@c    mind:  neither let them say:  We have swallowed him up.

@c    34:26. Let them blush:  and be ashamed together, who rejoice at my
@c    evils.  Let them be clothed with confusion and shame, who speak great
@c    things against me.

@c    34:27. Let them rejoice and be glad, who are well pleased with my
@c    justice, and let them say always:  The Lord be magnified, who delights
@c    in the peace of his servant.

@c    34:28. And my tongue shall meditate thy justice, thy praise all the day
@c    long.



@c    Psalms Chapter 35


@c    Dixit injustus.

@c    The malice of sinners, and the goodness of God.

@c    35:1. Unto the end, for the servant of God, David himself.

@c    35:2. The unjust hath said within himself, that he would sin:  there is
@c    no fear of God before his eyes.

@c    35:3. For in his sight he hath done deceitfully, that his iniquity may
@c    be found unto hatred.

@c    Unto hatred. . .That is, hateful to God.

@c    35:4. The words of his mouth are iniquity and guile:  he would not
@c    understand that he might do well.

@c    35:5. He hath devised iniquity on his bed, he hath set himself on every
@c    way that is not good:  but evil he hath not hated.

@c    35:6. O Lord, thy mercy is in heaven, and thy truth reacheth even to
@c    the clouds.

@c    35:7. Thy justice is as the mountains of God, thy judgments are a great
@c    deep.  Men and beasts thou wilt preserve, O Lord:

@c    35:8. O how hast thou multiplied thy mercy, O God!  But the children of
@c    men shall put their trust under the covert of thy wings.

@c    35:9. They shall be inebriated with the plenty of thy house; and thou
@c    shalt make them drink of the torrent of thy pleasure.

@c    35:10. For with thee is the fountain of life; and in thy light we shall
@c    see light.

@c    35:11. Extend thy mercy to them that know thee, and thy justice to them
@c    that are right in heart.

@c    35:12. Let not the foot of pride come to me, and let not the hand of
@c    the sinner move me.

@c    35:13. There the workers of iniquity are fallen, they are cast out, and
@c    could not stand.



@c    Psalms Chapter 36


@c    Noli aemulari.

@c    An exhortation to despise this world; and the short prosperity of the
@c    wicked; and to trust in Providence.

@c    36:1. Be not emulous of evildoers; nor envy them that work iniquity.

@c    36:2. For they shall shortly wither away as grass, and as the green
@c    herbs shall quickly fall.

@c    36:3. Trust in the Lord, and do good, and dwell in the land, and thou
@c    shalt be fed with its riches.

@c    36:4. Delight in the Lord, and he will give thee the requests of thy
@c    heart.

@c    36:5. Commit thy way to the Lord, and trust in him, and he will do it.

@c    36:6. And he will bring forth thy justice as the light, and thy
@c    judgment as the noonday.

@c    36:7. Be subject to the Lord and pray to him.  Envy not the man who
@c    prospereth in his way; the man who doth unjust things.

@c    36:8. Cease from anger, and leave rage; have no emulation to do evil.

@c    36:9. For evildoers shall be cut off:  but they that wait upon the Lord,
@c    they shall inherit the land.

@c    36:10. For yet a little while, and the wicked shall not be:  and thou
@c    shalt seek his place, and shalt not find it.

@c    36:11. But the meek shall inherit the land, and shall delight in
@c    abundance of peace.

@c    36:12. The sinner shall watch the just man:  and shall gnash upon him
@c    with his teeth.

@c    36:13. But the Lord shall laugh at him:  for he foreseeth that his day
@c    shall come.

@c    36:14. The wicked have drawn out the sword:  they have bent their bow.
@c    To cast down the poor and needy, to kill the upright of heart.

@c    36:15. Let their sword enter into their own hearts, and let their bow
@c    be broken.

@c    36:16. Better is a little to the just, than the great riches of the
@c    wicked.

@c    36:17. For the arms of the wicked shall be broken in pieces; but the
@c    Lord strengtheneth the just.

@c    36:18. The Lord knoweth the days of the undefiled; and their
@c    inheritance shall be for ever.

@c    36:19. They shall not be confounded in the evil time; and in the days
@c    of famine they shall be filled:

@c    36:20. Because the wicked shall perish.  And the enemies of the Lord,
@c    presently after they shall be honoured and exalted, shall come to
@c    nothing and vanish like smoke.

@c    36:21. The sinner shall borrow, and not pay again; but the just sheweth
@c    mercy and shall give.

@c    36:22. For such as bless him shall inherit the land:  but such as curse
@c    him shall perish.

@c    36:23. With the Lord shall the steps of a man be directed, and he shall
@c    like well his way.

@c    36:24. When he shall fall he shall not be bruised, for the Lord putteth
@c    his hand under him.

@c    36:25. I have been young and now am old; and I have not seen the just
@c    forsaken, nor his seed seeking bread.

@c    36:26. He sheweth mercy, and lendeth all the day long; and his seed
@c    shall be in blessing.

@c    36:27. Decline from evil and do good, and dwell for ever and ever.

@c    36:28. For the Lord loveth judgment, and will not forsake his saints:
@c    they shall be preserved for ever.  The unjust shall be punished, and the
@c    seed of the wicked shall perish.

@c    36:29. But the just shall inherit the land, and shall dwell therein for
@c    evermore.

@c    36:30. The mouth of the just shall meditate wisdom:  and his tongue
@c    shall speak judgment.

@c    36:31. The law of his God is in his heart, and his steps shall not be
@c    supplanted.

@c    36:32. The wicked watcheth the just man, and seeketh to put him to
@c    death,

@c    36:33. But the Lord will not leave him in his hands; nor condemn him
@c    when he shall be judged.

@c    36:34. Expect the Lord and keep his way:  and he will exalt thee to
@c    inherit the land:  when the sinners shall perish thou shalt see.

@c    36:35. I have seen the wicked highly exalted, and lifted up like the
@c    cedars of Libanus.

@c    36:36. And I passed by, and lo, he was not:  and I sought him and his
@c    place was not found.

@c    36:37. Keep innocence, and behold justice:  for there are remnants for
@c    the peaceable man.

@c    36:38. But the unjust shall be destroyed together:  the remnants of the
@c    wicked shall perish.

@c    36:39. But the salvation of the just is from the Lord, and he is their
@c    protector in the time of trouble.

@c    36:40. And the Lord will help them and deliver them:  and he will rescue
@c    them from the wicked, and save them because they have hoped in him.



@c    Psalms Chapter 37


@c    Domine, ne in furore.

@c    A prayer of a penitent for the remission of his sins.  The third
@c    penitential psalm.

@c    37:1. A psalm for David, for a remembrance of the sabbath.

@c    For a remembrance. . .Viz., of our miseries and sins:  and to be sung on
@c    the sabbath day.

@c    37:2. Rebuke me not, O Lord, in thy indignation; nor chastise me in thy
@c    wrath.

@c    37:3. For thy arrows are fastened in me:  and thy hand hath been strong
@c    upon me.

@c    37:4. There is no health in my flesh, because of thy wrath:  there is no
@c    peace for my bones, because of my sins.

@c    37:5. For my iniquities are gone over my head:  and as a heavy burden
@c    are become heavy upon me.

@c    37:6. My sores are putrified and corrupted, because of my foolishness.

@c    37:7. I am become miserable, and am bowed down even to the end:  I
@c    walked sorrowful all the day long.

@c    37:8. For my loins are filled with illusions; and there is no health in
@c    my flesh.

@c    37:9. I am afflicted and humbled exceedingly:  I roared with the
@c    groaning of my heart.

@c    37:10. Lord, all my desire is before thee, and my groaning is not
@c    hidden from thee.

@c    37:11. My heart is troubled, my strength hath left me, and the light of
@c    my eyes itself is not with me.

@c    37:12. My friends and my neighbours have drawn near, and stood against
@c    me.  And they that were near me stood afar off:

@c    37:13. And they that sought my soul used violence.  And they that sought
@c    evils to me spoke vain things, and studied deceits all the day long.

@c    37:14. But I, as a deaf man, heard not:  and as a dumb man not opening
@c    his mouth.

@c    37:15. And I became as a man that heareth not:  and that hath no
@c    reproofs in his mouth.

@c    37:16. For in thee, O Lord, have I hoped:  thou wilt hear me, O Lord my
@c    God.

@c    37:17. For I said:  Lest at any time my enemies rejoice over me:  and
@c    whilst my feet are moved, they speak great things against me.

@c    37:18. For I am ready for scourges:  and my sorrow is continually before
@c    me.

@c    37:19. For I will declare my iniquity:  and I will think for my sin.

@c    37:20. But my enemies live, and are stronger than I:  and they that hate
@c    me wrongfully are multiplied.

@c    37:21. They that render evil for good, have detracted me, because I
@c    followed goodness.

@c    37:22. For sake me not, O Lord my God:  do not thou depart from me.

@c    37:23. Attend unto my help, O Lord, the God of my salvation.



@c    Psalms Chapter 38


@c    Dixi custodiam.

@c    A just man's peace and patience in his sufferings; considering the
@c    vanity of the world, and the providence of God.

@c    38:1. Unto the end, for Idithun himself, a canticle of David.

@c    38:2. I said:  I will take heed to my ways:  that I sin not with my
@c    tongue.  I have set a guard to my mouth, when the sinner stood against
@c    me.

@c    38:3. I was dumb, and was humbled, and kept silence from good things:
@c    and my sorrow was renewed.

@c    38:4. My heart grew hot within me:  and in my meditation a fire shall
@c    flame out.

@c    38:5. I spoke with my tongue:  O Lord, make me know my end.  And what is
@c    the number of my days:  that I may know what is wanting to me.

@c    38:6. Behold thou hast made my days measurable.  and my substance is as
@c    nothing before thee.  And indeed all things are vanity:  every man
@c    living.

@c    38:7. Surely man passeth as an image:  yea, and he is disquieted in
@c    vain.  He storeth up:  and he knoweth not for whom he shall gather these
@c    things.

@c    38:8. And now what is my hope?  is it not the Lord?  and my substance is
@c    with thee.

@c    38:9. Deliver thou me from all my iniquities:  thou hast made me a
@c    reproach to the fool.

@c    38:10. I was dumb, and I opened not my mouth, because thou hast done
@c    it.

@c    38:11. Remove thy scourges from me.  The strength of thy hand hath made
@c    me faint in rebukes:

@c    38:12. Thou hast corrected man for iniquity.  And thou hast made his
@c    soul to waste away like a spider:  surely in vain is any man disquieted.

@c    38:13. Hear my prayer, O Lord, and my supplication:  give ear to my
@c    tears.  Be no silent:  for I am a stranger with thee, and a sojourner as
@c    all my fathers were.

@c    38:14. O forgive me, that I may be refreshed, before I go hence, and be
@c    no more.



@c    Psalms Chapter 39


@c    Expectans expectavi.

@c    Christ's coming, and redeeming mankind.

@c    39:1. Unto the end, a psalm for David himself.

@c    39:2. With expectation I have waited for the Lord, and he was attentive
@c    to me.

@c    39:3. And he heard my prayers, and brought me out of the pit of misery
@c    and the mire of dregs.  And he set my feet upon a rock, and directed my
@c    steps.

@c    39:4. And he put a new canticle into my mouth, a song to our God.  Many
@c    shall see, and shall fear:  and they shall hope in the Lord.

@c    39:5. Blessed is the man whose trust is in the name of the Lord; and
@c    who hath not had regard to vanities, and lying follies.

@c    39:6. Thou hast multiplied thy wonderful works, O Lord my God:  and in
@c    thy thoughts there is no one like to thee.  I have declared and I have
@c    spoken they are multiplied above number.

@c    39:7. Sacrifice and oblation thou didst not desire; but thou hast
@c    pierced ears for me.  Burnt offering and sin offering thou didst not
@c    require:

@c    39:8. Then said I, Behold I come.  In the head of the book it is written
@c    of me

@c    39:9. That I should do thy will:  O my God, I have desired it, and thy
@c    law in the midst of my heart.

@c    39:10. I have declared thy justice in a great church, lo, I will not
@c    restrain my lips:  O Lord, thou knowest it.

@c    39:11. I have not hid thy justice within my heart:  I have declared thy
@c    truth and thy salvation.  I have not concealed thy mercy and thy truth
@c    from a great council.

@c    39:12. Withhold not thou, O Lord, thy tender mercies from me:  thy mercy
@c    and thy truth have always upheld me.

@c    39:13. For evils without number have surrounded me; my iniquities have
@c    overtaken me, and I was not able to see.  They are multiplied above the
@c    hairs of my head:  and my heart hath forsaken me.

@c    My iniquities. . .That is, the sins of all mankind, which I have taken
@c    upon me.

@c    39:14. Be pleased, O Lord, to deliver me.  look down, O Lord, to help
@c    me.

@c    39:15. Let them be confounded and ashamed together, that seek after my
@c    soul to take it away.  Let them be turned backward and be ashamed that
@c    desire evils to me.

@c    39:16. Let them immediately bear their confusion, that say to me:  'T is
@c    well, t' is well.

@c    'T is well. . .The Hebrew here is an interjection of insult and
@c    derision, like the Vah.  Matt. 27.49.

@c    39:17. Let all that seek thee rejoice and be glad in thee:  and let such
@c    as love thy salvation say always:  The Lord be magnified.

@c    39:18. But I am a beggar and poor:  the Lord is careful for me.  Thou art
@c    my helper and my protector:  O my God, be not slack.



@c    Psalms Chapter 40


@c    Beatus qui intelligit.

@c    The happiness of him that shall believe in Christ; notwithstanding the
@c    humility and poverty in which he shall come:  the malice of his enemies,
@c    especially of the traitor Judas.

@c    40:1. Unto the end, a psalm for David himself.

@c    40:2. Blessed is he that understandeth concerning the needy and the
@c    poor:  the Lord will deliver him in the evil day.

@c    40:3. The Lord preserve him and give him life, and make him blessed
@c    upon the earth:  and deliver him not up to the will of his enemies.

@c    40:4. The Lord help him on his bed of sorrow:  thou hast turned all his
@c    couch in his sickness.

@c    40:5. I said:  O Lord, be thou merciful to me:  heal my soul, for I have
@c    sinned against thee.

@c    40:6. My enemies have spoken evils against me:  when shall he die and
@c    his name perish?

@c    40:7. And if he came in to see me, he spoke vain things:  his heart
@c    gathered together iniquity to itself.  He went out and spoke to the same
@c    purpose.

@c    40:8. All my enemies whispered together against me:  they devised evils
@c    to me.

@c    40:9. They determined against me an unjust word:  shall he that sleepeth
@c    rise again no more?

@c    40:10. For even the man of my peace, in whom I trusted, who ate my
@c    bread, hath greatly supplanted me.

@c    40:11. But thou, O Lord, have mercy on me, and raise my up again:  and I
@c    will requite them.

@c    40:12. By this I know, that thou hast had a good will for me:  because
@c    my enemy shall not rejoice over me.

@c    40:13. But thou hast upheld me by reason of my innocence:  and hast
@c    established me in thy sight for ever.

@c    40:14. Blessed be the Lord the God of Israel from eternity to eternity.
@c    So be it.  So be it.



@c    Psalms Chapter 41


@c    Quemadmodum desiderat.

@c    The fervent desire of the just after God:  hope in afflictions.

@c    41:1. Unto the end, understanding for the sons of Core.

@c    41:2. As the hart panteth after the fountains of water; so my soul
@c    panteth after thee, O God.

@c    41:3. My soul hath thirsted after the strong living God; when shall I
@c    come and appear before the face of God?

@c    41:4. My tears have been my bread day and night, whilst it is said to
@c    me daily:  Where is thy God?

@c    41:5. These things I remembered, and poured out my soul in me:  for I
@c    shall go over into the place of the wonderful tabernacle, even to the
@c    house of God:  With the voice of joy and praise; the noise of one
@c    feasting.

@c    41:6. Why art thou sad, O my soul?  and why dost thou trouble me?  Hope
@c    in God, for I will still give praise to him:  the salvation of my
@c    countenance,

@c    41:7. And my God.  My soul is troubled within my self:  therefore will I
@c    remember thee from the land of Jordan and Hermoniim, from the little
@c    hill.

@c    41:8. Deep calleth on deep, at the noise of thy flood-gates.  All thy
@c    heights and thy billows have passed over me.

@c    41:9. In the daytime the Lord hath commanded his mercy; and a canticle
@c    to him in the night.  With me is prayer to the God of my life.

@c    41:10. I will say to God:  Thou art my support.  Why hast thou forgotten
@c    me?  and why go I mourning, whilst my enemy afflicteth me?

@c    41:11. Whilst my bones are broken, my enemies who trouble me have
@c    reproached me; Whilst they say to me day by day:  Where is thy God?

@c    41:12. Why art thou cast down, O my soul?  and why dost thou disquiet
@c    me?  Hope thou in God, for I will still give praise to him:  the
@c    salvation of my countenance, and my God.



@c    Psalms Chapter 42


@c    Judica me, Deus.

@c    The prophet aspireth after the temple and altar of God.

@c    42:1. A psalm for David.  Judge me, O God, and distinguish my cause from
@c    the nation that is not holy:  deliver me from the unjust and deceitful
@c    man.

@c    42:2. For thou art God my strength:  why hast thou cast me off?  and why
@c    do I go sorrowful whilst the enemy afflicteth me?

@c    42:3. Sent forth thy light and thy truth:  they have conducted me, and
@c    brought me unto thy holy hill, and into thy tabernacles.

@c    42:4. And I will go in to the altar of God:  to God who giveth joy to my
@c    youth.

@c    42:5. To thee, O God my God, I will give praise upon the harp:  why art
@c    thou sad, O my soul?  and why dost thou disquiet me?

@c    42:6. Hope in God, for I will still give praise to him:  the salvation
@c    of my countenance, and my God.



@c    Psalms Chapter 43


@c    Deus auribus nostris.

@c    The church commemorates former favours, and present afflictions; under
@c    which she prays for succour.

@c    43:1. Unto the end, for the sons of Core, to give understanding.

@c    43:2. We have heard, O God, with our ears:  our fathers have declared to
@c    us, The work thou hast wrought in their days, and in the days of old.

@c    43:3. Thy hand destroyed the Gentiles, and thou plantedst them:  thou
@c    didst afflict the people and cast them out.

@c    43:4. For they got not the possession of the land by their own sword:
@c    neither did their own arm save them.  But thy right hand and thy arm,
@c    and the light of thy countenance:  because thou wast pleased with them.

@c    43:5. Thou art thyself my king and my God, who commandest the saving of
@c    Jacob.

@c    43:6. Through thee we will push down our enemies with the horn:  and
@c    through thy name we will despise them that rise up against us.

@c    43:7. For I will not trust in my bow:  neither shall my sword save me.

@c    43:8. But thou hast saved us from them that afflict us:  and hast put
@c    them to shame that hate us.

@c    43:9. In God shall we glory all the day long:  and in thy name we will
@c    give praise for ever.

@c    43:10. But now thou hast cast us off, and put us to shame:  and thou , O
@c    God, wilt not go out with our armies.

@c    43:11. Thou hast made us turn our back to our enemies:  and they that
@c    hated us plundered for themselves.

@c    43:12. Thou hast given us up like sheep to be eaten:  thou hast
@c    scattered us among the nations.

@c    43:13. Thou hast sold thy people for no price:  and there was no
@c    reckoning in the exchange of them.

@c    43:14. Thou hast made us a reproach to our neighbours, a scoff and
@c    derision to them that are round about us.

@c    43:15. Thou hast made us a byword among the Gentiles:  a shaking of the
@c    head among the people.

@c    43:16. All the day long my shame is before me:  and the confusion of my
@c    face hath covered me,

@c    43:17. At the voice of him that reproacheth and detracteth me:  at the
@c    face of the enemy and persecutor.

@c    43:18. All these things have come upon us, yet we have not forgotten
@c    thee:  and we have not done wickedly in thy covenant.

@c    43:19. And our heart hath not turned back:  neither hast thou turned
@c    aside our steps from thy way.

@c    43:20. For thou hast humbled us in the place of affliction:  and the
@c    shadow of death hath covered us.

@c    43:21. If we have forgotten the name of our God, and if we have spread
@c    forth our hands to a strange god:

@c    43:22. Shall not God search out these things:  for he knoweth the
@c    secrets of the heart.  Because for thy sake we are killed all the day
@c    long:  we are counted as sheep for the slaughter.

@c    43:23. Arise, why sleepest thou, O Lord?  arise, and cast us not off to
@c    the end.

@c    43:24. Why turnest thou thy face away?  and forgettest our want and our
@c    trouble?

@c    43:25. For our soul is humbled down to the dust:  our belly cleaveth to
@c    the earth.

@c    43:26. Arise, O Lord, help us and redeem us for thy name's sake.



@c    Psalms Chapter 44


@c    Eructavit cor meum.

@c    The excellence of Christ's kingdom, and the endowments of his church.

@c    44:1. Unto the end, for them that shall be changed, for the sons of
@c    Core, for understanding.  A canticle for the Beloved.

@c    For them that shall be changed. . .i.e., for souls happily changed, by
@c    being converted to God.--Ibid.  The Beloved. . .Viz., Our Lord Jesus
@c    Christ.

@c    44:2. My heart hath uttered a good word:  I speak my works to the king:
@c    My tongue is the pen of a scrivener that writeth swiftly.

@c    44:3. Thou art beautiful above the sons of men:  grace is poured abroad
@c    in thy lips; therefore hath God blessed thee for ever.

@c    44:4. Gird thy sword upon thy thigh, O thou most mighty.

@c    44:5. With thy comeliness and thy beauty set out, proceed prosperously,
@c    and reign.  Because of truth and meekness and justice:  and thy right
@c    hand shall conduct thee wonderfully.

@c    44:6. Thy arrows are sharp:  under thee shall people fall, into the
@c    hearts of the king's enemies.

@c    44:7. Thy throne, O God, is forever and ever:  the sceptre of thy
@c    kingdom is a sceptre of uprightness.

@c    44:8. Thou hast loved justice, and hated iniquity:  therefore God, thy
@c    God, hath anointed thee with the oil of gladness above thy fellows.

@c    44:9. Myrrh and stacte and cassia perfume thy garments, from the ivory
@c    houses:  out of which

@c    44:10. The daughters of kings have delighted thee in thy glory.  The
@c    queen stood on thy right hand, in gilded clothing; surrounded with
@c    variety.

@c    44:11. Hearken, O daughter, and see, and incline thy ear:  and forget
@c    thy people and thy father's house.

@c    44:12. And the king shall greatly desire thy beauty; for he is the Lord
@c    thy God, and him they shall adore.

@c    44:13. And the daughters of Tyre with gifts, yea, all the rich among
@c    the people, shall entreat thy countenance.

@c    44:14. All the glory of the king's daughter is within in golden
@c    borders,

@c    44:15. Clothed round about with varieties.  After her shall virgins be
@c    brought to the king:  her neighbours shall be brought to thee.

@c    44:16. They shall be brought with gladness and rejoicing:  they shall be
@c    brought into the temple of the king.

@c    44:17. Instead of thy fathers, sons are born to thee:  thou shalt make
@c    them princes over all the earth.

@c    44:18. They shall remember thy name throughout all generations.
@c    Therefore shall people praise thee for ever; yea, for ever and ever.



@c    Psalms Chapter 45


@c    Deus noster refugium.

@c    The church in persecution trusteth in the protection of God.

@c    45:1. Unto the end, for the sons of Core, for the hidden.

@c    45:2. Our God is our refuge and strength:  a helper in troubles, which
@c    have found us exceedingly.

@c    45:3. Therefore we will not fear, when the earth shall be troubled; and
@c    the mountains shall be removed into the heart of the sea.

@c    45:4. Their waters roared and were troubled:  the mountains were
@c    troubled with his strength.

@c    45:5. The stream of the river maketh the city of God joyful:  the most
@c    High hath sanctified his own tabernacle.

@c    45:6. God is in the midst thereof, it shall not be moved:  God will help
@c    it in the morning early.

@c    45:7. Nations were troubled, and kingdoms were bowed down:  he uttered
@c    his voice, the earth trembled.

@c    45:8. The Lord of armies is with us:  the God of Jacob is our protector.

@c    45:9. Come and behold ye the works of the Lord:  what wonders he hath
@c    done upon earth,

@c    45:10. Making wars to cease even to the end of the earth.  He shall
@c    destroy the bow, and break the weapons:  and the shield he shall burn in
@c    the fire.

@c    45:11. Be still and see that I am God; I will be exalted among the
@c    nations, and I will be exalted in the earth.

@c    45:12. The Lord of armies is with us:  the God of Jacob is our
@c    protector.



@c    Psalms Chapter 46


@c    Omnes gentes, plaudite.

@c    The Gentiles are invited to praise God for the establishment of the
@c    kingdom of Christ.

@c    46:1. Unto the end, for the sons of Core.

@c    46:2. O clap your hands, all ye nations:  shout unto God with the voice
@c    of joy,

@c    46:3. For the Lord is high, terrible:  a great king over all the earth.

@c    46:4. He hath subdued the people under us; and the nations under our
@c    feet.

@c    46:5. He hath chosen for us his inheritance, the beauty of Jacob which
@c    he hath love.

@c    46:6. God is ascended with jubilee, and the Lord with the sound of
@c    trumpet.

@c    46:7. Sing praises to our God, sing ye:  sing praises to our king, sing
@c    ye.

@c    46:8. For God is the king of all the earth:  sing ye wisely.

@c    46:9. God shall reign over the nations:  God sitteth on his holy throne.

@c    46:10. The princes of the people are gathered together, with the God of
@c    Abraham:  for the strong gods of the earth are exceedingly exalted.



@c    Psalms Chapter 47


@c    Magnus Dominus.

@c    God is greatly to be praised for the establishment of his church.

@c    47:1. A psalm of a canticle, for the sons of Core, on the second day of
@c    the week.

@c    47:2. Great is the Lord, and exceedingly to be praised in the city of
@c    our God, in his holy mountain.

@c    47:3. With the joy of the whole earth is mount Sion founded, on the
@c    sides of the north, the city of the great king.

@c    47:4. In her houses shall God be known, when he shall protect her.

@c    47:5. For behold the kings of the earth assembled themselves:  they
@c    gathered together.

@c    47:6. So they saw, and they wondered, they were troubled, they were
@c    moved:

@c    47:7. Trembling took hold of them.  There were pains as of a woman in
@c    labour.

@c    47:8. With a vehement wind thou shalt break in pieces the ships of
@c    Tharsis.

@c    47:9. As we have heard, so have we seen, in the city of the Lord of
@c    hosts, in the city of our God:  God hath founded it for ever.

@c    47:10. We have received thy mercy, O God, in the midst of thy temple.

@c    47:11. According to thy name, O God, so also is thy praise unto the
@c    ends of the earth:  thy right hand is full of justice.

@c    47:12. Let mount Sion rejoice, and the daughters of Juda be glad;
@c    because of thy judgments, O Lord.

@c    47:13. Surround Sion, and encompass her:  tell lye in her towers.

@c    47:14. Set your hearts on her strength; and distribute her houses, that
@c    ye may relate it in another generation.

@c    47:15. For this is God, our God unto eternity, and for ever and ever:
@c    he shall rule us for evermore.



@c    Psalms Chapter 48


@c    Audite haec, omnes gentes.

@c    The folly of worldlings, who live on in sin, without thinking of death
@c    or hell.

@c    48:1. Unto the end, a psalm for the sons of Core.

@c    48:2. Hear these things, all ye nations:  give ear, all ye inhabitants
@c    of the world.

@c    48:3. All you that are earthborn, and you sons of men:  both rich and
@c    poor together.

@c    48:4. My mouth shall speak wisdom:  and the meditation of my heart
@c    understanding.

@c    48:5. I will incline my ear to a parable; I will open my proposition on
@c    the psaltery.

@c    48:6. Why shall I fear in the evil day?  the iniquity of my heel shall
@c    encompass me.

@c    The iniquity of my heel. . .That is, the iniquity of my steps or ways:
@c    or the iniquity of my pride, with which as with the heel, I have
@c    spurned and kicked at my neighbours:  or the iniquity of my heel, that
@c    is, the iniquity in which I shall be found in death.  The meaning of
@c    this verse is, Why should I now indulge those passions and sinful
@c    affections, or commit now those sins, which will cause me so much fear
@c    and anguish in the evil day; when the sorrows of death shall compass
@c    me, and the perils of hell shall find me?

@c    48:7. They that trust in their own strength, and glory in the multitude
@c    of their riches,

@c    They that trust, etc. . .As much as to say, let them fear that trust in
@c    their strength or riches:  for they have great reason to fear:  seeing no
@c    brother or other man, how much a friend soever, can by any price or
@c    labour rescue them from death.

@c    48:8. No brother can redeem, nor shall man redeem:  he shall not give to
@c    God his ransom,

@c    48:9. Nor the price of the redemption of his soul:  and shall labour for
@c    ever,

@c    And shall labour for ever, etc. . .This seems to be a continuation of
@c    the foregoing sentence:  as much as to say no man can by any price or
@c    ransom prolong his life, that so he may still continue to labour here,
@c    and live to the end of the world.  Others understand it of the eternal
@c    sorrows, and dying life of hell, which is the dreadful consequence of
@c    dying in sin.

@c    48:10. And shall still live unto the end.

@c    48:11. He shall not see destruction, when he shall see the wise dying:
@c    the senseless and the fool shall perish together:  And they shall leave
@c    their riches to strangers:

@c    He shall not see destruction, etc. . .Or, shall he not see destruction?
@c    As much as to say, however thoughtless he may be of his death, he must
@c    not expect to escape; when even the wise and the good are not exempt
@c    from dying.

@c    48:12. And their sepulchres shall be their houses for ever.  Their
@c    dwelling places to all generations:  they have called their lands by
@c    their names.

@c    They have called, etc. . .That is, they have left their names on their
@c    graves, which alone remain of their lands.

@c    48:13. And man when he was in honour did not understand; he is compared
@c    to senseless beasts, and is become like to them.

@c    48:14. This way of theirs is a stumblingblock to them:  and afterwards
@c    they shall delight in their mouth.

@c    They shall delight in their mouth. . .Notwithstanding the wretched way
@c    in which they walk, they shall applaud themselves with their mouths,
@c    and glory in their doings.

@c    48:15. They are laid in hell like sheep:  death shall feed upon them.
@c    And the just shall have dominion over them in the morning; and their
@c    help shall decay in hell from their glory.

@c    In the morning. . .That is, in the resurrection to a new life; when the
@c    just shall judge and condemn the wicked.  Ibid.  From their
@c    glory. . .That is, when their short-lived glory in this world shall be
@c    past, and be no more.

@c    48:16. But God will redeem my soul from the hand of hell, when he shall
@c    receive me.

@c    48:17. Be not thou afraid, when a man shall be made rick, and when the
@c    glory of his house shall be increased.

@c    48:18. For when he shall die he shall take nothing away; nor shall his
@c    glory descend with him.

@c    48:19. For in his lifetime his soul will be blessed:  and he will praise
@c    thee when thou shalt do well to him.

@c    48:20. He shall go in to the generations of his fathers:  and he shall
@c    never see light.

@c    48:21. Man when he was in honour did not understand:  he hath been
@c    compared to senseless beasts, and made like to them.



@c    Psalms Chapter 49


@c    Deus deorum.

@c    The coming of Christ:  who prefers virtue and inward purity before the
@c    blood of victims.

@c    49:1. A psalm for Asaph.  The God of gods, the Lord hath spoken:  and he
@c    hath called the earth.  From the rising of the sun, to the going down
@c    thereof:

@c    49:2. Out of Sion the loveliness of his beauty.

@c    49:3. God shall come manifestly:  our God shall come, and shall not keep
@c    silence.  A fire shall burn before him:  and a mighty tempest shall be
@c    round about him.

@c    49:4. He shall call heaven from above, and the earth, to judge his
@c    people.

@c    49:5. Gather ye together his saints to him:  who set his covenant before
@c    sacrifices.

@c    49:6. And the heavens shall declare his justice:  for God is judge.

@c    49:7. Hear, O my people, and I will speak:  O Israel, and I will testify
@c    to thee:  I am God, thy God.

@c    49:8. I will not reprove thee for thy sacrifices:  and thy burnt
@c    offerings are always in my sight.

@c    49:9. I will not take calves out of thy house:  nor he goats out of thy
@c    flocks.

@c    49:10. For all the beasts of the woods are mine:  the cattle on the
@c    hills, and the oxen.

@c    49:11. I know all the fowls of the air:  and with me is the beauty of
@c    the field.

@c    49:12. If I should be hungry, I would not tell thee:  for the world is
@c    mine, and the fulness thereof.

@c    49:13. Shall I eat the flesh of bullocks?  or shall I drink the blood of
@c    goats?

@c    49:14. Offer to God the sacrifice of praise:  and pay thy vows to the
@c    most High.

@c    49:15. And call upon me in the day of trouble:  I will deliver thee, and
@c    thou shalt glorify me.

@c    49:16. But to the sinner God hath said:  Why dost thou declare my
@c    justices, and take my covenant in thy mouth?

@c    49:17. Seeing thou hast hated discipline:  and hast cast my words behind
@c    thee.

@c    49:18. If thou didst see a thief thou didst run with him:  and with
@c    adulterers thou hast been a partaker.

@c    49:19. Thy mouth hath abounded with evil, and thy tongue framed
@c    deceits.

@c    49:20. Sitting thou didst speak against thy brother, and didst lay a
@c    scandal against thy mother's son:

@c    49:21. These things hast thou done, and I was silent.  Thou thoughtest
@c    unjustly that I should be like to thee:  but I will reprove thee, and
@c    set before thy face.

@c    49:22. Understand these things, you that forget God; lest he snatch you
@c    away, and there be none to deliver you.

@c    49:23. The sacrifice of praise shall glorify me:  and there is the way
@c    by which I will shew him the salvation of God.



@c    Psalms Chapter 50


@c    Miserere.

@c    The repentance and confession of David after his sin.  The fourth
@c    penitential psalm.

@c    50:1. Unto the end, a psalm of David,

@c    50:2. When Nathan the prophet came to him, after he had sinned with
@c    Bethsabee.  [2 Kings 12.]

@c    50:3. Have mercy on me, O God, according to thy great mercy.  And
@c    according to the multitude of thy tender mercies blot out my iniquity.

@c    50:4. Wash me yet more from my iniquity, and cleanse me from my sin.

@c    50:5. For I know my iniquity, and my sin is always before me.

@c    50:6. To thee only have I sinned, and have done evil before thee:  that
@c    thou mayst be justified in thy words, and mayst overcome when thou art
@c    judged.

@c    50:7. For behold I was conceived in iniquities; and in sins did my
@c    mother conceive me.

@c    50:8. For behold thou hast loved truth:  the uncertain and hidden things
@c    of thy wisdom thou hast made manifest to me.

@c    50:9. Thou shalt sprinkle me with hyssop, and I shall be cleansed:  thou
@c    shalt wash me, and I shall be made whiter than snow.

@c    50:10. To my hearing thou shalt give joy and gladness:  and the bones
@c    that have been humbled shall rejoice.

@c    50:11. Turn away thy face from my sins, and blot out all my iniquities.

@c    50:12. Create a clean heart in me, O God:  and renew a right spirit
@c    within my bowels.

@c    50:13. Cast me not away from thy face; and take not thy holy spirit
@c    from me.

@c    50:14. Restore unto me the joy of thy salvation, and strengthen me with
@c    a perfect spirit.

@c    50:15. I will teach the unjust thy ways:  and the wicked shall be
@c    converted to thee.

@c    50:16. Deliver me from blood, O God, thou God of my salvation:  and my
@c    tongue shall extol thy justice.

@c    50:17. O Lord, thou wilt open my lips:  and my mouth shall declare thy
@c    praise.

@c    50:18. For if thou hadst desired sacrifice, I would indeed have given
@c    it:  with burnt offerings thou wilt not be delighted.

@c    50:19. A sacrifice to God is an afflicted spirit:  a contrite and
@c    humbled heart, O God, thou wilt not despise.

@c    50:20. Deal favourably, O Lord, in thy good will with Sion; that the
@c    walls of Jerusalem may be built up.

@c    50:21. Then shalt thou accept the sacrifice of justice, oblations and
@c    whole burnt offerings:  then shall they lay calves upon thy altar.



@c    Psalms Chapter 51


@c    Quid gloriaris.

@c    David condemneth the wickedness of Doeg, and foretelleth his
@c    destruction.

@c    51:1. Unto the end, understanding for David,

@c    51:2. When Doeg the Edomite came and told Saul:  David went to the house
@c    of Achimelech.

@c    51:3. Why dost thou glory in malice, thou that art mighty in iniquity?

@c    51:4. All the day long thy tongue hath devised injustice:  as a sharp
@c    razor, thou hast wrought deceit.

@c    51:5. Thou hast loved malice more than goodness:  and iniquity rather
@c    than to speak righteousness.

@c    51:6. Thou hast loved all the words of ruin, O deceitful tongue.

@c    51:7. Therefore will God destroy thee for ever:  he will pluck thee out,
@c    and remove thee from thy dwelling place:  and thy root out of the land
@c    of the living.

@c    51:8. The just shall see and fear, and shall laugh at him, and say:

@c    51:9. Behold the man that made not God his helper:  But trusted in the
@c    abundance of his riches:  and prevailed in his vanity.

@c    51:10. But I, as a fruitful olive tree in the house of God, have hoped
@c    in the mercy of God for ever, yea for ever and ever.

@c    51:11. I will praise thee for ever, because thou hast done it:  and I
@c    will wait on thy name, for it is good in the sight of thy saints.



@c    Psalms Chapter 52


@c    Dixit insipiens.

@c    The general corruption of man before the coming of Christ.

@c    52:1. Unto the end, for Maeleth, understandings to David.  The fool said
@c    in his heart:  There is no God.

@c    Maeleth. . .Or Machalath.  A musical instrument, or a chorus of
@c    musicians, for St. Jerome renders it, per chorum.

@c    52:2. They are corrupted, and become abominable in iniquities:  there is
@c    none that doth good.

@c    52:3. God looked down from heaven on the children of men:  to see if
@c    there were any that did understand, or did seek God.

@c    52:4. All have gone aside, they are become unprofitable together, there
@c    is none that doth good, no not one.

@c    52:5. Shall not all the workers of iniquity know, who eat up my people
@c    as they eat bread?

@c    52:6. They have not called upon God:  there have they trembled for fear,
@c    where there was no fear.  For God hath scattered the bones of them that
@c    please men:  they have been confounded, because God hath despised them.

@c    God hath scattered the bones, etc. . .That is, God has brought to
@c    nothing the strength of all those that seek to please men, to the
@c    prejudice of their duty to their Maker.

@c    52:7. Who will give out of Sion the salvation of Israel?  when God shall
@c    bring back the captivity of his people, Jacob shall rejoice, and Israel
@c    shall be glad.



@c    Psalms Chapter 53


@c    Deus, in nomine tuo.

@c    A prayer for help in distress.

@c    53:1. Unto the end, in verses, understanding for David.

@c    53:2. When the en of Ziph had come and said to Saul:  Is not David
@c    hidden with us?  [1 Kings 23.19]

@c    53:3. Save me, O God, by thy name, and judge me in thy strength.

@c    53:4. O God, hear my prayer:  give ear to the words of my mouth.

@c    53:5. For strangers have risen up against me; and the mighty have
@c    sought after my soul:  and they have not set God before their eyes.

@c    53:6. For behold God is my helper:  and the Lord is the protector of my
@c    soul.

@c    53:7. Turn back the evils upon my enemies; and cut them off in thy
@c    truth.

@c    53:8. I will freely sacrifice to thee, and will give praise, O God, to
@c    thy name:  because it is good:

@c    53:9. For thou hast delivered me out of all trouble:  and my eye hath
@c    looked down upon my enemies.



@c    Psalms Chapter 54


@c    Exaudi, Deus.

@c    A prayer of a just man under persecution from the wicked.  It agrees to
@c    Christ persecuted by the Jews, and betrayed by Judas.

@c    54:1. Unto the end, in verses, understanding for David.

@c    54:2. Hear, O God, my prayer, and despise not my supplication:

@c    54:3. Be attentive to me and hear me.  I am grieved in my exercise; and
@c    am troubled,

@c    54:4. At the voice of the enemy, and at the tribulation of the sinner.
@c    For they have cast iniquities upon me:  and in wrath they were
@c    troublesome to me.

@c    54:5. My heart is troubled within me:  and the fear of death is fallen
@c    upon me.

@c    54:6. Fear and trembling are come upon me:  and darkness hath covered
@c    me.

@c    54:7. And I said:  Who will give me wings like a dove, and I will fly
@c    and be at rest?

@c    54:8. Lo, I have gone far off flying away; and I abode in the
@c    wilderness.

@c    54:9. I waited for him that hath saved me from pusillanimity of spirit,
@c    and a storm.

@c    54:10. Cast down, O Lord, and divide their tongues; for I have seen
@c    iniquity and contradiction in the city.

@c    54:11. Day and night shall iniquity surround it upon its walls:  and in
@c    the midst thereof are labour,

@c    54:12. And injustice.  And usury and deceit have not departed from its
@c    streets.

@c    54:13. For if my enemy had reviled me, I would verily have borne with
@c    it.  And if he that hated me had spoken great things against me, I would
@c    perhaps have hidden my self from him.

@c    54:14. But thou a man of one mind, my guide, and my familiar,

@c    54:15. Who didst take sweetmeats together with me:  in the house of God
@c    we walked with consent.

@c    54:16. Let death come upon them, and let them go down alive into hell.
@c    For there is wickedness in their dwellings:  in the midst of them.

@c    Let death, etc. . .This, and such like imprecations which occur in the
@c    psalms, are delivered prophetically; that is, by way of foretelling the
@c    punishments which shall fall upon the wicked from divine justice, and
@c    approving the righteous ways of God:  but not by way of ill will, or
@c    uncharitable curses, which the law of God disallows.

@c    54:17. But I have cried to God:  and the Lord will save me.

@c    54:18. Evening and morning, and at noon I will speak and declare:  and
@c    he shall hear my voice.

@c    54:19. He shall redeem my soul in peace from them that draw near to me:
@c    for among many they were with me.

@c    Among many, etc. . .That is, they that drew near to attack me were many
@c    in company all combined to fight against me.

@c    54:20. God shall hear, and the Eternal shall humble them.  For there is
@c    no change with them, and they have not feared God:

@c    54:21. He hath stretched forth his hand to repay.  They have defiled his
@c    covenant,

@c    54:22. They are divided by the wrath of his countenance, and his heart
@c    hath drawn near.  His words are smoother than oil, and the same are
@c    darts.

@c    They are divided, etc. . .Dispersed, scattered, and brought to nothing,
@c    by the wrath of God; who looks with indignation on their wicked and
@c    deceitful ways.

@c    54:23. Cast thy care upon the Lord, and he shall sustain thee:  he shall
@c    not suffer the just to waver for ever.

@c    54:24. But thou, O God, shalt bring them down into the pit of
@c    destruction.  Bloody and deceitful men shall not live out half their
@c    days; but I will trust in thee, O Lord.



@c    Psalms Chapter 55


@c    Miserere mei, Deus.

@c    A prayer of David in danger and distress.

@c    55:1. Unto the end, for a people that is removed at a distance form the
@c    sanctuary:  for David, for an inscription of a title (or pillar) when
@c    the Philistines held him in Geth.

@c    55:2. Have mercy on me, O God, for man hath trodden me under foot; all
@c    the day long he hath afflicted me fighting against me.

@c    55:3. My enemies have trodden on me all the day long; for they are many
@c    that make war against me.

@c    55:4. From the height of the day I shall fear:  but I will trust in
@c    thee.

@c    The height of the day. . .That is, even at noonday, when the sun is the
@c    highest, I am still in danger.

@c    55:5. In God I will praise my words, in God I have put my trust:  I will
@c    not fear what flesh can do against me.

@c    My words. . .The words or promises God has made in my favour.

@c    55:6. All the day long they detested my words:  all their thoughts were
@c    against me unto evil.

@c    55:7. They will dwell and hide themselves:  they will watch my heel.  As
@c    they have waited for my soul,

@c    55:8. For nothing shalt thou save them:  in thy anger thou shalt break
@c    the people in pieces.  O God,

@c    For nothing shalt thou save them. . .That is, since they lie in wait to
@c    ruin my soul, thou shalt for no consideration favour or assist them,
@c    but execute thy justice upon them.

@c    55:9. I have declared to thee my life:  thou hast set me tears in thy
@c    sight, As also in thy promise.

@c    55:10. Then shall my enemies be turned back.  In what day soever I shall
@c    call upon thee, behold I know thou art my God.

@c    55:11. In God will I praise the word, in the Lord will I praise his
@c    speech.  In God have I hoped, I will not fear what man can do to me.

@c    55:12. In me, O God, are vows to thee, which I will pay, praises to
@c    thee:

@c    55:13. Because thou hast delivered my soul from death, my feet from
@c    falling:  that I may please in the sight of God, in the light of the
@c    living.



@c    Psalms Chapter 56


@c    Miserere mei, Deus.  The prophet prays in his affliction, and praises
@c    God for his delivery.

@c    56:1. Unto the end, destroy not, for David, for an inscription of a
@c    title, when he fled from Saul into the cave.  [1 Kings 24.]

@c    Destroy not. . .Suffer me not to be destroyed.

@c    56:2. Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me:  for my soul trusteth
@c    in thee.  And in the shadow of thy wings will I hope, until iniquity
@c    pass away.

@c    56:3. I will cry to God the most high; to God who hath done good to me.

@c    56:4. He hath sent from heaven and delivered me:  he hath made them a
@c    reproach that trod upon me.  God hath sent his mercy and his truth,

@c    56:5. And he hath delivered my soul from the midst of the young lions.
@c    I slept troubled.  The sons of men, whose teeth are weapons and arrows,
@c    and their tongue a sharp sword.

@c    56:6. Be thou exalted, O God, above the heavens, and thy glory above
@c    all the earth.

@c    56:7. They prepared a snare for my feet; and they bowed down my soul.
@c    They dug a pit before my face, and they are fallen into it.

@c    56:8. My heart is ready, O God, my heart is ready:  I will sing, and
@c    rehearse a psalm.

@c    56:9. Arise, O my glory, arise psaltery and harp:  I will arise early.

@c    56:10. I will give praise to thee, O Lord, among the people:  I will
@c    sing a psalm to thee among the nations.

@c    56:11. For thy mercy is magnified even to the heavens:  and thy truth
@c    unto the clouds.

@c    56:12. Be thou exalted, O God, above the heavens:  and thy glory above
@c    all the earth.



@c    Psalms Chapter 57


@c    Si vere utique.

@c    David reproveth the wicked, and foretelleth their punishment.

@c    57:1. Unto the end, destroy not, for David, for an inscription of a
@c    title.

@c    57:2. If in very deed ye speak justice:  judge right things, ye sons of
@c    men.

@c    57:3. For in your heart you work iniquity:  your hands forge injustice
@c    in the earth.

@c    57:4. The wicked are alienated from the womb; they have gone astray
@c    from the womb:  they have spoken false things.

@c    57:5. Their madness is according to the likeness of a serpent:  like the
@c    deaf asp that stoppeth her ears:

@c    57:6. Which will not hear the voice of the charmers; nor of the wizard
@c    that charmeth wisely.

@c    57:7. God shall break in pieces their teeth in their mouth:  the Lord
@c    shall break the grinders of the lions.

@c    57:8. They shall come to nothing, like water running down; he hath bent
@c    his bow till they be weakened.

@c    57:9. Like wax that melteth they shall be taken away:  fire hath fallen
@c    on them, and they shall not see the sun.

@c    57:10. Before your thorns could know the brier; he swalloweth them up,
@c    as alive, in his wrath.

@c    Before your thorns, etc. . .That is, before your thorns grow up, so as
@c    to become strong briers, they shall be overtaken and consumed by divine
@c    justice, swallowing them up, as it were, alive in his wrath.

@c    57:11. The just shall rejoice when he shall see the revenge:  he shall
@c    wash his hands in the blood of the sinner.

@c    Shall wash his hands, etc. . .Shall applaud the justice of God, and take
@c    occasion from the consideration of the punishment of the wicked to wash
@c    and cleanse his hands from sin.

@c    57:12. And man shall say:  If indeed there be fruit to the just:  there
@c    is indeed a God that judgeth them on the earth.



@c    Psalms Chapter 58


@c    Eripe me.

@c    A prayer to be delivered from the wicked, with confidence in God's help
@c    and protection.  It agrees to Christ and his enemies the Jews.

@c    58:1. Unto the end, destroy not, for David for an inscription of a
@c    title, when Saul sent and watched his house to kill him.  [1 Kings 19.]

@c    58:2. Deliver me from my enemies, O my God; and defend me from them
@c    that rise up against me.

@c    58:3. Deliver me from them that work iniquity, and save me from bloody
@c    men.

@c    58:4. For behold they have caught my soul:  the mighty have rushed in
@c    upon me:

@c    58:5. Neither is it my iniquity, nor my sin, O Lord:  without iniquity
@c    have I run, and directed my steps.

@c    58:6. Rise up thou to meet me, and behold:  even thou, O Lord, the God
@c    of hosts, the God of Israel.  Attend to visit all the nations:  have no
@c    mercy on all them that work iniquity.

@c    58:7. They shall return at evening, and shall suffer hunger like dogs:
@c    and shall go round about the city.

@c    58:8. Behold they shall speak with their mouth, and a sword is in their
@c    lips:  for who, say they, hath heard us?

@c    58:9. But thou, O Lord, shalt laugh at them:  thou shalt bring all the
@c    nations to nothing.

@c    58:10. I will keep my strength to thee:  for thou art my protector:

@c    58:11. My God, his mercy shall prevent me.

@c    58:12. God shall let me see over my enemies:  slay them not, lest at any
@c    time my people forget.  Scatter them by thy power; and bring them down,
@c    O Lord, my protector:

@c    58:13. For the sin of their mouth, and the word of their lips:  and let
@c    them be taken in their pride.  And for their cursing and lying they
@c    shall be talked of,

@c    58:14. When they are consumed:  when they are consumed by thy wrath, and
@c    they shall be no more.  And they shall know that God will rule Jacob,
@c    and all the ends of the earth.

@c    58:15. They shall return at evening and shall suffer hunger like dogs:
@c    and shall go round about the city.

@c    58:16. They shall be scattered abroad to eat, and shall murmur if they
@c    be not filled.

@c    58:17. But I will sing thy strength:  and will extol thy mercy in the
@c    morning.  For thou art become my support, and my refuge, in the day of
@c    my trouble.

@c    58:18. Unto thee, O my helper, will I sing, for thou art God my
@c    defence:  my God my mercy.



@c    Psalms Chapter 59


@c    Deus, repulisti nos.

@c    After many afflictions, the church of Christ shall prevail.

@c    59:1. Unto the end, for them that shall be changed, for the inscription
@c    of a title, to David himself, for doctrine,

@c    59:2. When he set fire to Mesopotamia of Syria and Sobal:  and Joab
@c    returned and slew of Edom, in the vale of the saltpits, twelve thousand
@c    men.

@c    59:3. O God, thou hast cast us off, and hast destroyed us; thou hast
@c    been angry, and hast had mercy on us.

@c    59:4. Thou hast moved the earth, and hast troubled it:  heal thou the
@c    breaches thereof, for it has been moved.

@c    59:5. Thou hast shewn thy people hard things; thou hast made us drink
@c    the wine of sorrow.

@c    59:6. Thou hast given a warning to them that fear thee:  that they may
@c    flee from before the bow:  That thy beloved may be delivered.

@c    59:7. Save me with thy right hand, and hear me.

@c    59:8. God hath spoken in his holy place:  I will rejoice, and I will
@c    divide Sichem; and will mete out the vale of tabernacles.

@c    59:9. Galaad is mine, and Manasses is mine:  and Ephraim is the strength
@c    of my head.  Juda is my king:

@c    59:10. Moab is the pot of my hope.  Into Edom will I stretch out my
@c    shoe:  to me the foreigners are made subject.

@c    The pot of my hope. . .Or my watering pot.  That is, a vessel for meaner
@c    uses, by being reduced to serve me, even in the meanest
@c    employments.--Ibid.  Foreigners. . .So the Philistines are called, who
@c    had no kindred with the Israelites; whereas the Edomites, Moabites, etc.,
@c    were originally of the same family.

@c    59:11. Who will bring me into the strong city?  who will lead me into
@c    Edom?

@c    59:12. Wilt not thou, O God, who hast cast us off?  and wilt not thou, O
@c    God, go out with our armies?

@c    59:13. Give us help from trouble:  for vain is the salvation of man.

@c    59:14. Through God we shall do mightily:  and he shall bring to nothing
@c    them that afflict us.



@c    Psalms Chapter 60


@c    Exaudi, Deus.

@c    A prayer for the coming of the kingdom of Christ, which shall have no
@c    end.

@c    60:1. Unto the end, in hymns, for David.

@c    60:2. Hear, O God, my supplication:  be attentive to my prayer.

@c    60:3. To thee have I cried from the ends of the earth:  when my heart
@c    was in anguish, thou hast exalted me on a rock.  Thou hast conducted me;

@c    60:4. For thou hast been my hope; a tower of strength against the face
@c    of the enemy.

@c    60:5. In thy tabernacle I shall dwell for ever:  I shall be protected
@c    under the covert of thy wings.

@c    60:6. For thou, my God, hast heard my prayer:  thou hast given an
@c    inheritance to them that fear thy name.

@c    60:7. Thou wilt add days to the days of the king:  his years even to
@c    generation and generation.

@c    60:8. He abideth for ever in the sight of God:  his mercy and truth who
@c    shall search?

@c    60:9. So will I sing a psalm to thy name for ever and ever:  that I may
@c    pay my vows from day to day.



@c    Psalms Chapter 61


@c    Nonne Deo.

@c    The prophet encourageth himself and all others to trust in God, and
@c    serve him.

@c    61:1. Unto the end, for Idithun, a psalm of David.

@c    61:2. Shall not my soul be subject to God?  for from him is my
@c    salvation.

@c    61:3. For he is my God and my saviour:  he is my protector, I shall be
@c    moved no more.

@c    61:4. How long do you rush in upon a man?  you all kill, as if you were
@c    thrusting down a leaning wall, and a tottering fence.

@c    61:5. But they have thought to cast away my price; I ran in thirst:
@c    they blessed with their mouth, but cursed with their heart.

@c    61:6. But be thou, O my soul, subject to God:  for from him is my
@c    patience.

@c    61:7. For he is my God and my saviour:  he is my helper, I shall not be
@c    moved.

@c    61:8. In God is my salvation and my glory:  he is the God of my help,
@c    and my hope is in God.

@c    61:9. Trust in him, all ye congregation of people:  pour out your hearts
@c    before him.  God is our helper for ever.

@c    61:10. But vain are the sons of men, the sons of men are liars in the
@c    balances:  that by vanity they may together deceive.

@c    Are liars in the balances, etc. . .They are so vain and light, that if
@c    they are put into the scales, they will be found to be of no weight;
@c    and to be mere lies, deceit, and vanity.  Or, They are liars in their
@c    balances, by weighing things by false weights, and preferring the
@c    temporal before the eternal.

@c    61:11. Trust not in iniquity, and cover not robberies:  if riches
@c    abound, set not your heart upon them.

@c    61:12. God hath spoken once, these two things have I heard, that power
@c    belongeth to God,

@c    61:13. And mercy to thee, O Lord; for thou wilt render to every man
@c    according to his works.



@c    Psalms Chapter 62


@c    Deus Deus meus, ad te.

@c    The prophet aspireth after God.

@c    62:1. A psalm of David while he was in the desert of Edom.

@c    62:2. O God, my God, to thee do I watch at break of day.  For thee my
@c    soul hath thirsted; for thee my flesh, O how many ways!

@c    62:3. In a desert land, and where there is no way, and no water:  so in
@c    the sanctuary have I come before thee, to see thy power and thy glory.

@c    62:4. For thy mercy is better than lives:  thee my lips will praise.

@c    62:5. Thus will I bless thee all my life long:  and in thy name I will
@c    lift up my hands.

@c    62:6. Let my soul be filled as with marrow and fatness:  and my mouth
@c    shall praise thee with joyful lips.

@c    62:7. If I have remembered thee upon my bed, I will meditate on thee in
@c    the morning:

@c    62:8. Because thou hast been my helper.  And I will rejoice under the
@c    covert of thy wings:

@c    62:9. My soul hath stuck close to thee:  thy right hand hath received
@c    me.

@c    62:10. But they have fought my soul in vain, they shall go into the
@c    lower parts of the earth:

@c    62:11. They shall be delivered into the hands of the sword, they shall
@c    be the portions of foxes.

@c    62:12. But the king shall rejoice in God, all they shall be praised
@c    that swear by him:  because the mouth is stopped of them that speak
@c    wicked things.



@c    Psalms Chapter 63


@c    Exaudi Deus orationem.

@c    A prayer in affliction, with confidence in God that he will bring to
@c    nought the machinations of persecutors.

@c    63:1. Unto the end, a psalm for David.

@c    63:2. Hear O God, my prayer, when I make supplication to thee:  deliver
@c    my soul from the fear of the enemy.

@c    63:3. Thou hast protected me from the assembly of the malignant; from
@c    the multitude of the workers of iniquity.

@c    63:4. For they have whetted their tongues like a sword; they have bent
@c    their bow a bitter thing,

@c    63:5. To shoot in secret the undefiled.

@c    63:6. They will shoot at him on a sudden, and will not fear:  they are
@c    resolute in wickedness.  They have talked of hiding snares; they have
@c    said:  Who shall see them?

@c    63:7. They have searched after iniquities:  they have failed in their
@c    search.  Man shall come to a deep heart:

@c    A deep heart. . .That is, crafty, subtle, deep projects and designs;
@c    which nevertheless shall not succeed; for God shall be exalted in
@c    bringing them to nought by his wisdom and power.

@c    63:8. And God shall be exalted.  The arrows of children are their
@c    wounds:

@c    The arrows of children are their wounds. . .That is, the wounds,
@c    stripes, or blows, they seek to inflict upon the just, are but like the
@c    weak efforts of children's arrows, which can do no execution:  and their
@c    tongues, that is, their speeches against them come to nothing.

@c    63:9. And their tongues against them are made weak.  All that saw them
@c    were troubled;

@c    63:10. And every man was afraid.  And they declared the works of God,
@c    and understood his doings.

@c    63:11. The just shall rejoice in the Lord, and shall hope in him:  and
@c    all the upright in heart shall be praised.



@c    Psalms Chapter 64


@c    Te decet.

@c    God is to be praised in his church, to which all nations shall be
@c    called.

@c    64:1. To the end, a psalm of David.  The canticle of Jeremias and
@c    Ezechiel to the people of the captivity, when they began to go out.

@c    Of the captivity. . .That is, the people of the captivity of Babylon.
@c    This is not in the Hebrew, but is found in the ancient translation of
@c    the Septuagint.

@c    64:2. A hymn, O God, becometh thee in Sion:  and a vow shall be paid to
@c    thee in Jerusalem.

@c    64:3. O hear my prayer:  all flesh shall come to thee.

@c    64:4. The words of the wicked have prevailed over us:  and thou wilt
@c    pardon our transgressions.

@c    64:5. Blessed is he whom thou hast chosen and taken to thee:  he shall
@c    dwell in thy courts.  We shall be filled with the good things of thy
@c    house; holy is thy temple,

@c    64:6. Wonderful in justice.  Hear us, O God our saviour, who art the
@c    hope of all the ends of the earth, and in the sea afar off.

@c    64:7. Thou who preparest the mountains by thy strength, being girded
@c    with power:

@c    64:8. Who troublest the depth of the sea, the noise of its waves.  The
@c    Gentiles shall be troubled,

@c    64:9. And they that dwell in the uttermost borders shall be afraid at
@c    thy signs:  thou shalt make the outgoings of the morning and of the
@c    evening to be joyful.

@c    64:10. Thou hast visited the earth, and hast plentifully watered it;
@c    thou hast many ways enriched it.  The river of God is filled with water,
@c    thou hast prepared their food:  for so is its preparation.

@c    64:11. Fill up plentifully the streams thereof, multiply its fruits; it
@c    shall spring up and rejoice in its showers.

@c    64:12. Thou shalt bless the crown of the year of thy goodness:  and thy
@c    fields shall be filled with plenty.

@c    64:13. The beautiful places of the wilderness shall grow fat:  and the
@c    hills shall be girded about with joy,

@c    64:14. The rams of the flock are clothed, and the vales shall abound
@c    with corn:  they shall shout, yea they shall sing a hymn.



@c    Psalms Chapter 65


@c    Jubilate Deo.

@c    An invitation to praise God.

@c    65:1. Unto the end, a canticle of a psalm of the resurrection.  Shout
@c    with joy to God, all the earth,

@c    65:2. Sing ye a psalm to his name; give glory to his praise.

@c    65:3. Say unto God, How terrible are thy works, O Lord! in the
@c    multitude of thy strength thy enemies shall lie to thee.

@c    65:4. Let all the earth adore thee, and sing to thee:  let it sing a
@c    psalm to thy name.

@c    65:5. Come and see the works of God; who is terrible in his counsels
@c    over the sons of men.

@c    65:6. Who turneth the sea into dry land, in the river they shall pass
@c    on foot:  there shall we rejoice in him.

@c    65:7. Who by his power ruleth for ever:  his eyes behold the nations;
@c    let not them that provoke him be exalted in themselves.

@c    65:8. O bless our God, ye Gentiles:  and make the voice of his praise to
@c    be heard.

@c    65:9. Who hath set my soul to live:  and hath not suffered my feet to be
@c    moved:

@c    65:10. For thou, O God, hast proved us:  thou hast tried us by fire, as
@c    silver is tried.

@c    65:11. Thou hast brought us into a net, thou hast laid afflictions on
@c    our back:

@c    65:12. Thou hast set men over our heads.  We have passed through fire
@c    and water, and thou hast brought us out into a refreshment.

@c    65:13. I will go into thy house with burnt offerings:  I will pay thee
@c    my vows,

@c    65:14. Which my lips have uttered, And my mouth hath spoken, when I was
@c    in trouble.

@c    65:15. I will offer up to thee holocausts full of marrow, with burnt
@c    offerings of rams:  I will offer to thee bullocks with goats.

@c    65:16. Come and hear, all ye that fear God, and I will tell you what
@c    great things he hath done for my soul.

@c    65:17. I cried to him with my mouth:  and I extolled him with my tongue.

@c    65:18. If I have looked at iniquity in my heart, the Lord will not hear
@c    me.

@c    65:19. Therefore hath God heard me, and hath attended to the voice of
@c    my supplication.

@c    65:20. Blessed be God, who hath not turned away my prayer, nor his
@c    mercy from me.



@c    Psalms Chapter 66


@c    Deus misereatur.

@c    A prayer for the propagation of the church.

@c    66:1. Unto the end, in hymns, a psalm of a canticle for David.

@c    66:2. May God have mercy on us, and bless us:  may he cause the light of
@c    his countenance to shine upon us, and may he have mercy on us.

@c    66:3. That we may know thy way upon earth:  thy salvation in all
@c    nations.

@c    66:4. Let people confess to thee, O God:  let all people give praise to
@c    thee.

@c    66:5. Let the nations be glad and rejoice:  for thou judgest the people
@c    with justice, and directest the nations upon earth.

@c    66:6. Let the people, O God, confess to thee:  let all the people give
@c    praise to thee:

@c    66:7. The earth hath yielded her fruit.  May God, our God bless us,

@c    66:8. May God bless us:  and all the ends of the earth fear him.



@c    Psalms Chapter 67


@c    Exurgat Deus.

@c    The glorious establishment of the church of the New Testament,
@c    prefigured by the benefits bestowed on the people of Israel.

@c    67:1. Unto the end, a psalm of a canticle for David himself.

@c    67:2. Let God arise, and let his enemies be scattered:  and let them
@c    that hate him flee from before his face.

@c    67:3. As smoke vanisheth, so let them vanish away:  as wax melteth
@c    before the fire, so let the wicked perish at the presence of God.

@c    67:4. And let the just feast, and rejoice before God:  and be delighted
@c    with gladness.

@c    67:5. Sing ye to God, sing a psalm to his name, make a way for him who
@c    ascendeth upon the west:  the Lord is his name.  Rejoice ye before him:
@c    but the wicked shall be troubled at his presence,

@c    Who ascendeth upon the west. . .Super occasum.  St. Gregory understands
@c    it of Christ, who after his going down, like the sun, in the west, by
@c    his passion and death, ascended more glorious, and carried all before
@c    him.  St. Jerome renders it, who ascendeth, or cometh up, through the
@c    deserts.

@c    67:6. Who is the father of orphans, and the judge of widows.  God in his
@c    holy place:

@c    67:7. God who maketh men of one manner to dwell in a house:  Who
@c    bringeth out them that were bound in strength; in like manner them that
@c    provoke, that dwell in sepulchres.

@c    Of one manner. . .That is, agreeing in faith, unanimous in love, and
@c    following the same manner of discipline.  It is verified in the servants
@c    of God, living together in his house, which is the church.  1 Tim.
@c    3.15.--Ibid.  Them that were bound, etc. . .The power and mercy of God
@c    appears in his bringing out of their captivity those that were strongly
@c    bound in their sins:  and in restoring to his grace those whose
@c    behaviour had been most provoking; and who by their evil habits were
@c    not only dead, but buried in their sepulchres.

@c    67:8. O God, when thou didst go forth in the sight of thy people, when
@c    thou didst pass through the desert:

@c    67:9. The earth was moved, and the heavens dropped at the presence of
@c    the God of Sina, at the presence of the God of Israel.

@c    67:10. Thou shalt set aside for thy inheritance a free rain, O God:  and
@c    it was weakened, but thou hast made it perfect.

@c    A free rain. . .the manna, which rained plentifully from heaven, in
@c    favour of God's inheritance, that is, of his people Israel:  which was
@c    weakened indeed under a variety of afflictions, but was made perfect by
@c    God; that is, was still supported by divine providence, and brought on
@c    to the promised land.  It agrees particularly to the church of Christ
@c    his true inheritance, which is plentifully watered with the free rain
@c    of heavenly grace; and through many infirmities, that is, crosses and
@c    tribulations, is made perfect, and fitted for eternal glory.

@c    67:11. In it shall thy animals dwell; in thy sweetness, O God, thou
@c    hast provided for the poor.

@c    In it, etc. . .That is, in this church, which is thy fold and thy
@c    inheritance, shall thy animals, thy sheep, dwell:  where thou hast
@c    plentifully provided for them.

@c    67:12. The Lord shall give the word to them that preach good tidings
@c    with great power.

@c    To them that preach good tidings. . .Evangelizantibus.  That is, to the
@c    preachers of the gospel; who receiving the word from the Lord, shall
@c    with great power and efficacy preach throughout the world the glad
@c    tidings of a Saviour, and of eternal salvation through him.

@c    67:13. The king of powers is of the beloved, of the beloved; and the
@c    beauty of the house shall divide spoils.

@c    The king of powers. . .That is, the mighty King, the Lord of hosts, is
@c    of the beloved, of the beloved; that is, is on the side of Christ, his
@c    most beloved son:  and his beautiful house, viz., the church, in which
@c    God dwells forever, shall by her spiritual conquests divide the spoils
@c    of many nations.  The Hebrew (as it now stands pointed) is thus
@c    rendered, The kings of armies have fled, they have fled, and she that
@c    dwells at home (or the beauty of the house) shall divide the spoils.

@c    67:14. If you sleep among the midst of lots, you shall be as the wings
@c    of a dove covered with silver, and the hinder parts of her back with
@c    the paleness of gold.

@c    If you sleep among the midst of lots (intermedios cleros, etc.). . .Viz.,
@c    in such dangers and persecutions, as if your enemies were casting
@c    lots for your goods and persons:  or in the midst of the lots,
@c    (intermedios terminos, as St. Jerome renders it,) that is, upon the
@c    very bounds or borders of the dominions of your enemies:  you shall be
@c    secure nevertheless under the divine protection; and shall be enabled
@c    to fly away, like a dove, with glittering wings and feathers shining
@c    like the palest and most precious gold; that is, with great increase of
@c    virtue, and glowing with the fervour of charity.

@c    67:15. When he that is in heaven appointeth kings over her, they shall
@c    be whited with snow in Selmon.

@c    Kings over her. . .That is, pastors and rulers over his church, viz.,
@c    the apostles and their successors.  Then by their ministry shall men be
@c    made whiter than the snow which lies on the top of the high mountain
@c    Selmon.

@c    67:16. The mountain of God is a fat mountain.  A curdled mountain, a fat
@c    mountain.

@c    The mountain of God. . .The church, which, Isa. 2.2, is called The
@c    mountain of the house of the Lord upon the top of mountains.  It is here
@c    called a fat and a curdled mountain; that is to say, most fruitful, and
@c    enriched by the spiritual gifts and graces of the Holy Ghost.

@c    67:17. Why suspect, ye curdled mountains?  A mountain in which God is
@c    well pleased to dwell:  for there the Lord shall dwell unto the end.

@c    Why suspect, ye curdled mountains?. . .Why do you suppose or imagine
@c    there may be any other such curdled mountains?  You are mistaken:  the
@c    mountain thus favoured by God is but one; and this same he has chosen
@c    for his dwelling for ever.

@c    67:18. The chariot of God is attended by ten thousands; thousands of
@c    them that rejoice:  the Lord is among them in Sina, in the holy place.

@c    The chariot of God. . .Descending to give his law on mount Sina:  as also
@c    of Jesus Christ his Son, ascending into heaven, to send from thence the
@c    Holy Ghost, to publish his new law, is attended with ten thousands,
@c    that is, with an innumerable multitude of joyful angels.

@c    67:19. Thou hast ascended on high, thou hast led captivity captive;
@c    thou hast received gifts in men.  Yea for those also that do not
@c    believe, the dwelling of the Lord God.

@c    Led captivity captive. . .Carrying away with thee to heaven those who
@c    before had been the captives of Satan; and receiving from God the
@c    Father gifts to be distributed to men; even to those who were before
@c    unbelievers.

@c    67:20. Blessed be the Lord day by day:  the God of our salvation will
@c    make our journey prosperous to us.

@c    67:21. Our God is the God of salvation:  and of the Lord, of the Lord
@c    are the issues from death.

@c    The issues from death. . .The Lord alone is master of the issues, by
@c    which we may escape from death.

@c    67:22. But God shall break the heads of his enemies:  the hairy crown of
@c    them that walk on in their sins.

@c    67:23. The Lord said:  I will turn them from Basan, I will turn them
@c    into the depth of the sea:

@c    I will turn them from Basan, etc. . .I will cast out my enemies from
@c    their rich possessions, signified by Basan, a fruitful country; and I
@c    will drive them into the depth of the sea:  and make such a slaughter of
@c    them, that the feet of my servants may be dyed in their blood, etc.

@c    67:24. That thy foot may be dipped in the blood of thy enemies; the
@c    tongue of thy dogs be red with the same.

@c    67:25. They have seen thy goings, O God, the goings of my God:  of my
@c    king who is in his sanctuary.

@c    Thy goings. . .Thy ways, thy proceedings, by which thou didst formerly
@c    take possession of the promised land in favour of thy people; and shalt
@c    afterwards of the whole world, which thou shalt subdue to thy Son.

@c    67:26. Princes went before joined with singers, in the midst of young
@c    damsels playing on timbrels.

@c    Princes. . .The apostles, the first converters of nations; attended by
@c    numbers of perfect souls, singing the divine praises, and virgins
@c    consecrated to God.

@c    67:27. In the churches bless ye God the Lord, from the fountains of
@c    Israel.

@c    From the fountains of Israel. . .From whom both Christ and his apostles
@c    sprung.  By Benjamin, the holy fathers on this place understand St.
@c    Paul, who was of that tribe, named here a youth, because he was the
@c    last called to the apostleship.  By the princes of Juda, Zabulon, and
@c    Nephthali, we may understand the other apostles, who were of the tribe
@c    of Juda; or of the tribes of Zabulon, and Nephthali, where our Lord
@c    began to preach, Matt. 4.13, etc.

@c    67:28. There is Benjamin a youth, in ecstasy of mind.  The princes of
@c    Juda are their leaders:  the princes of Zabulon, the princes of
@c    Nephthali.

@c    67:29. Command thy strength, O God confirm, O God, what thou hast
@c    wrought in us.

@c    Command thy strength. . .Give orders that thy strength may be always with
@c    us.

@c    67:30. From thy temple in Jerusalem, kings shall offer presents to
@c    thee.

@c    67:31. Rebuke the wild beasts of the reeds, the congregation of bulls
@c    with the kine of the people; who seek to exclude them who are tried
@c    with silver.  Scatter thou the nations that delight in wars:

@c    Rebuke the wild beasts of the reeds. . .or the wild beasts, which lie
@c    hid in the reeds.  That is, the devils, who hide themselves in order to
@c    surprise their prey.  Or by wild beasts, are here understood
@c    persecutors, who, for all their attempts against the Church, are but as
@c    weak reeds, which cannot prevail against them who are supported by the
@c    strength of the Almighty.  The same are also called the congregation of
@c    bulls (from their rage against the Church) who assemble together all
@c    their kine, that is, the people their subjects, to exclude if they can,
@c    from Christ and his inheritance, his constant confessors, who are like
@c    silver tried by fire.

@c    67:32. Ambassadors shall come out of Egypt:  Ethiopia shall soon stretch
@c    out her hands to God.

@c    Ambassadors shall come, etc. . .It is a prophecy of the conversion of
@c    the Gentiles, and by name of the Egyptians and Ethiopians.

@c    67:33. Sing to God, ye kingdoms of the earth:  sing ye to the Lord:  Sing
@c    ye to God,

@c    67:34. Who mounteth above the heaven of heavens, to the east.  Behold he
@c    will give to his voice the voice of power:

@c    To the east. . .From mount Olivet, which is on the east side of
@c    Jerusalem.--Ibid.  The voice of power. . .That is, he will make his voice
@c    to be a powerful voice:  by calling from death to life, such as were
@c    dead in mortal sin:  as at the last day he will by the power of his
@c    voice call all the dead from their graves.

@c    67:35. Give ye glory to God for Israel, his magnificence, and his power
@c    is in the clouds.

@c    67:36. God is wonderful in his saints:  the God of Israel is he who will
@c    give power and strength to his people.  Blessed be God.



@c    Psalms Chapter 68


@c    Salvum me fac, Deus.

@c    Christ in his passion declareth the greatness of his sufferings, and
@c    the malice of his persecutors the Jews; and foretelleth their
@c    reprobation.

@c    68:1. Unto the end, for them that shall be changed; for David.

@c    For them that shall be changed. . .A psalm for Christian converts, to
@c    remember the passion of Christ.

@c    68:2. Save me, O God:  for the waters are come in even unto my soul.

@c    The waters. . .Of afflictions and sorrows.  My soul is sorrowful even
@c    unto death.  Matt. 26.38.

@c    68:3. I stick fast in the mire of the deep and there is no sure
@c    standing.  I am come into the depth of the sea, and a tempest hath
@c    overwhelmed me.

@c    68:4. I have laboured with crying; my jaws are become hoarse, my eyes
@c    have failed, whilst I hope in my God.

@c    68:5. They are multiplied above the hairs of my head, who hate me
@c    without cause.  My enemies are grown strong who have wrongfully
@c    persecuted me:  then did I pay that which I took not away.

@c    I pay that which I took not away. . .Christ in his passion made
@c    restitution of what he had not taken away, by suffering the punishment
@c    due to our sins, and so repairing the injury we had done to God.

@c    68:6. O God, thou knowest my foolishness; and my offences are not
@c    hidden from thee:

@c    My foolishness and my offences. . .which my enemies impute to me:  or the
@c    follies and sins of men, which I have taken upon myself.

@c    68:7. Let not them be ashamed for me, who look for thee, O Lord, the
@c    Lord of hosts.  Let them not be confounded on my account, who seek thee,
@c    O God of Israel.

@c    68:8. Because for thy sake I have borne reproach; shame hath covered my
@c    face.

@c    68:9. I am become a stranger to my brethren, and an alien to the sons
@c    of my mother.

@c    68:10. For the zeal of thy house hath eaten me up:  and the reproaches
@c    of them that reproached thee are fallen upon me.

@c    68:11. And I covered my soul in fasting:  and it was made a reproach to
@c    me.

@c    68:12. And I made haircloth my garment:  and I became a byword to them.

@c    68:13. They that sat in the gate spoke against me:  and they that drank
@c    wine made me their song.

@c    68:14. But as for me, my prayer is to thee, O Lord; for the time of thy
@c    good pleasure, O God.  In the multitude of thy mercy hear me, in the
@c    truth of thy salvation.

@c    68:15. Draw me out of the mire, that I may not stick fast:  deliver me
@c    from them that hate me, and out of the deep waters.

@c    68:16. Let not the tempest of water drown me, nor the deep water
@c    swallow me up:  and let not the pit shut her mouth upon me.

@c    68:17. Hear me, O Lord, for thy mercy is kind; look upon me according
@c    to the multitude of thy tender mercies.

@c    68:18. And turn not away thy face from thy servant:  for I am in
@c    trouble, hear me speedily.

@c    68:19. Attend to my soul, and deliver it:  save me because of my
@c    enemies.

@c    68:20. Thou knowest my reproach, and my confusion, and my shame.

@c    68:21. In thy sight are all they that afflict me; my heart hath
@c    expected reproach and misery.  And I looked for one that would grieve
@c    together with me, but there was none:  and for one that would comfort
@c    me, and I found none.

@c    68:22. And they gave me gall for my food, and in my thirst they gave me
@c    vinegar to drink.

@c    68:23. Let their table become as a snare before them, and a recompense,
@c    and a stumblingblock.

@c    Let their table, etc. . .What here follows in the style of an
@c    imprecation, is a prophecy of the wretched state to which the Jews
@c    should be reduced in punishment of their wilful obstinacy.

@c    68:24. Let their eyes be darkened that they see not; and their back
@c    bend thou down always.

@c    68:25. Pour out thy indignation upon them:  and let thy wrathful anger
@c    take hold of them.

@c    68:26. Let their habitation be made desolate:  and let there be none to
@c    dwell in their tabernacles.

@c    68:27. Because they have persecuted him whom thou hast smitten; and
@c    they have added to the grief of my wounds.

@c    68:28. Add thou iniquity upon their iniquity:  and let them not come
@c    into thy justice.

@c    68:29. Let them be blotted out of the book of the living; and with the
@c    just let them not be written.

@c    68:30. But I am poor and sorrowful:  thy salvation, O God, hath set me
@c    up.

@c    68:31. I will praise the name of God with a canticle:  and I will
@c    magnify him with praise.

@c    68:32. And it shall please God better than a young calf, that bringeth
@c    forth horns and hoofs.

@c    68:33. Let the poor see and rejoice:  seek ye God, and your soul shall
@c    live.

@c    68:34. For the Lord hath heard the poor:  and hath not despised his
@c    prisoners.

@c    68:35. Let the heavens and the earth praise him; the sea, and every
@c    thing that creepeth therein.

@c    68:36. For God will save Sion, and the cities of Juda shall be built
@c    up.  And they shall dwell there, and acquire it by inheritance.

@c    Sion. . .The catholic church.  The cities of Juda, etc., her places of
@c    worship, which shall be established throughout the world.  And there,
@c    viz., in this church of Christ, shall his servants dwell, etc.

@c    68:37. And the seed of his servants shall possess it; and they that
@c    love his name shall dwell therein.



@c    Psalms Chapter 69


@c    Deus in adjutorium.

@c    A prayer in persecution.

@c    69:1. Unto the end, a psalm for David, to bring to remembrance that the
@c    Lord saved him.

@c    69:2. O God, come to my assistance; O Lord, make haste to help me.

@c    69:3. Let them be confounded and ashamed that seek my soul:

@c    69:4. Let them be turned backward, and blush for shame that desire
@c    evils to me:  Let them be presently turned away blushing for shame that
@c    say to me:  'Tis well, 'tis well.

@c    'T is well, 't is well. . .Euge, euge.  St. Jerome renders it, vah, vah!
@c    which is the voice of one insulting and deriding.  Some understand it as
@c    a detestation of deceitful flatterers.

@c    69:5. Let all that seek thee rejoice and be glad in thee; and let such
@c    as love thy salvation say always:  The Lord be magnified.

@c    69:6. But I am needy and poor; O God, help me.  Thou art my helper and
@c    my deliverer:  O lord, make no delay.



@c    Psalms Chapter 70


@c    In te, Domine.

@c    A prayer for perseverance.

@c    70:1. A psalm for David.  Of the sons of Jonadab, and the former
@c    captives.  In thee, O Lord, I have hoped, let me never be put to
@c    confusion:

@c    Of the sons of Jonadab. . .The Rechabites, of whom see Jer. 35.  By this
@c    addition of the seventy-two interpreters, we gather that this psalm was
@c    usually sung in the synagogue, in the person of the Rechabites, and of
@c    those who were first carried away into captivity.

@c    70:2. Deliver me in thy justice, and rescue me.  Incline thy ear unto
@c    me, and save me.

@c    70:3. Be thou unto me a God, a protector, and a place of strength:  that
@c    thou mayst make me safe.  For thou art my firmament and my refuge.

@c    70:4. Deliver me, O my God, out of the hand of the sinner, and out of
@c    the hand of the transgressor of the law and of the unjust.

@c    70:5. For thou art my patience, O Lord:  my hope, O Lord, from my youth.

@c    70:6. By thee have I been confirmed from the womb:  from my mother's
@c    womb thou art my protector.  Of thee I shall continually sing:

@c    70:7. I am become unto many as a wonder, but thou art a strong helper.

@c    70:8. Let my mouth be filled with praise, that I may sing thy glory;
@c    thy greatness all the day long.

@c    70:9. Cast me not off in the time of old age:  when my strength shall
@c    fail, do not thou forsake me.

@c    70:10. For my enemies have spoken against me; and they that watched my
@c    soul have consulted together,

@c    70:11. Saying:  God hath forsaken him:  pursue and take him, for there is
@c    none to deliver him.

@c    70:12. O God, be not thou far from me:  O my God, make haste to my help.

@c    70:13. Let them be confounded and come to nothing that detract my soul;
@c    let them be covered with confusion and blame that seek my hurt.

@c    70:14. But I will always hope; and will add to all thy praise.

@c    70:15. My mouth shall shew forth thy justice; thy salvation all the day
@c    long.  Because I have not known learning,

@c    Learning. . .As much as to say, I build not upon human learning, but
@c    only on the power and justice of God.

@c    70:16. I will enter into the powers of the Lord:  O Lord, I will be
@c    mindful of thy justice alone.

@c    70:17. Thou hast taught me, O God, from my youth:  and till now I will
@c    declare thy wonderful works.

@c    70:18. And unto old age and grey hairs:  O God, forsake me not, Until I
@c    shew forth thy arm to all the generation that is to come:  Thy power,

@c    70:19. And thy justice, O God, even to the highest great things thou
@c    hast done:  O God, who is like to thee?

@c    70:20. How great troubles hast thou shewn me, many and grievous:  and
@c    turning thou hast brought me to life, and hast brought me back again
@c    from the depths of the earth:

@c    70:21. Thou hast multiplied thy magnificence; and turning to me thou
@c    hast comforted me.

@c    70:22. For I will also confess to thee thy truth with the instruments
@c    of psaltery:  O God, I will sing to thee with the harp, thou holy one of
@c    Israel.

@c    70:23. My lips shall greatly rejoice, when I shall sing to thee; and my
@c    soul which thou hast redeemed.

@c    70:24. Yea and my tongue shall meditate on thy justice all the day;
@c    when they shall be confounded and put to shame that seek evils to me.



@c    Psalms Chapter 71


@c    Deus, judicium tuum.

@c    A prophecy of the coming of Christ, and of his kingdom:  prefigured by
@c    Solomon and his happy reign.

@c    71:1. A psalm on Solomon.

@c    71:2. Give to the king thy judgment, O God, and to the king's son thy
@c    justice:  To judge thy people with justice, and thy poor with judgment.

@c    71:3. Let the mountains receive peace for the people:  and the hills
@c    justice.

@c    71:4. He shall judge the poor of the people, and he shall save the
@c    children of the poor:  and he shall humble the oppressor.

@c    71:5. And he shall continue with the sun and before the moon,
@c    throughout all generations.

@c    71:6. He shall come down like rain upon the fleece; and as showers
@c    falling gently upon the earth.

@c    71:7. In his days shall justice spring up, and abundance of peace, till
@c    the moon be taken away.

@c    71:8. And he shall rule from sea to sea, and from the river unto the
@c    ends of the earth.

@c    71:9. Before him the Ethiopians shall fall down:  and his enemies shall
@c    lick the ground.

@c    71:10. The kings of Tharsis and the islands shall offer presents:  the
@c    kings of the Arabians and of Saba shall bring gifts:

@c    71:11. And all kings of the earth shall adore him:  all nations shall
@c    serve him.

@c    71:12. For he shall deliver the poor from the mighty:  and the needy
@c    that had no helper.

@c    71:13. He shall spare the poor and needy:  and he shall save the souls
@c    of the poor.

@c    71:14. He shall redeem their souls from usuries and iniquity:  and their
@c    names shall be honourable in his sight.

@c    71:15. And he shall live, and to him shall be given of the gold of
@c    Arabia, for him they shall always adore:  they shall bless him all the
@c    day.

@c    71:16. And there shall be a firmament on the earth on the tops of
@c    mountains, above Libanus shall the fruit thereof be exalted:  and they
@c    of the city shall flourish like the grass of the earth.

@c    A firmament on the earth, etc. . .This may be understood of the church
@c    of Christ, ever firm and visible:  and of the flourishing condition of
@c    its congregation.

@c    71:17. Let his name be blessed for evermore:  his name continueth before
@c    the sun.  And in him shall all the tribes of the earth be blessed:  all
@c    nations shall magnify him.

@c    71:18. Blessed be the Lord, the God of Israel, who alone doth wonderful
@c    things.

@c    71:19. And blessed be the name of his majesty for ever:  and the whole
@c    earth shall be filled with his majesty.  So be it.  So be it.

@c    71:20. The praises of David, the son of Jesse, are ended.

@c    Are ended. . .By this it appears that this psalm, though placed here,
@c    was in order of time the last of those which David composed.



@c    Psalms Chapter 72


@c    Quam bonus Israel Deus.

@c    The temptation of the weak, upon seeing the prosperity of the wicked,
@c    is overcome by the consideration of the justice of God, who will
@c    quickly render to every one according to his works.

@c    72:1. A psalm for Asaph.  How good is God to Israel, to them that are of
@c    a right heart!

@c    72:2. But my feet were almost moved; my steps had well nigh slipped.

@c    72:3. Because I had a zeal on occasion of the wicked, seeing the
@c    prosperity of sinners.

@c    72:4. For there is no regard to their death, nor is there strength in
@c    their stripes.

@c    72:5. They are not in the labour of men:  neither shall they be scourged
@c    like other men.

@c    72:6. Therefore pride hath held them fast:  they are covered with their
@c    iniquity and their wickedness.

@c    72:7. Their iniquity hath come forth, as it were from fatness:  they
@c    have passed into the affection of the heart.

@c    Fatness. . .Abundance and temporal prosperity, which hath encouraged
@c    them in their iniquity:  and made them give themselves up to their
@c    irregular affections.

@c    72:8. They have thought and spoken wickedness:  they have spoken
@c    iniquity on high.

@c    72:9. They have set their mouth against heaven:  and their tongue hath
@c    passed through the earth.

@c    72:10. Therefore will my people return here and full days shall be
@c    found in them.

@c    Return here. . .or hither.  The weak among the servants of God, will be
@c    apt often to return to this thought, and will be shocked when they
@c    consider the full days, that is, the long and prosperous life of the
@c    wicked; and will be tempted to make the reflections against providence
@c    which are set down in the following verses.

@c    72:11. And they said:  How doth God know?  and is there knowledge in the
@c    most High?

@c    72:12. Behold these are sinners; and yet, abounding in the world they
@c    have obtained riches.

@c    72:13. And I said:  Then have I in vain justified my heart, and washed
@c    my hands among the innocent.

@c    72:14. And I have been scourged all the day; and my chastisement hath
@c    been in the mornings.

@c    72:15. If I said:  I will speak thus; behold I should condemn the
@c    generation of thy children.

@c    If I said, etc. . .That is, if I should indulge such thoughts as these.

@c    72:16. I studied that I might know this thing, it is a labour in my
@c    sight:

@c    72:17. Until I go into the sanctuary of God, and understand concerning
@c    their last ends.

@c    72:18. But indeed for deceits thou hast put it to them:  when they were
@c    lifted up thou hast cast them down.

@c    Thou hast put it to them. . .In punishment of their deceits, or for
@c    deceiving them, thou hast brought evils upon them in their last end,
@c    which, in their prosperity they never apprehended.

@c    72:19. How are they brought to desolation?  they have suddenly ceased to
@c    be:  they have perished by reason of their iniquity.

@c    72:20. As the dream of them that awake, O Lord; so in thy city thou
@c    shalt bring their image to nothing.

@c    72:21. For my heart hath been inflamed, and my reins have been changed:

@c    72:22. And I am brought to nothing, and I knew not.

@c    72:23. I am become as a beast before thee:  and I am always with thee.

@c    72:24. Thou hast held me by my right hand; and by thy will thou hast
@c    conducted me, and with thy glory thou hast received me.

@c    72:25. For what have I in heaven?  and besides thee what do I desire
@c    upon earth?

@c    72:26. For thee my flesh and my heart hath fainted away:  thou art the
@c    God of my heart, and the God that is my portion for ever.

@c    72:27. For behold they that go far from thee shall perish:  thou hast
@c    destroyed all them that are disloyal to thee.

@c    72:28. But it is good for me to adhere to my God, to put my hope in the
@c    Lord God:  That I may declare all thy praises, in the gates of the
@c    daughter of Sion.



@c    Psalms Chapter 73


@c    Ut quid, Deus.

@c    A prayer of the church under grievous persecutions.

@c    73:1. Understanding for Asaph.  O God, why hast thou cast us off unto
@c    the end:  why is thy wrath enkindled against the sheep of thy pasture?

@c    73:2. Remember thy congregation, which thou hast possessed from the
@c    beginning.  The sceptre of thy inheritance which thou hast redeemed:
@c    mount Sion in which thou hast dwelt.

@c    73:3. Lift up thy hands against their pride unto the end; see what
@c    things the enemy hath done wickedly in the sanctuary.

@c    73:4. And they that hate thee have made their boasts, in the midst of
@c    thy solemnity.  They have set up their ensigns for signs,

@c    Their ensigns, etc. . .They have fixed their colours for signs and
@c    trophies, both on the gates, and on the highest top of the temple:  and
@c    they knew not, that is, they regarded not the sanctity of the place.
@c    This psalm manifestly foretells the time of the Machabees, and the
@c    profanation of the temple by Antiochus.

@c    73:5. And they knew not both in the going out and on the highest top.
@c    As with axes in a wood of trees,

@c    73:6. They have cut down at once the gates thereof, with axe and
@c    hatchet they have brought it down.

@c    73:7. They have set fire to thy sanctuary:  they have defiled the
@c    dwelling place of thy name on the earth.

@c    73:8. They said in their heart, the whole kindred of them together:  Let
@c    us abolish all the festival days of God from the land.

@c    73:9. Our signs we have not seen, there is now no prophet:  and he will
@c    know us no more.

@c    73:10. How long, O God, shall the enemy reproach:  is the adversary to
@c    provoke thy name for ever?

@c    73:11. Why dost thou turn away thy hand:  and thy right hand out of the
@c    midst of thy bosom for ever?

@c    73:12. But God is our king before ages:  he hath wrought salvation in
@c    the midst of the earth.

@c    73:13. Thou by thy strength didst make the sea firm:  thou didst crush
@c    the heads of the dragons in the waters.

@c    The sea firm. . .By making the waters of the Red Sea stand like firm
@c    walls, whilst Israel passed through:  and destroying the Egyptians
@c    called here dragons from their cruelty, in the same waters, with their
@c    king:  casting up their bodies on the shore to be stripped by the
@c    Ethiopians inhabiting in those days the coast of Arabia.

@c    73:14. Thou hast broken the heads of the dragon:  thou hast given him to
@c    be meat for the people of the Ethiopians.

@c    73:15. Thou hast broken up the fountains and the torrents:  thou hast
@c    dried up the Ethan rivers.

@c    Ethan rivers. . .That is, rivers which run with strong streams.  This was
@c    verified in Jordan, Jos. 3, and in Arnon, Num. 21.14.

@c    73:16. Thine is the day, and thine is the night:  thou hast made the
@c    morning light and the sun.

@c    73:17. Thou hast made all the borders of the earth:  the summer and the
@c    spring were formed by thee.

@c    73:18. Remember this, the enemy hath reproached the Lord:  and a foolish
@c    people hath provoked thy name.

@c    73:19. Deliver not up to beasts the souls that confess to thee:  and
@c    forget not to the end the souls of thy poor.

@c    73:20. Have regard to thy covenant:  for they that are the obscure of
@c    the earth have been filled with dwellings of iniquity.

@c    The obscure of the earth. . .Mean and ignoble wretches have been filled,
@c    that is, enriched, with houses of iniquity, that is, with our estates
@c    and possessions, which they have unjustly acquired.

@c    73:21. Let not the humble be turned away with confusion:  the poor and
@c    needy shall praise thy name.

@c    73:22. Arise, O God, judge thy own cause:  remember thy reproaches with
@c    which the foolish man hath reproached thee all the day.

@c    73:23. Forget not the voices of thy enemies:  the pride of them that
@c    hate thee ascendeth continually.



@c    Psalms Chapter 74


@c    Confitebimur tibi.

@c    There is a just judgment to come:  therefore let the wicked take care.

@c    74:1. Unto the end, corrupt not, a psalm of a canticle for Asaph.

@c    Corrupt not. . .It is believed to have been the beginning of some ode or
@c    hymn, to the tune of which this psalm was to be sung.  St. Augustine and
@c    other fathers take it to be an admonition of the spirit of God, not to
@c    faint or fail in our hope:  but to persevere with constancy in good:
@c    because God will not fail in his due time to render to every man
@c    according to his works.

@c    74:2. We will praise thee, O God:  we will praise, and we will call upon
@c    thy name.  We will relate thy wondrous works:

@c    74:3. When I shall take a time, I will judge justices.

@c    When I shall take a time. . .In proper times:  particularly at the last
@c    day, when the earth shall melt away at the presence of the great Judge:
@c    the same who originally laid the foundations of it, and as it were
@c    established its pillars.

@c    74:4. The earth is melted, and all that dwell therein:  I have
@c    established the pillars thereof.

@c    74:5. I said to the wicked:  Do not act wickedly:  and to the sinners:
@c    Lift not up the horn.

@c    74:6. Lift not up your horn on high:  speak not iniquity against God.

@c    74:7. For neither from the east, nor from the west, nor from the desert
@c    hills:

@c    74:8. For God is the judge.  One he putteth down, and another he lifteth
@c    up:

@c    74:9. For in the hand of the Lord there is a cup of strong wine full of
@c    mixture.  And he hath poured it out from this to that:  but the dregs
@c    thereof are not emptied:  all the sinners of the earth shall drink.

@c    74:10. But I will declare for ever:  I will sing to the God of Jacob.

@c    74:11. And I will break all the horns of sinners:  but the horns of the
@c    just shall be exalted.



@c    Psalms Chapter 75


@c    Notus in Judaea.

@c    God is known in his church:  and exerts his power in protecting it.  It
@c    alludes to the slaughter of the Assyrians, in the days of king
@c    Ezechias.

@c    75:1. Unto the end, in praises, a psalm for Asaph:  a canticle to the
@c    Assyrians.

@c    75:2. In Judea God is known:  his name is great in Israel.

@c    75:3. And his place is in peace:  and his abode in Sion:

@c    75:4. There hath he broken the powers of bows, the shield, the sword,
@c    and the battle.

@c    75:5. Thou enlightenest wonderfully from the everlasting hills.

@c    75:6. All the foolish of heart were troubled.  They have slept their
@c    sleep; and all the men of riches have found nothing in their hands.

@c    75:7. At thy rebuke, O God of Jacob, they have all slumbered that
@c    mounted on horseback.

@c    75:8. Thou art terrible, and who shall resist thee?  from that time thy
@c    wrath.

@c    From that time, etc. . .From the time that thy wrath shall break out.

@c    75:9. Thou hast caused judgment to be heard from heaven:  the earth
@c    trembled and was still,

@c    75:10. When God arose in judgment, to save all the meek of the earth.

@c    75:11. For the thought of man shall give praise to thee:  and the
@c    remainders of the thought shall keep holiday to thee.

@c    75:12. Vow ye, and pay to the Lord your God:  all you that are round
@c    about him bring presents.  To him that is terrible,

@c    75:13. Even to him who taketh away the spirit of princes:  to the
@c    terrible with the kings of the earth.



@c    Psalms Chapter 76


@c    Voce mea.

@c    The faithful have recourse to God in trouble of mind, with confidence
@c    in his mercy and power.

@c    76:1. Unto the end, for Idithun, a psalm of Asaph.

@c    76:2. I cried to the Lord with my voice; to God with my voice, and he
@c    gave ear to me.

@c    76:3. In the days of my trouble I sought God, with my hands lifted up
@c    to him in the night, and I was not deceived.  My soul refused to be
@c    comforted:

@c    76:4. I remembered God, and was delighted, and was exercised, and my
@c    spirit swooned away.

@c    76:5. My eyes prevented the watches:  I was troubled, and I spoke not.

@c    76:6. I thought upon the days of old:  and I had in my mind the eternal
@c    years.

@c    76:7. And I meditated in the night with my own heart:  and I was
@c    exercised and I swept my spirit.

@c    76:8. Will God then cast off for ever?  or will he never be more
@c    favourable again?

@c    76:9. Or will he cut off his mercy for ever, from generation to
@c    generation?

@c    76:10. Or will God forget to shew mercy?  or will he in his anger shut
@c    up his mercies?

@c    76:11. And I said, Now have I begun:  this is the change of the right
@c    hand of the most High.

@c    76:12. I remembered the works of the Lord:  for I will be mindful of thy
@c    wonders from the beginning.

@c    76:13. And I will meditate on all thy works:  and will be employed in
@c    thy inventions.

@c    76:14. Thy way, O God, is in the holy place:  who is the great God like
@c    our God?

@c    76:15. Thou art the God that dost wonders.  Thou hast made thy power
@c    known among the nations:

@c    76:16. With thy arm thou hast redeemed thy people the children of Jacob
@c    and of Joseph.

@c    76:17. The waters saw thee, O God, the waters saw thee:  and they were
@c    afraid, and the depths were troubled.

@c    76:18. Great was the noise of the waters:  the clouds sent out a sound.
@c    For thy arrows pass:

@c    76:19. The voice of thy thunder in a wheel.  Thy lightnings enlightened
@c    the world:  the earth shook and trembled.

@c    76:20. Thy way is in the sea, and thy paths in many waters:  and thy
@c    footsteps shall not be known.

@c    76:21. Thou hast conducted thy people like sheep, by the hand of Moses
@c    and Aaron.



@c    Psalms Chapter 77


@c    Attendite.

@c    God's great benefits to the people of Israel, notwithstanding their
@c    ingratitude.

@c    77:1. Understanding for Asaph.  Attend, O my people, to my law:  incline
@c    your ears to the words of my mouth.

@c    77:2. I will open my mouth in parables:  I will utter propositions from
@c    the beginning.

@c    Propositions. . .Deep and mysterious sayings.  By this it appears that
@c    the historical facts of ancient times, commemorated in this psalm, were
@c    deep and mysterious:  as being figures of great truths appertaining to
@c    the time of the New Testament.

@c    77:3. How great things have we heard and known, and our fathers have
@c    told us.

@c    77:4. They have not been hidden from their children, in another
@c    generation.  Declaring the praises of the Lord, and his powers, and his
@c    wonders which he hath done.

@c    77:5. And he set up a testimony in Jacob:  and made a law in Israel.  How
@c    great things he commanded our fathers, that they should make the same
@c    known to their children:

@c    77:6. That another generation might know them.  The children that should
@c    be born and should rise up, and declare them to their children.

@c    77:7. That they may put their hope in God and may not forget the works
@c    of God:  and may seek his commandments.

@c    77:8. That they may not become like their fathers, a perverse and
@c    exasperating generation.  A generation that set not their heart aright:
@c    and whose spirit was not faithful to God.

@c    77:9. The sons of Ephraim who bend and shoot with the bow:  they have
@c    turned back in the day of battle.

@c    77:10. They kept not the covenant of God:  and in his law they would not
@c    walk.

@c    77:11. And they forgot his benefits, and his wonders that he had shewn
@c    them.

@c    77:12. Wonderful things did he do in the sight of their fathers, in the
@c    land of Egypt, in the field of Tanis.

@c    77:13. He divided the sea and brought them through:  and he made the
@c    waters to stand as in a vessel.

@c    77:14. And he conducted them with a cloud by day:  and all the night
@c    with a light of fire.

@c    77:15. He struck the rock in the wilderness:  and gave them to drink, as
@c    out of the great deep.

@c    77:16. He brought forth water out of the rock:  and made streams run
@c    down as rivers.

@c    77:17. And they added yet more sin against him:  they provoked the most
@c    High to wrath in the place without water.

@c    77:18. And they tempted God in their hearts, by asking meat for their
@c    desires.

@c    77:19. And they spoke ill of God:  they said:  Can God furnish a table in
@c    the wilderness?

@c    77:20. Because he struck the rock, and the waters gushed out, and the
@c    streams overflowed.  Can he also give bread, or provide a table for his
@c    people?

@c    77:21. Therefore the Lord heard, and was angry:  and a fire was kindled
@c    against Jacob, and wrath came up against Israel.

@c    77:22. Because they believed not in God:  and trusted not in his
@c    salvation.

@c    77:23. And he had commanded the clouds from above, and had opened the
@c    doors of heaven.

@c    77:24. And had rained down manna upon them to eat, and had given them
@c    the bread of heaven.

@c    77:25. Man ate the bread of angels:  he sent them provisions in
@c    abundance.

@c    77:26. He removed the south wind from heaven:  and by his power brought
@c    in the southwest wind.

@c    77:27. And he rained upon them flesh as dust:  and feathered fowls like
@c    as the sand of the sea.

@c    77:28. And they fell in the midst of their camp, round about their
@c    pavilions.

@c    77:29. So they did eat, and were filled exceedingly, and he gave them
@c    their desire:

@c    77:30. they were not defrauded of that which they craved.  As yet their
@c    meat was in their mouth:

@c    77:31. And the wrath of God came upon them.  And he slew the fat ones
@c    amongst them, and brought down the chosen men of Israel.

@c    77:32. In all these things they sinned still:  and they behaved not for
@c    his wondrous works.

@c    77:33. And their days were consumed in vanity, and their years in
@c    haste.

@c    77:34. When he slew them, then they sought him:  and they returned, and
@c    came to him early in the morning.

@c    77:35. And they remembered that God was their helper:  and the most high
@c    God their redeemer.

@c    77:36. And they loved him with their mouth:  and with their tongue they
@c    lied unto him:

@c    77:37. But their heart was not right with him:  nor were they counted
@c    faithful in his covenant.

@c    77:38. But he is merciful, and will forgive their sins:  and will not
@c    destroy them.  And many a time did he turn away his anger:  and did not
@c    kindle all his wrath.

@c    77:39. And he remembered that they are flesh:  a wind that goeth and
@c    returneth not.

@c    77:40. How often did they provoke him in the desert:  and move him to
@c    wrath in the place without water?

@c    77:41. And they turned back and tempted God:  and grieved the holy one
@c    of Israel.

@c    77:42. They remembered not his hand, in the day that he redeemed them
@c    from the hand of him that afflicted them:

@c    77:43. How he wrought his signs in Egypt, and his wonders in the field
@c    of Tanis.

@c    77:44. And he turned their rivers into blood, and their showers that
@c    they might not drink.

@c    77:45. He sent amongst them divers sorts of flies, which devoured them:
@c    and frogs which destroyed them.

@c    77:46. And he gave up their fruits to the blast, and their labours to
@c    the locust.

@c    77:47. And he destroyed their vineyards with hail, and their mulberry
@c    trees with hoarfrost.

@c    77:48. And he gave up their cattle to the hail, and their stock to the
@c    fire.

@c    77:49. And he sent upon them the wrath of his indignation:  indignation
@c    and wrath and trouble, which he sent by evil angels.

@c    77:50. He made a way for a path to his anger:  he spared not their souls
@c    from death, and their cattle he shut up in death.

@c    77:51. And he killed all the firstborn in the land of Egypt:  the
@c    firstfruits of all their labour in the tabernacles of Cham.

@c    77:52. And he took away his own people as sheep:  and guided them in the
@c    wilderness like a flock.

@c    77:53. And he brought them out in hope and they feared not:  and the sea
@c    overwhelmed their enemies.

@c    77:54. And he brought them into the mountain of his sanctuary:  the
@c    mountain which his right hand had purchased.  And he cast out the
@c    Gentiles before them:  and by lot divided to them their land by a line
@c    of distribution.

@c    77:55. And he made the tribes of Israel to dwell in their tabernacles.

@c    77:56. Yet they tempted, and provoked the most high God:  and they kept
@c    not his testimonies.

@c    77:57. And they turned away, and kept not the covenant:  even like their
@c    fathers they were turned aside as a crooked bow.

@c    77:58. They provoked him to anger on their hills:  and moved him to
@c    jealousy with their graven things.

@c    77:59. God heard, and despised them, and he reduced Israel exceedingly
@c    as it were to nothing.

@c    77:60. And he put away the tabernacle of Silo, his tabernacle where he
@c    dwelt among men.

@c    77:61. And he delivered their strength into captivity:  and their beauty
@c    into the hands of the enemy.

@c    77:62. And he shut up his people under the sword:  and he despised his
@c    inheritance.

@c    77:63. Fire consumed their young men:  and their maidens were not
@c    lamented.

@c    77:64. Their priests fell by the sword:  and their widows did not mourn.

@c    77:65. And the Lord was awaked as one out of sleep, and like a mighty
@c    man that hath been surfeited with wine.

@c    77:66. And he smote his enemies on the hinder parts:  he put them to an
@c    everlasting reproach.

@c    77:67. And he rejected the tabernacle of Joseph:  and chose not the
@c    tribe of Ephraim:

@c    77:68. But he chose the tribe of Juda, mount Sion which he loved.

@c    77:69. And he built his sanctuary as of unicorns, in the land which he
@c    founded for ever.

@c    As of unicorns. . .That is, firm and strong like the horn of the
@c    unicorn.  This is one of the chiefest of the propositions of this psalm,
@c    foreshewing the firm establishment of the one, true, and everlasting
@c    sanctuary of God, in his church.

@c    77:70. And he chose his servant David, and took him from the flocks of
@c    sheep:  he brought him from following the ewes great with young,

@c    77:71. To feed Jacob his servant and Israel his inheritance.

@c    77:72. And he fed them in the innocence of his heart:  and conducted
@c    them by the skilfulness of his hands.



@c    Psalms Chapter 78


@c    Deus, venerunt gentes.

@c    The church in time of persecution prayeth for relief.  It seems to
@c    belong to the time of the Machabees.

@c    78:1. A psalm for Asaph.  O God, the heathens are come into thy
@c    inheritance, they have defiled thy holy temple:  they have made
@c    Jerusalem as a place to keep fruit.

@c    78:2. They have given the dead bodies of thy servants to be meat for
@c    the fowls of the air:  the flesh of thy saints for the beasts of the
@c    earth.

@c    78:3. They have poured out their blood as water, round about Jerusalem
@c    and there was none to bury them.

@c    78:4. We are become a reproach to our neighbours:  a scorn and derision
@c    to them that are round about us.

@c    78:5. How long, O Lord, wilt thou be angry for ever:  shall thy zeal be
@c    kindled like a fire?

@c    78:6. Pour out thy wrath upon the nations that have not known thee:  and
@c    upon the kingdoms that have not called upon thy name.

@c    78:7. Because they have devoured Jacob; and have laid waste his place.

@c    78:8. Remember not our former iniquities:  let thy mercies speedily
@c    prevent us, for we are become exceeding poor.

@c    78:9. Help us, O God, our saviour:  and for the glory of thy name, O
@c    Lord, deliver us:  and forgive us our sins for thy name's sake:

@c    78:10. Lest they should say among the Gentiles:  Where is their God?  And
@c    let him be made known among the nations before our eyes, By the
@c    revenging the blood of thy servants, which hath been shed:

@c    78:11. Let the sighing of the prisoners come in before thee.  According
@c    to the greatness of thy arm, take possession of the children of them
@c    that have been put to death.

@c    78:12. And render to our neighbours sevenfold in their bosom:  the
@c    reproach wherewith they have reproached thee, O Lord.

@c    78:13. But we thy people, and the sheep of thy pasture, will give
@c    thanks to thee for ever.  We will shew forth thy praise, unto generation
@c    and generation.



@c    Psalms Chapter 79


@c    Qui regis Israel.

@c    A prayer for the church in tribulation, commemorating God's former
@c    favours.

@c    79:1. Unto the end, for them that shall be changed, a testimony for
@c    Asaph, a psalm.

@c    79:2. Give ear, O thou that rulest Israel:  thou that leadest Joseph
@c    like a sheep.  Thou that sittest upon the cherubims, shine forth

@c    79:3. Before Ephraim, Benjamin, and Manasses.  Stir up thy might, and
@c    come to save us.

@c    79:4. Convert us, O God:  and shew us thy face, and we shall be saved.

@c    79:5. O Lord God of hosts, how long wilt thou be angry against the
@c    prayer of thy servant?

@c    79:6. How long wilt thou feed us with the bread of tears:  and give us
@c    for our drink tears in measure?

@c    79:7. Thou hast made us to be a contradiction to our neighbours:  and
@c    our enemies have scoffed at us.

@c    79:8. O God of hosts, convert us:  and shew thy face, and we shall be
@c    saved.

@c    79:9. Thou hast brought a vineyard out of Egypt:  thou hast cast out the
@c    Gentiles and planted it.

@c    79:10. Thou wast the guide of its journey in its sight:  thou plantedst
@c    the roots thereof, and it filled the land.

@c    79:11. The shadow of it covered the hills:  and the branches thereof the
@c    cedars of God.

@c    79:12. It stretched forth its branches unto the sea, and its boughs
@c    unto the river.

@c    79:13. Why hast thou broken down the hedge thereof, so that all they
@c    who pass by the way do pluck it?

@c    79:14. The boar out of the wood hath laid it waste:  and a singular wild
@c    beast hath devoured it.

@c    79:15. Turn again, O God of hosts, look down from heaven, and see, and
@c    visit this vineyard:

@c    79:16. And perfect the same which thy right hand hath planted:  and upon
@c    the son of man whom thou hast confirmed for thyself.

@c    79:17. Things set on fire and dug down shall perish at the rebuke of
@c    thy countenance.

@c    Things set on fire, etc. . .So this vineyard of thine, almost consumed
@c    already, must perish, if thou continue thy rebukes.

@c    79:18. Let thy hand be upon the man of thy right hand:  and upon the son
@c    of man whom thou hast confirmed for thyself.

@c    The man of thy right hand. . .Christ.

@c    79:19. And we depart not from thee, thou shalt quicken us:  and we will
@c    call upon thy name.

@c    79:20. O Lord God of hosts, convert us and shew thy face, and we shall
@c    be saved.



@c    Psalms Chapter 80


@c    Exultate Deo.

@c    An invitation to a solemn praising of God.

@c    80:1. Unto the end, for the winepresses, a psalm for Asaph himself.

@c    For the winepresses, etc. . .Torcularibus.  It either signifies a musical
@c    instrument, or that this psalm was to be sung at the feast of the
@c    tabernacles after the gathering in of the vintage.

@c    80:2. Rejoice to God our helper:  sing aloud to the God of Jacob.

@c    80:3. Take a psalm, and bring hither the timbrel:  the pleasant psaltery
@c    with the harp.

@c    80:4. Blow up the trumpet on the new moon, on the noted day of your
@c    solemnity.

@c    80:5. For it is a commandment in Israel, and a judgment to the God of
@c    Jacob.

@c    80:6. He ordained it for a testimony in Joseph, when he came out of the
@c    land of Egypt:  he heard a tongue which he knew not.

@c    80:7. He removed his back from the burdens:  his hands had served in
@c    baskets.

@c    80:8. Thou calledst upon me in affliction, and I delivered thee:  I
@c    heard thee in the secret place of tempest:  I proved thee at the waters
@c    of contradiction.

@c    In the secret place of tempest. . .Heb., Of thunder.  When thou soughtest
@c    to hide thyself from the tempest:  or, when I came down to mount Sina,
@c    hidden from thy eyes in a storm of thunder.

@c    80:9. Hear, O my people, and I will testify to thee:  O Israel, if thou
@c    wilt hearken to me,

@c    80:10. there shall be no new god in thee:  neither shalt
@c    thou adore a strange god.

@c    80:11. For I am the Lord thy God, who brought thee out of the land of
@c    Egypt:  open thy mouth wide, and I will fill it.

@c    80:12. But my people heard not my voice:  and Israel hearkened not to
@c    me.

@c    80:13. So I let them go according to the desires of their heart:  they
@c    shall walk in their own inventions.

@c    80:14. If my people had heard me:  if Israel had walked in my ways:

@c    80:15. I should soon have humbled their enemies, and laid my hand on
@c    them that troubled them.

@c    80:16. The enemies of the Lord have lied to him:  and their time shall
@c    be for ever.

@c    Their time shall be forever. . .Impenitent sinners shall suffer for
@c    ever.

@c    80:17. And he fed them with the fat of wheat, and filled them with
@c    honey out of the rock.



@c    Psalms Chapter 81


@c    Deus stetit.

@c    An exhortation to judges and men in power.

@c    81:1. A psalm for Asaph.  God hath stood in the congregation of gods:
@c    and being in the midst of them he judgeth gods.

@c    81:2. How long will you judge unjustly:  and accept the persons of the
@c    wicked?

@c    81:3. Judge for the needy and fatherless:  do justice to the humble and
@c    the poor.

@c    81:4. Rescue the poor; and deliver the needy out of the hand of the
@c    sinner.

@c    81:5. They have not known nor understood:  they walk on in darkness:  all
@c    the foundations of the earth shall be moved.

@c    81:6. I have said:  You are gods and all of you the sons of the most
@c    High.

@c    81:7. But you like men shall die:  and shall fall like one of the
@c    princes.

@c    81:8. Arise, O God, judge thou the earth:  for thou shalt inherit among
@c    all the nations.



@c    Psalms Chapter 82


@c    Deus, quis similis.

@c    A prayer against the enemies of God's church.

@c    82:1. A canticle of a psalm for Asaph.

@c    82:2. O God, who shall be like to thee?  hold not thy peace, neither be
@c    thou still, O God.

@c    82:3. For lo, thy enemies have made a noise:  and they that hate thee
@c    have lifted up the head.

@c    82:4. They have taken a malicious counsel against thy people, and have
@c    consulted against thy saints.

@c    82:5. They have said:  Come and let us destroy them, so that they be not
@c    a nation:  and let the name of Israel be remembered no more.

@c    82:6. For they have contrived with one consent:  they have made a
@c    covenant together against thee,

@c    82:7. The tabernacle of the Edomites, and the Ishmahelites:  Moab, and
@c    the Agarens,

@c    82:8. Gebal, and Ammon and Amalec:  the Philistines, with the
@c    inhabitants of Tyre.

@c    82:9. Yea, and the Assyrian also is joined with them:  they are come to
@c    the aid of the sons of Lot.

@c    82:10. Do to them as thou didst to Madian and to Sisara:  as to Jabin at
@c    the brook of Cisson.

@c    82:11. Who perished at Endor:  and became as dung for the earth.

@c    82:12. Make their princes like Oreb, and Zeb, and Zebee, and Salmana.
@c    All their princes,

@c    82:13. Who have said:  Let us possess the sanctuary of God for an
@c    inheritance.

@c    82:14. O my God, make them like a wheel; and as stubble before the
@c    wind.

@c    82:15. As fire which burneth the wood:  and as a flame burning
@c    mountains:

@c    82:16. So shalt thou pursue them with thy tempest:  and shalt trouble
@c    them in thy wrath.

@c    82:17. Fill their faces with shame; and they shall seek thy name, O
@c    Lord.

@c    82:18. Let them be ashamed and troubled for ever and ever:  and let them
@c    be confounded and perish.

@c    82:19. And let them know that the Lord is thy name:  thou alone art the
@c    most High over all the earth.



@c    Psalms Chapter 83


@c    Quam dilecta.

@c    The soul aspireth after heaven; rejoicing in the mean time, in being in
@c    the communion of God's church upon earth.

@c    83:1. Unto the end, for the winepresses, a psalm for the sons of Core.

@c    83:2. How lovely are thy tabernacles, O Lord of hosts!

@c    83:3. my soul longeth and fainteth for the courts of the Lord.  My heart
@c    and my flesh have rejoiced in the living God.

@c    83:4. For the sparrow hath found herself a house, and the turtle a nest
@c    for herself where she may lay her young ones:  Thy altars, O Lord of
@c    hosts, my king and my God.

@c    83:5. Blessed are they that dwell in thy house, O Lord:  they shall
@c    praise thee for ever and ever.

@c    83:6. Blessed is the man whose help is from thee:  in his heart he hath
@c    disposed to ascend by steps,

@c    In his heart he hath disposed to ascend by steps, etc. . .Ascensiones in
@c    corde suo disposuit.  As by steps men ascended to the temple of God
@c    situated on a hill; so the good Christian ascends towards the eternal
@c    temple by certain steps of virtue disposed or ordered within the heart:
@c    and this whilst he lives as yet in the body, in this vale of tears, the
@c    place which man hath set:  that is, which he hath brought himself to:
@c    being cast out of paradise for his sin.

@c    83:7. In the vale of tears, in the place which he hath set.

@c    83:8. For the lawgiver shall give a blessing, they shall go from virtue
@c    to virtue:  the God of gods shall be seen in Sion.

@c    83:9. O Lord God of hosts, hear my prayer:  give ear, O God of Jacob.

@c    83:10. Behold, O God our protector:  and look on the face of thy Christ.

@c    83:11. For better is one day in thy courts above thousands.  I have
@c    chosen to be an abject in the house of my God, rather than to dwell in
@c    the tabernacles of sinners.

@c    83:12. For God loveth mercy and truth:  the Lord will give grace and
@c    glory.

@c    83:13. He will not deprive of good things them that walk in innocence:
@c    O Lord of hosts, blessed is the man that trusteth in thee.



@c    Psalms Chapter 84


@c    Benedixisti, Domine.

@c    The coming of Christ, to bring peace and salvation to man.

@c    84:1. Unto the end, for the sons of Core, a psalm.

@c    84:2. Lord, thou hast blessed thy land:  thou hast turned away the
@c    captivity of Jacob.

@c    84:3. Thou hast forgiven the iniquity of thy people:  thou hast covered
@c    all their sins.

@c    84:4. Thou hast mitigated all thy anger:  thou hast turned away from the
@c    wrath of thy indignation.

@c    84:5. Convert us, O God our saviour:  and turn off thy anger from us.

@c    84:6. Wilt thou be angry with us for ever:  or wilt thou extend thy
@c    wrath from generation to generation?

@c    84:7. Thou wilt turn, O God, and bring us to life:  and thy people shall
@c    rejoice in thee.

@c    84:8. Shew us, O Lord, thy mercy; and grant us thy salvation.

@c    84:9. I will hear what the Lord God will speak in me:  for he will speak
@c    peace unto his people:  And unto his saints:  and unto them that are
@c    converted to the heart.

@c    84:10. Surely his salvation is near to them that fear him :  that glory
@c    may dwell in our land.

@c    84:11. Mercy and truth have met each other:  justice and peace have
@c    kissed.

@c    84:12. Truth is sprung out of the earth:  and justice hath looked down
@c    from heaven.

@c    84:13. For the Lord will give goodness:  and our earth shall yield her
@c    fruit.

@c    84:14. Justice shall walk before him:  and ,shall set his steps in the
@c    way.



@c    Psalms Chapter 85


@c    Inclina, Domine.

@c    A prayer for God's grace to assist us to the end.

@c    85:1. A prayer for David himself.  Incline thy ear, O Lord, and hear me:
@c    for I am needy and poor.

@c    85:2. Preserve my soul, for I am holy:  save thy servant, O my God, that
@c    trusteth in thee.

@c    I am holy. . .I am by my office and profession dedicated to thy service.

@c    85:3. Have mercy on me, O Lord, for I have cried to thee all the day.

@c    85:4. Give joy to the soul of thy servant, for to thee, O Lord, I have
@c    lifted up my soul.

@c    85:5. For thou, O Lord, art sweet and mild:  and plenteous in mercy to
@c    all that call upon thee.

@c    85:6. Give ear, O Lord, to my prayer:  and attend to the voice of my
@c    petition.

@c    85:7. I have called upon thee in the day of my trouble:  because thou
@c    hast heard me.

@c    85:8. There is none among the gods like unto thee, O Lord:  and there is
@c    none according to thy works.

@c    85:9. All the nations thou hast made shall come and adore before thee,
@c    O Lord:  and they shall glorify thy name.

@c    85:10. For thou art great and dost wonderful things:  thou art God
@c    alone.

@c    85:11. Conduct me, O Lord, in thy way, and I will walk in thy truth:
@c    let my heart rejoice that it may fear thy name.

@c    85:12. I will praise thee, O Lord my God, with my whole heart, and I
@c    will glorify thy name for ever:

@c    85:13. For thy mercy is great towards me:  and thou hast delivered my
@c    soul out of the lower hell.

@c    85:14. O God, the wicked are risen up against me, and the assembly of
@c    the mighty have sought my soul:  and they have not set thee before their
@c    eyes.

@c    85:15. And thou, O Lord, art a God of compassion, and merciful,
@c    patient, and of much mercy, and true.

@c    85:16. O look upon me, and have mercy on me:  give thy command to thy
@c    servant, and save the son of thy handmaid.

@c    85:17. Shew me a token for good:  that they who hate me may see, and be
@c    confounded, because thou, O Lord, hast helped me and hast comforted me.



@c    Psalms Chapter 86


@c    Fundamenta ejus.

@c    The glory of the church of Christ.

@c    86:1. For the sons of Core, a psalm of a canticle.  The foundations
@c    thereof are the holy mountains:

@c    The holy mountains. . .The apostles and prophets.  Eph. 2.20.

@c    86:2. The Lord loveth the gates of Sion above all the tabernacles of
@c    Jacob.

@c    86:3. Glorious things are said of thee, O city of God.

@c    86:4. I will be mindful of Rahab and of Babylon knowing me.  Behold the
@c    foreigners, and Tyre, and the people of the Ethiopians, these were
@c    there.

@c    Rahab. . .Egypt, etc.  To this Sion, which is the church of God, many
@c    shall resort from all nations.

@c    86:5. Shall not Sion say:  This man and that man is born in her?  and the
@c    Highest himself hath founded her.

@c    Shall not Sion say, etc. . .The meaning is, that Sion, viz., the church,
@c    shall not only be able to commemorate this or that particular person of
@c    renown born in her, but also to glory in great multitudes of people and
@c    princes of her communion; who have been foretold in the writings of the
@c    prophets, and registered in the writings of the apostles.

@c    86:6. The Lord shall tell in his writings of peoples and of princes, of
@c    them that have been in her.

@c    86:7. The dwelling in thee is as it were of all rejoicing.



@c    Psalms Chapter 87


@c    Domine, Deus salutis.

@c    A prayer of one under grievous affliction:  it agrees to Christ in his
@c    passion, and alludes to his death and burial.

@c    87:1. A canticle of a psalm for the sons of Core:  unto the end, for
@c    Maheleth, to answer understanding of Eman the Ezrahite.

@c    Maheleth. . .A musical instrument, or chorus of musicians, to answer one
@c    another.--Ibid.  Understanding. . .Or a psalm of instruction, composed by
@c    Eman the Ezrahite, or by David, in his name.

@c    87:2. O Lord, the God of my salvation:  I have cried in the day, and in
@c    the night before thee.

@c    87:3. Let my prayer come in before thee:  incline thy ear to my
@c    petition.

@c    87:4. For my soul is filled with evils:  and my life hath drawn nigh to
@c    hell.

@c    87:5. I am counted among them that go down to the pit:  I am become as a
@c    man without help,

@c    87:6. Free among the dead.  Like the slain sleeping in the sepulchres,
@c    whom thou rememberest no more:  and they are cut off from thy hand.

@c    87:7. They have laid me in the lower pit:  in the dark places, and in
@c    the shadow of death.

@c    87:8. Thy wrath is strong over me:  and all thy waves thou hast brought
@c    in upon me.

@c    87:9. Thou hast put away my acquaintance far from me:  they have set me
@c    an abomination to themselves.  I was delivered up, and came not forth:

@c    87:10. My eyes languished through poverty.  All the day I cried to thee,
@c    O Lord:  I stretched out my hands to thee.

@c    87:11. Wilt thou shew wonders to the dead?  or shall physicians raise to
@c    life, and give praise to thee?

@c    87:12. Shall any one in the sepulchre declare thy mercy:  and thy truth
@c    in destruction?

@c    87:13. Shall thy wonders be known in the dark; and thy justice in the
@c    land of forgetfulness?

@c    87:14. But I, O Lord, have cried to thee:  and in the morning my prayer
@c    shall prevent thee.

@c    87:15. Lord, why castest thou off my prayer:  why turnest thou away thy
@c    face from me?

@c    87:16. I am poor, and in labours from my youth:  and being exalted have
@c    been humbled and troubled.

@c    87:17. Thy wrath hath come upon me:  and thy terrors have troubled me.

@c    87:18. They have come round about me like water all the day:  they have
@c    compassed me about together.

@c    87:19. Friend and neighbour thou hast put far from me:  and my
@c    acquaintance, because of misery.



@c    Psalms Chapter 88


@c    Misericordias Domini.

@c    The perpetuity of the church of Christ, in consequence of the promise
@c    of God:  which, notwithstanding, God permits her to suffer sometimes
@c    most grievous afflictions.

@c    88:1. Of understanding, for Ethan the Ezrahite.

@c    88:2. The mercies of the Lord I will sing for ever.  I will shew forth
@c    thy truth with my mouth to generation and generation.

@c    88:3. For thou hast said:  Mercy shall be built up for ever in the
@c    heavens:  thy truth shall be prepared in them.

@c    88:4. I have made a covenant with my elect:  I have sworn to David my
@c    servant:

@c    88:5. Thy seed will I settle for ever.  And I will build up thy throne
@c    unto generation and generation.

@c    88:6. The heavens shall confess thy wonders, O Lord:  and thy truth in
@c    the church of the saints.

@c    88:7. For who in the clouds can be compared to the Lord:  or who among
@c    the sons of God shall be like to God?

@c    88:8. God, who is glorified in the assembly of the saints:  great and
@c    terrible above all them that are about him.

@c    88:9. O Lord God of hosts, who is like to thee?  thou art mighty, O
@c    Lord, and thy truth is round about thee.

@c    88:10. Thou rulest the power of the sea:  and appeasest the motion of
@c    the waves thereof.

@c    88:11. Thou hast humbled the proud one, as one that is slain:  with the
@c    arm of thy strength thou hast scattered thy enemies.

@c    88:12. Thine are the heavens, and thine is the earth:  the world and the
@c    fulness thereof thou hast founded:

@c    88:13. The north and the sea thou hast created.  Thabor and Hermon shall
@c    rejoice in thy name:

@c    88:14. Thy arm is with might.  Let thy hand be strengthened, and thy
@c    right hand exalted:

@c    88:15. Justice and judgment are the preparation of thy throne.  Mercy
@c    and truth shall go before thy face:

@c    88:16. Blessed is the people that knoweth jubilation.  They shall walk,
@c    O Lord, in the light of thy countenance:

@c    88:17. And in thy name they shall rejoice all the day, and in thy
@c    justice they shall be exalted.

@c    88:18. For thou art the glory of their strength:  and in thy good
@c    pleasure shall our horn be exalted.

@c    88:19. For our protection is of the Lord, and of our king the holy one
@c    of Israel.

@c    88:20. Then thou spokest in a vision to thy saints, and saidst:  I have
@c    laid help upon one that is mighty, and have exalted one chosen out of
@c    my people.

@c    88:21. I have found David my servant:  with my holy oil I have anointed
@c    him.

@c    88:22. For my hand shall help him:  and my arm shall strengthen him.

@c    88:23. The enemy shall have no advantage over him:  nor the son of
@c    iniquity have power to hurt him.

@c    88:24. And I will cut down his enemies before his face; and them that
@c    hate him I will put to flight.

@c    88:25. And my truth and my mercy shall be with him:  and in my name
@c    shall his horn be exalted.

@c    88:26. And I will set his hand in the sea; and his right hand in the
@c    rivers.

@c    88:27. He shall cry out to me:  Thou art my father:  my God, and the
@c    support of my salvation.

@c    88:28. And I will make him my firstborn, high above the kings of the
@c    earth.

@c    88:29. I will keep my mercy for him for ever:  and my covenant faithful
@c    to him.

@c    88:30. And I will make his seed to endure for evermore:  and his throne
@c    as the days of heaven.

@c    88:31. And if his children forsake my law, and walk not in my
@c    judgments:

@c    88:32. If they profane my justices:  and keep not my commandments:

@c    88:33. I will visit their iniquities with a rod and their sins with
@c    stripes.

@c    88:34. But my mercy I will not take away from him:  nor will I suffer my
@c    truth to fail.

@c    88:35. Neither will I profane my covenant:  and the words that proceed
@c    from my mouth I will not make void.

@c    88:36. Once have I sworn by my holiness:  I will not lie unto David:

@c    88:37. His seed shall endure for ever.

@c    88:38. And his throne as the sun before me:  and as the moon perfect for
@c    ever, and a faithful witness in heaven.

@c    88:39. But thou hast rejected and despised:  thou hast been angry with
@c    my anointed.

@c    88:40. Thou hast overthrown the covenant of thy servant:  thou hast
@c    profaned his sanctuary on the earth.

@c    Overthrown the covenant, etc. . .All this seems to relate to the time of
@c    the captivity of Babylon, in which, for the sins of the people and
@c    their princes, God seemed to have set aside for a while the covenant he
@c    made with David.

@c    88:41. Thou hast broken down all his hedges:  thou hast made his
@c    strength fear.

@c    88:42. All that pass by the way have robbed him:  he is become a
@c    reproach to his neighbours.

@c    88:43. Thou hast set up the right hand of them that oppress him:  thou
@c    hast made all his enemies to rejoice.

@c    88:44. Thou hast turned away the help of his sword; and hast not
@c    assisted him in battle.

@c    88:45. Thou hast made his purification to cease:  and thou hast cast his
@c    throne down to the ground.

@c    88:46. Thou hast shortened the days of his time:  thou hast covered him
@c    with confusion.

@c    88:47. How long, O Lord, turnest thou away unto the end?  shall thy
@c    anger burn like fire?

@c    88:48. Remember what my substance is:  for hast thou made all the
@c    children of men in vain?

@c    88:49. Who is the man that shall live, and not see death:  that shall
@c    deliver his soul from the hand of hell?

@c    88:50. Lord, where are thy ancient mercies, according to what thou
@c    didst swear to David in thy truth?

@c    88:51. Be mindful, O Lord, of the reproach of thy servants (which I
@c    have held in my bosom) of many nations:

@c    88:52. Wherewith thy enemies have reproached, O Lord; wherewith they
@c    have reproached the change of thy anointed.

@c    88:53. Blessed be the Lord for evermore.  So be it.  So be it.



@c    Psalms Chapter 89


@c    Domine, refugium.

@c    A prayer for the mercy of God:  recounting the shortness and miseries of
@c    the days of man.

@c    89:1. A prayer of Moses the man of God.  Lord, thou hast been our refuge
@c    from generation to generation.

@c    89:2. Before the mountains were made, or the earth and the world was
@c    formed; from eternity and to eternity thou art God.

@c    89:3. Turn not man away to be brought low:  and thou hast said:  Be
@c    converted, O ye sons of men.

@c    Turn not man away, etc. . .Suffer him not quite to perish from thee,
@c    since thou art pleased to call upon him to be converted to thee.

@c    89:4. For a thousand years in thy sight are as yesterday, which is
@c    past.  And as a watch in the night,

@c    89:5. Things that are counted nothing, shall their years be.

@c    89:6. In the morning man shall grow up like grass; in the morning he
@c    shall flourish and pass away:  in the evening he shall fall, grow dry,
@c    and wither.

@c    89:7. For in thy wrath we have fainted away:  and are troubled in thy
@c    indignation.

@c    89:8. Thou hast set our iniquities before thy eyes:  our life in the
@c    light of thy countenance.

@c    89:9. For all our days are spent; and in thy wrath we have fainted
@c    away.  Our years shall be considered as a spider:

@c    As a spider. . .As frail and weak as a spider's web; and miserable
@c    withal, whilst like a spider we spend our bowels in weaving webs to
@c    catch flies.

@c    89:10. The days of our years in them are threescore and ten years.  But
@c    if in the strong they be fourscore years:  and what is more of them is
@c    labour and sorrow.  For mildness is come upon us:  and we shall be
@c    corrected.

@c    Mildness is come upon us, etc. . .God's mildness corrects us; inasmuch
@c    as he deals kindly with us, in shortening the days of this miserable
@c    life; and so weaning our affections from all its transitory enjoyments,
@c    and teaching us true wisdom.

@c    89:11. Who knoweth the power of thy anger, and for thy fear

@c    89:12. Can number thy wrath?  So make thy right hand known:  and men
@c    learned in heart, in wisdom.

@c    89:13. Return, O Lord, how long?  and be entreated in favour of thy
@c    servants.

@c    89:14. We are filled in the morning with thy mercy:  and we have
@c    rejoiced, and are delighted all our days.

@c    89:15. We have rejoiced for the days in which thou hast humbled us:  for
@c    the years in which we have seen evils.

@c    89:16. Look upon thy servants and upon their works:  and direct their
@c    children.

@c    89:17. And let the brightness of the Lord our God be upon us:  and
@c    direct thou the works of our hands over us; yea, the work of our hands
@c    do thou direct.



@c    Psalms Chapter 90


@c    Qui habitat.

@c    The just is secure under the protection of God.

@c    90:1. The praise of a canticle for David.  He that dwelleth in the aid
@c    of the most High, shall abide under the protection of the God of Jacob.

@c    90:2. He shall say to the Lord:  Thou art my protector, and my refuge:
@c    my God, in him will I trust.

@c    90:3. For he hath delivered me from the snare of the hunters:  and from
@c    the sharp word.

@c    90:4. He will overshadow thee with his shoulders:  and under his wings
@c    thou shalt trust.

@c    90:5. His truth shall compass thee with a shield:  thou shalt not be
@c    afraid of the terror of the night.

@c    90:6. Of the arrow that flieth in the day, of the business that walketh
@c    about in the dark:  of invasion, or of the noonday devil.

@c    90:7. A thousand shall fall at thy side, and ten thousand at thy right
@c    hand:  but it shall not come nigh thee.

@c    90:8. But thou shalt consider with thy eyes:  and shalt see the reward
@c    of the wicked.

@c    90:9. Because thou, O Lord, art my hope:  thou hast made the most High
@c    thy refuge.

@c    90:10. There shall no evil come to thee:  nor shall the scourge come
@c    near thy dwelling.

@c    90:11. For he hath given his angels charge over thee; to keep thee in
@c    all thy ways.

@c    90:12. In their hands they shall bear thee up:  lest thou dash thy foot
@c    against a stone.

@c    90:13. Thou shalt walk upon the asp and the basilisk:  and thou shalt
@c    trample under foot the lion and the dragon.

@c    90:14. Because he hoped in me I will deliver him:  I will protect him
@c    because he hath known my name.

@c    90:15. He shall cry to me, and I will hear him:  I am with him in
@c    tribulation, I will deliver him, and I will glorify him.

@c    90:16. I will fill him with length of days; and I will shew him my
@c    salvation.



@c    Psalms Chapter 91


@c    Bonum est confiteri.

@c    God is to be praised for his wondrous works.

@c    91:1. A psalm of a canticle on the sabbath day.

@c    91:2. It is good to give praise to the Lord:  and to sing to thy name, O
@c    most High.

@c    91:3. To shew forth thy mercy in the morning, and thy truth in the
@c    night:

@c    91:4. Upon an instrument of ten strings, upon the psaltery:  with a
@c    canticle upon the harp.

@c    91:5. For thou hast given me, O Lord, a delight in thy doings:  and in
@c    the works of thy hands I shall rejoice.

@c    91:6. O Lord, how great are thy works! thy thoughts are exceeding deep.

@c    91:7. The senseless man shall not know:  nor will the fool understand
@c    these things.

@c    91:8. When the wicked shall spring up as grass:  and all the workers of
@c    iniquity shall appear:  That they may perish for ever and ever:

@c    91:9. But thou, O Lord, art most high for evermore.

@c    91:10. For behold thy enemies, O lord, for behold thy enemies shall
@c    perish:  and all the workers of iniquity shall be scattered.

@c    91:11. But my horn shall be exalted like that of the unicorn:  and my
@c    old age in plentiful mercy.

@c    91:12. My eye also hath looked down upon my enemies:  and my ear shall
@c    hear of the downfall of the malignant that rise up against me.

@c    91:13. The just shall flourish like the palm tree:  he shall grow up
@c    like the cedar of Libanus.

@c    91:14. They that are planted in the house of the Lord shall flourish in
@c    the courts of the house of our God.

@c    91:15. They shall still increase in a fruitful old age:  and shall be
@c    well treated,

@c    91:16. That they may shew, That the Lord our God is righteous, and
@c    there is no iniquity in him.



@c    Psalms Chapter 92


@c    Dominus regnavit.

@c    The glory and stability of the kingdom; that is, of the church of
@c    Christ.

@c    Praise in the way of a canticle, for David himself, on the day before
@c    the sabbath, when the earth was founded.

@c    92:1. The Lord hath reigned, he is clothed with beauty:  the Lord is
@c    clothed with strength, and hath girded himself.  For he hath established
@c    the world which shall not be moved.

@c    92:2. My throne is prepared from of old:  thou art from everlasting.

@c    92:3. The floods have lifted up, O Lord:  the floods have lifted up
@c    their voice.  The floods have lifted up their waves,

@c    92:4. With the noise of many waters.  Wonderful are the surges of the
@c    sea:  wonderful is the Lord on high.

@c    92:5. Thy testimonies are become exceedingly credible:  holiness
@c    becometh thy house, O Lord, unto length of days.



@c    Psalms Chapter 93


@c    Deus ultionum.

@c    God shall judge and punish the oppressors of his people.

@c    A psalm for David himself on the fourth day of the week.

@c    93:1. The Lord is the God to whom revenge belongeth:  the God of revenge
@c    hath acted freely.

@c    93:2. Lift up thyself, thou that judgest the earth:  render a reward to
@c    the proud.

@c    93:3. How long shall sinners, O Lord:  how long shall sinners glory?

@c    93:4. Shall they utter, and speak iniquity:  shall all speak who work
@c    injustice?

@c    93:5. Thy people, O Lord, they have brought low:  and they have
@c    afflicted thy inheritance.

@c    93:6. They have slain the widow and the stranger:  and they have
@c    murdered the fatherless.

@c    93:7. And they have said:  The Lord shall not see:  neither shall the God
@c    of Jacob understand.

@c    93:8. Understand, ye senseless among the people:  and, you fools, be
@c    wise at last.

@c    93:9. He that planted the ear, shall he not hear?  or he that formed the
@c    eye, doth he not consider?

@c    93:10. He that chastiseth nations, shall he not rebuke:  he that
@c    teacheth man knowledge?

@c    93:11. The Lord knoweth the thoughts of men, that they are vain.

@c    93:12. Blessed is the man whom thou shalt instruct, O Lord:  and shalt
@c    teach him out of thy law.

@c    93:13. That thou mayst give him rest from the evil days:  till a pit be
@c    dug for the wicked.

@c    Rest from the evil days. . .That thou mayst mitigate the sorrows, to
@c    which he is exposed, during the short and evil days of his mortality.

@c    93:14. For the Lord will not cast off his people:  neither will he
@c    forsake his own inheritance.

@c    93:15. Until justice be turned into judgment:  and they that are near it
@c    are all the upright in heart.

@c    Until justice be turned into judgment, etc. . .By being put in
@c    execution; which will be agreeable to all the upright in heart.

@c    93:16. Who shall rise up for me against the evildoers?  or who shall
@c    stand with me against the workers of iniquity?

@c    93:17. Unless the Lord had been my helper, my soul had almost dwelt in
@c    hell.

@c    93:18. If I said:  My foot is moved:  thy mercy, O Lord, assisted me.

@c    93:19. According to the multitude of my sorrows in my heart, thy
@c    comforts have given joy to my soul.

@c    93:20. Doth the seat of iniquity stick to thee, who framest labour in
@c    commandment?

@c    Doth the seat of iniquity stick to thee, etc. . .That is, wilt thou, O
@c    God, who art always just, admit of the seat of iniquity:  that is, of
@c    injustice, or unjust judges, to have any partnership with thee?  Thou
@c    who framest, or makest, labour in commandment, that is, thou who
@c    obligest us to labour with all diligence to keep thy commandments.

@c    93:21. They will hunt after the soul of the just, and will condemn
@c    innocent blood.

@c    93:22. But the Lord is my refuge:  and my God the help of my hope.

@c    93:23. And he will render them their iniquity :  and in their malice he
@c    will destroy them:  the Lord our God will destroy them.



@c    Psalms Chapter 94


@c    Venite exultemus.

@c    An invitation to adore and serve God, and to hear his voice.

@c    Praise of a canticle for David himself.

@c    94:1. Come let us praise the Lord with joy:  let us joyfully sing to God
@c    our saviour.

@c    94:2. Let us come before his presence with thanksgiving; and make a
@c    joyful noise to him with psalms.

@c    94:3. For the Lord is a great God, and a great King above all gods.

@c    94:4. For in his hand are all the ends of the earth:  and the heights of
@c    the mountains are his.

@c    94:5. For the sea is his, and he made it:  and his hands formed the dry
@c    land.

@c    94:6. Come let us adore and fall down:  and weep before the Lord that
@c    made us.

@c    94:7. For he is the Lord our God:  and we are the people of his pasture
@c    and the sheep of his hand.

@c    94:8. To day if you shall hear his voice, harden not your hearts:

@c    94:9. As in the provocation, according to the day of temptation in the
@c    wilderness:  where your fathers tempted me, they proved me, and saw my
@c    works.

@c    94:10. Forty years long was I offended with that generation, and I
@c    said:  These always err in heart.

@c    94:11. And these men have not known my ways:  so I swore in my wrath
@c    that they shall not enter into my rest.



@c    Psalms Chapter 95


@c    Cantate Domino.

@c    An exhortation to praise God for the coming of Christ and his kingdom.

@c    95:1. A canticle for David himself, when the house was built after the
@c    captivity.  Sing ye to the Lord a new canticle:  sing to the Lord, all
@c    the earth.

@c    When the house was built, etc. . .Alluding to that time, and then
@c    ordered to be sung:  but principally relating to the building of the
@c    church of Christ, after our redemption from the captivity of Satan.

@c    95:2. Sing ye to the Lord and bless his name:  shew forth his salvation
@c    from day to day.

@c    95:3. Declare his glory among the Gentiles:  his wonders among all
@c    people.

@c    95:4. For the Lord is great, and exceedingly to be praised:  he is to be
@c    feared above all gods.

@c    95:5. For all the gods of the Gentiles are devils:  but the Lord made
@c    the heavens.

@c    95:6. Praise and beauty are before him:  holiness and majesty in his
@c    sanctuary.

@c    95:7. Bring ye to the Lord, O ye kindreds of the Gentiles, bring ye to
@c    the Lord glory and honour:

@c    95:8. Bring to the Lord glory unto his name.  Bring up sacrifices, and
@c    come into his courts:

@c    95:9. Adore ye the Lord in his holy court.  Let all the earth be moved
@c    at his presence.

@c    95:10. Say ye among the Gentiles, the Lord hath reigned.  For he hath
@c    corrected the world, which shall not be moved:  he will judge the people
@c    with justice.

@c    95:11. Let the heavens rejoice, and let the earth be glad, let the sea
@c    be moved, and the fulness thereof:

@c    95:12. The fields and all things that are in them shall be joyful.  Then
@c    shall all the trees of the woods rejoice

@c    95:13. before the face of the Lord, because he cometh:  because he
@c    cometh to judge the earth.  He shall judge the world with justice, and
@c    the people with his truth.



@c    Psalms Chapter 96


@c    Dominus regnavit.

@c    All are invited to rejoice at the glorious coming and reign of Christ.

@c    96:1. For the same David, when his land was restored again to him.  The
@c    Lord hath reigned, let the earth rejoice:  let many islands be glad.

@c    96:2. Clouds and darkness are round about him:  justice and judgment are
@c    the establishment of his throne.

@c    Clouds and darkness. . .The coming of Christ in the clouds with great
@c    terror and majesty to judge the world, is here prophesied.

@c    96:3. A fire shall go before him, and shall burn his enemies round
@c    about.

@c    96:4. His lightnings have shone forth to the world:  the earth saw and
@c    trembled.

@c    96:5. The mountains melted like wax, at the presence of the Lord:  at
@c    the presence of the Lord of all the earth.

@c    96:6. The heavens declared his justice:  and all people saw his glory.

@c    96:7. Let them be all confounded that adore graven things, and that
@c    glory in their idols.  Adore him, all you his angels:

@c    96:8. Sion heard, and was glad.  And the daughters of Juda rejoiced,
@c    because of thy judgments, O Lord.

@c    96:9. For thou art the most high Lord over all the earth:  thou art
@c    exalted exceedingly above all gods.

@c    96:10. You that love the Lord, hate evil:  the Lord preserveth the souls
@c    of his saints, he will deliver them out of the hand of the sinner.

@c    96:11. Light is risen to the just, and joy to the right of heart.

@c    96:12. Rejoice, ye just, in the Lord:  and give praise to the
@c    remembrance of his holiness.



@c    Psalms Chapter 97


@c    Cantate Domino.

@c    All are again invited to praise the Lord, for the victories of Christ.

@c    97:1. A psalm for David himself.  Sing ye to the Lord a new canticle:
@c    because he hath done wonderful things.  His right hand hath wrought for
@c    him salvation, and his arm is holy.

@c    97:2. The Lord hath made known his salvation:  he hath revealed his
@c    justice in the sight of the Gentiles.

@c    97:3. He hath remembered his mercy and his truth toward the house of
@c    Israel.  All the ends of the earth have seen the salvation of our God.

@c    97:4. Sing joyfully to God, all the earth; make melody, rejoice and
@c    sing.

@c    97:5. Sing praise to the Lord on the harp, on the harp, and with the
@c    voice of a psalm:

@c    97:6. With long trumpets, and sound of cornet.  Make a joyful noise
@c    before the Lord our king:

@c    97:7. Let the sea be moved and the fullness thereof:  the world and they
@c    that dwell therein.

@c    97:8. The rivers shall clap their hands, the mountains shall rejoice
@c    together

@c    97:9. At the presence of the Lord:  because he cometh to judge the
@c    earth.  He shall judge the world with justice, and the people with
@c    equity.



@c    Psalms Chapter 98


@c    Dominus regnavit.

@c    The reign of the Lord in Sion:  that is, of Christ in his church.

@c    98:1. A psalm for David himself.  The Lord hath reigned, let the people
@c    be angry:  he that sitteth on the cherubims:  let the earth be moved.

@c    Let the people be angry. . .Though many enemies rage, and the whole
@c    earth be stirred up to oppose the reign of Christ, he shall still
@c    prevail.

@c    98:2. The lord is great in Sion, and high above all people.

@c    98:3. Let them give praise to thy great name:  for it is terrible and
@c    holy:

@c    98:4. And the king's honour loveth judgment.  Thou hast prepared
@c    directions:  thou hast done judgment and justice in Jacob.

@c    Loveth judgment. . .Requireth discretion.--Ibid.  Directions. . .Most
@c    right and just laws to direct men.

@c    98:5. Exalt ye the Lord our God, and adore his footstool, for it is
@c    holy.

@c    Adore his footstool. . .The ark of the covenant was called, in the Old
@c    Testament, God's footstool:  over which he was understood to sit, on his
@c    propitiatory, or mercy seat, as on a throne, between the wings of the
@c    cherubims, in the sanctuary:  to which the children of Israel paid a
@c    great veneration.  But as this psalm evidently relates to Christ, and
@c    the New Testament, where the ark has no place, the holy fathers
@c    understand this text, of the worship paid by the church to the body and
@c    blood of Christ in the sacred mysteries:  inasmuch as the humanity of
@c    Christ is, as it were, the footstool of the divinity.  So St. Ambrose,
@c    L. 3.  De Spiritu Sancto, c. 12.  And St. Augustine upon this psalm.

@c    98:6. Moses and Aaron among his priests:  and Samuel among them that
@c    call upon his name.  They called upon the Lord, and he heard them:

@c    Moses and Aaron among his priests. . .By this it is evident, that Moses
@c    also was a priest, and indeed the chief priest, inasmuch as he
@c    consecrated Aaron, and offered sacrifice for him.  Lev. 8.  So that his
@c    pre-eminence over Aaron makes nothing for lay church headship.

@c    98:7. He spoke to them in the pillar of the cloud.  They kept his
@c    testimonies, and the commandment which he gave them.

@c    98:8. Thou didst hear them, O Lord our God:  thou wast a merciful God to
@c    them, and taking vengeance on all their inventions.

@c    All their inventions. . .that is, all the enterprises of their enemies
@c    against them, as in the case of Core, Dathan, and Abiron.

@c    98:9. Exalt ye the Lord our God, and adore at his holy mountain:  for
@c    the Lord our God is holy.



@c    Psalms Chapter 99


@c    Jubilate Deo.

@c    All are invited to rejoice in God the creator of all.

@c    99:1. A psalm of praise.

@c    99:2. Sing joyfully to God, all the earth:  serve ye the Lord with
@c    gladness.  Come in before his presence with exceeding great joy.

@c    99:3. Know ye that the Lord he is God:  he made us, and not we
@c    ourselves.  We are his people and the sheep of his pasture.

@c    99:4. Go ye into his gates with praise, into his courts with hymns:  and
@c    give glory to him.  Praise ye his name:

@c    99:5. For the Lord is sweet, his mercy endureth for ever, and his truth
@c    to generation and generation.



@c    Psalms Chapter 100


@c    Misericordiam et judicium.

@c    The prophet exhorteth all by his example, to follow mercy and justice.

@c    100:1. A psalm for David himself.  Mercy and judgment I will sing to
@c    thee, O Lord:  I will sing,

@c    100:2. And I will understand in the unspotted way, when thou shalt come
@c    to me.  I walked in the innocence of my heart, in the midst of my house.

@c    I will understand, etc. . .That is, I will apply my mind, I will do my
@c    endeavour, to know and to follow the perfect way of thy commandments:
@c    not trusting to my own strength, but relying on thy coming to me by thy
@c    grace.

@c    100:3. I will not set before my eyes any unjust thing:  I hated the
@c    workers of iniquities.

@c    100:4. The perverse heart did not cleave to me:  and the malignant, that
@c    turned aside from me, I would not know.

@c    100:5. The man that in private detracted his neighbour, him did I
@c    persecute.  With him that had a proud eye, and an unsatiable heart, I
@c    would not eat.

@c    100:6. My eyes were upon the faithful of the earth, to sit with me:  the
@c    man that walked in the perfect way, he served me.

@c    100:7. He that worketh pride shall not dwell in the midst of my house:
@c    he that speaketh unjust things did not prosper before my eyes.

@c    100:8. In the morning I put to death all the wicked of the land:  that I
@c    might cut off all the workers of iniquity from the city of the Lord.



@c    Psalms Chapter 101


@c    Domine, exaudi.

@c    A prayer for one in affliction:  the fifth penitential psalm.

@c    101:1. The prayer of the poor man, when he was anxious, and poured out
@c    his supplication before the Lord.

@c    101:2. Hear, O Lord, my prayer:  and let my cry come to thee.

@c    101:3. Turn not away thy face from me:  in the day when I am in trouble,
@c    incline thy ear to me.  In what day soever I shall call upon thee, hear
@c    me speedily.

@c    101:4. For my days are vanished like smoke, and my bones are grown dry
@c    like fuel for the fire.

@c    101:5. I am smitten as grass, and my heart is withered:  because I
@c    forgot to eat my bread.

@c    101:6. Through the voice of my groaning, my bone hath cleaved to my
@c    flesh.

@c    101:7. I am become like to a pelican of the wilderness:  I am like a
@c    night raven in the house.

@c    A pelican, etc. . .I am become through grief, like birds that affect
@c    solitude and darkness.

@c    101:8. I have watched, and am become as a sparrow all alone on the
@c    housetop.

@c    101:9. All the day long my enemies reproached me:  and they that praised
@c    me did swear against me.

@c    101:10. For I did eat ashes like bread, and mingled my drink with
@c    weeping.

@c    101:11. Because of thy anger and indignation:  for having lifted me up
@c    thou hast thrown me down.

@c    101:12. My days have declined like a shadow, and I am withered like
@c    grass.

@c    101:13. But thou, O Lord, endurest for ever:  and thy memorial to all
@c    generations.

@c    101:14. Thou shalt arise and have mercy on Sion:  for it is time to have
@c    mercy on it, for the time is come.

@c    101:15. For the stones thereof have pleased thy servants:  and they
@c    shall have pity on the earth thereof.

@c    101:16. All the Gentiles shall fear thy name, O Lord, and all the kings
@c    of the earth thy glory.

@c    101:17. For the Lord hath built up Sion:  and he shall be seen in his
@c    glory.

@c    101:18. He hath had regard to the prayer of the humble:  and he hath not
@c    despised their petition.

@c    101:19. Let these things be written unto another generation:  and the
@c    people that shall be created shall praise the Lord:

@c    101:20. Because he hath looked forth from his high sanctuary:  from
@c    heaven the Lord hath looked upon the earth.

@c    101:21. That he might hear the groans of them that are in fetters:  that
@c    he might release the children of the slain:

@c    101:22. That they may declare the name of the Lord in Sion:  and his
@c    praise in Jerusalem;

@c    101:23. When the people assemble together, and kings, to serve the
@c    Lord.

@c    101:24. He answered him in the way of his strength:  Declare unto me the
@c    fewness of my days.

@c    He answered him in the way of his strength. . .That is, the people,
@c    mentioned in the foregoing verse, or the penitent, in whose person this
@c    psalm is delivered, answered the Lord in the way of his strength:  that
@c    is, according to the best of his power and strength:  or when he was in
@c    the flower of his age and strength:  inquiring after the fewness of his
@c    days:  to know if he should live long enough to see the happy
@c    restoration of Sion, etc.

@c    101:25. Call me not away in the midst of my days:  thy years are unto
@c    generation and generation.

@c    101:26. In the beginning, O Lord, thou foundedst the earth:  and the
@c    heavens are the works of thy hands.

@c    101:27. They shall perish but thou remainest:  and all of them shall
@c    grow old like a garment:  And as a vesture thou shalt change them, and
@c    they shall be changed.

@c    101:28. But thou art always the selfsame, and thy years shall not fail.

@c    101:29. The children of thy servants shall continue and their seed
@c    shall be directed for ever.



@c    Psalms Chapter 102


@c    Benedic, anima.

@c    Thanksgiving to God for his mercies.

@c    102:1. For David himself.  Bless the Lord, O my soul:  and let all that
@c    is within me bless his holy name.

@c    102:2. Bless the Lord, O my soul, and never forget all he hath done for
@c    thee.

@c    102:3. Who forgiveth all thy iniquities:  who healeth all thy diseases.

@c    102:4. Who redeemeth thy life from destruction:  who crowneth thee with
@c    mercy and compassion.

@c    102:5. Who satisfieth thy desire with good things:  thy youth shall be
@c    renewed like the eagle's.

@c    102:6. The Lord doth mercies, and judgment for all that suffer wrong.

@c    102:7. He hath made his ways known to Moses:  his wills to the children
@c    of Israel.

@c    102:8. The Lord is compassionate and merciful:  longsuffering and
@c    plenteous in mercy.

@c    102:9. He will not always be angry:  nor will he threaten for ever.

@c    102:10. He hath not dealt with us according to our sins:  nor rewarded
@c    us according to our iniquities.

@c    102:11. For according to the height of the heaven above the earth:  he
@c    hath strengthened his mercy towards them that fear him.

@c    102:12. As far as the east is from the west, so far hath he removed our
@c    iniquities from us.

@c    102:13. As a father hath compassion on his children, so hath the Lord
@c    compassion on them that fear him:

@c    102:14. For he knoweth our frame.  He remembereth that we are dust:

@c    102:15. Man's days are as grass, as the flower of the field so shall he
@c    flourish.

@c    102:16. For the spirit shall pass in him, and he shall not be:  and he
@c    shall know his place no more.

@c    102:17. But the mercy of the Lord is from eternity and unto eternity
@c    upon them that fear him:  And his justice unto children's children,

@c    102:18. To such as keep his covenant, And are mindful of his
@c    commandments to do them.

@c    102:19. The lord hath prepared his throne in heaven:  and his kingdom
@c    shall rule over all.

@c    102:20. Bless the Lord, all ye his angels:  you that are mighty in
@c    strength, and execute his word, hearkening to the voice of his orders.

@c    102:21. Bless the Lord, all ye his hosts:  you ministers of his that do
@c    his will.

@c    102:22. Bless the Lord, all his works:  in every place of his dominion,
@c    O my soul, bless thou the Lord.



@c    Psalms Chapter 103


@c    Benedic, anima.

@c    God is to be praised for his mighty works, and wonderful providence.

@c    103:1. For David himself.  Bless the Lord, O my soul:  O Lord my God,
@c    thou art exceedingly great.  Thou hast put on praise and beauty:

@c    103:2. And art clothed with light as with a garment.  Who stretchest out
@c    the heaven like a pavilion:

@c    103:3. Who coverest the higher rooms thereof with water.  Who makest the
@c    clouds thy chariot:  who walkest upon the wings of the winds.

@c    103:4. Who makest thy angels spirits:  and thy ministers a burning fire.

@c    103:5. Who hast founded the earth upon its own bases:  it shall not be
@c    moved for ever and ever.

@c    103:6. The deep like a garment is its clothing:  above the mountains
@c    shall the waters stand.

@c    103:7. At thy rebuke they shall flee:  at the voice of thy thunder they
@c    shall fear.

@c    103:8. The mountains ascend, and the plains descend into the place
@c    which thou hast founded for them.

@c    103:9. Thou hast set a bound which they shall not pass over; neither
@c    shall they return to cover the earth.

@c    103:10. Thou sendest forth springs in the vales:  between the midst of
@c    the hills the waters shall pass.

@c    103:11. All the beasts of the field shall drink:  the wild asses shall
@c    expect in their thirst.

@c    103:12. Over them the birds of the air shall dwell:  from the midst of
@c    the rocks they shall give forth their voices.

@c    103:13. Thou waterest the hills from thy upper rooms:  the earth shall
@c    be filled with the fruit of thy works:

@c    103:14. Bringing forth grass for cattle, and herb for the service of
@c    men.  That thou mayst bring bread out of the earth:

@c    103:15. And that wine may cheer the heart of man.  That he may make the
@c    face cheerful with oil:  and that bread may strengthen man's heart.

@c    103:16. The trees of the field shall be filled, and the cedars of
@c    Libanus which he hath planted:

@c    103:17. There the sparrows shall make their nests.  The highest of them
@c    is the house of the heron.

@c    103:18. The high hills are a refuge for the harts, the rock for the
@c    irchins.

@c    103:19. He hath made the moon for seasons:  the sun knoweth his going
@c    down.

@c    103:20. Thou hast appointed darkness, and it is night:  in it shall all
@c    the beasts of the woods go about:

@c    103:21. The young lions roaring after their prey, and seeking their
@c    meat from God.

@c    103:22. The sun ariseth, and they are gathered together:  and they shall
@c    lie down in their dens.

@c    103:23. Man shall go forth to his work, and to his labour until the
@c    evening.

@c    103:24. How great are thy works, O Lord ?  thou hast made all things in
@c    wisdom:  the earth is filled with thy riches.

@c    103:25. So is this great sea, which stretcheth wide its arms:  there are
@c    creeping things without number:  Creatures little and great.

@c    103:26. There the ships shall go.  This sea dragon which thou hast
@c    formed to play therein.

@c    103:27. All expect of thee that thou give them food in season.

@c    103:28. What thou givest to them they shall gather up:  when thou
@c    openest thy hand, they shall all be filled with good.

@c    103:29. But if thou turnest away thy face, they shall be troubled:  thou
@c    shalt take away their breath, and they shall fail, and shall return to
@c    their dust.

@c    103:30. Thou shalt send forth thy spirit, and they shall be created:
@c    and thou shalt renew the face of the earth.

@c    103:31. May the glory of the Lord endure for ever:  the Lord shall
@c    rejoice in his works.

@c    103:32. He looketh upon the earth, and maketh it tremble:  he troubleth
@c    the mountains, and they smoke.

@c    103:33. I will sing to the Lord as long as I live:  I will sing praise
@c    to my God while I have my being.

@c    103:34. Let my speech be acceptable to him:  but I will take delight in
@c    the Lord.

@c    103:35. Let sinners be consumed out of the earth, and the unjust, so
@c    that they be no more:  O my soul, bless thou the Lord.



@c    Psalms Chapter 104


@c    Confitemini Domino.

@c    A thanksgiving to God for his benefits to his people Israel.

@c    Alleluia.

@c    104:1. Give glory to the Lord, and call upon his name:  declare his
@c    deeds among the Gentiles.

@c    104:2. Sing to him, yea sing praises to him:  relate all his wondrous
@c    works.

@c    104:3. Glory ye in his holy name:  let the heart of them rejoice that
@c    seek the Lord.

@c    104:4. Seek ye the lord, and be strengthened:  seek his face evermore.

@c    104:5. Remember his marvellous works which he hath done; his wonders,
@c    and the judgments of his mouth.

@c    104:6. O ye seed of Abraham his servant; ye sons of Jacob his chosen.

@c    104:7. He is the Lord our God:  his judgments are in all the earth.

@c    104:8. He hath remembered his covenant for ever:  the word which he
@c    commanded to a thousand generations.

@c    104:9. Which he made to Abraham; and his oath to Isaac:

@c    104:10. And he appointed the same to Jacob for a law, and to Israel for
@c    an everlasting testament:

@c    104:11. Saying:  To thee will I give the land of Chanaan, the lot of
@c    your inheritance.

@c    104:12. When they were but a small number:  yea very few, and sojourners
@c    therein:

@c    104:13. And they passed from nation to nation, and from one kingdom to
@c    another people.

@c    104:14. He suffered no man to hurt them:  and he reproved kings for
@c    their sakes.

@c    104:15. Touch ye not my anointed:  and do no evil to my prophets.

@c    104:16. And he called a famine upon the land:  and he broke in pieces
@c    all the support of bread.

@c    104:17. He sent a man before them:  Joseph, who was sold for a slave.

@c    104:18. They humbled his feet in fetters:  the iron pierced his soul,

@c    104:19. Until his word came.  The word of the Lord inflamed him.

@c    104:20. The king sent, and he released him:  the ruler of the people,
@c    and he set him at liberty.

@c    104:21. He made him master of his house, and ruler of all his
@c    possession.

@c    104:22. That he might instruct his princes as himself, and teach his
@c    ancients wisdom.

@c    104:23. And Israel went into Egypt:  and Jacob was a sojourner in the
@c    land of Cham.

@c    104:24. And he increased his people exceedingly:  and strengthened them
@c    over their enemies.

@c    104:25. He turned their heart to hate his people:  and to deal
@c    deceitfully with his servants.

@c    He turned their heart, etc. . .Not that God (who is never the author of
@c    sin) moved the Egyptians to hate and persecute his people; but that the
@c    Egyptians took occasion of hating and envying them, from the sight of
@c    the benefits which God bestowed upon them.

@c    104:26. He sent Moses his servant:  Aaron the man whom he had chosen.

@c    104:27. He gave them power to shew them signs, and his wonders in the
@c    land of Cham.

@c    104:28. He sent darkness, and made it obscure:  and grieved not his
@c    words.

@c    Grieved not his words. . .That is, he was not wanting to fulfil his
@c    words:  or he did not grieve Moses and Aaron, the carriers of his words:
@c    or he did not grieve his words, that is, his sons, the children of
@c    Israel, who enjoyed light whilst the Egyptians were oppressed with
@c    darkness.

@c    104:29. He turned their waters into blood, and destroyed their fish.

@c    104:30. Their land brought forth frogs, in the inner chambers of their
@c    kings.

@c    104:31. He spoke, and there came divers sorts of flies and sciniphs in
@c    all their coasts.

@c    Sciniphs. . .See the annotation, Ex.8.16.

@c    104:32. He gave them hail for rain, a burning fire in the land.

@c    104:33. And he destroyed their vineyards and their fig trees:  and he
@c    broke in pieces the trees of their coasts.

@c    104:34. He spoke, and the locust came, and the bruchus, of which there
@c    was no number.

@c    Bruchus. . .An insect of the locust kind.

@c    104:35. And they devoured all the grass in their land, and consumed all
@c    the fruit of their ground.

@c    104:36. And he slew all the firstborn in their land:  the firstfruits of
@c    all their labour.

@c    104:37. And he brought them out with silver and gold:  and there was not
@c    among their tribes one that was feeble.

@c    104:38. Egypt was glad when they departed:  for the fear of them lay
@c    upon them.

@c    104:39. He spread a cloud for their protection, and fire to give them
@c    light in the night.

@c    104:40. They asked, and the quail came:  and he filled them with the
@c    bread of heaven.

@c    104:41. He opened the rock, and waters flowed:  rivers ran down in the
@c    dry land.

@c    104:42. Because he remembered his holy word, which he had spoken to his
@c    servant Abraham.

@c    104:43. And he brought forth his people with joy, and his chosen with
@c    gladness.

@c    104:44. And he gave them the lands of the Gentiles:  and they possessed
@c    the labours of the people:

@c    104:45. That they might observe his justifications, and seek after his
@c    law.

@c    His justifications. . .That is, his commandments; which here, and in
@c    many other places of the scripture, are called justifications, because
@c    the keeping of them makes man just.  The Protestants render it by the
@c    word statutes, in favour of their doctrine, which does not allow good
@c    works to justify.



@c    Psalms Chapter 105


@c    Confitemini Domino.

@c    A confession of the manifold sins and ingratitudes of the Israelites.

@c    Alleluia.

@c    105:1. Give glory to the Lord, for he is good:  for his mercy endureth
@c    for ever.

@c    105:2. Who shall declare the powers of the Lord?  who shall set forth
@c    all his praises?

@c    105:3. Blessed are they that keep judgment, and do justice at all
@c    times.

@c    105:4. Remember us, O Lord, in the favour of thy people:  visit us with
@c    thy salvation.

@c    105:5. That we may see the good of thy chosen, that we may rejoice in
@c    the joy of thy nation:  that thou mayst be praised with thy inheritance.

@c    105:6. We have sinned with our fathers:  we have acted unjustly, we have
@c    wrought iniquity.

@c    105:7. Our fathers understood not thy wonders in Egypt:  they remembered
@c    not the multitude of thy mercies:  And they provoked to wrath going up
@c    to the sea, even the Red Sea.

@c    105:8. And he saved them for his own name's sake:  that he might make
@c    his power known.

@c    105:9. And he rebuked the Red Sea and it was dried up:  and he led them
@c    through the depths, as in a wilderness.

@c    105:10. And he saved them from the hand of them that hated them:  and he
@c    redeemed them from the hand of the enemy.

@c    105:11. And the water covered them that afflicted them:  there was not
@c    one of them left.

@c    105:12. And they believed his words:  and they sang his praises.

@c    105:13. They had quickly done, they forgot his works:  and they waited
@c    not for his counsel.

@c    105:14. And they coveted their desire in the desert:  and they tempted
@c    God in the place without water.

@c    105:15. And he gave them their request:  and sent fulness into their
@c    souls.

@c    105:16. And they provoked Moses in the camp, Aaron the holy one of the
@c    Lord.

@c    105:17. The earth opened and swallowed up Dathan:  and covered the
@c    congregation of Abiron.

@c    105:18. And a fire was kindled in their congregation:  the flame burned
@c    the wicked.

@c    105:19. They made also a calf in Horeb:  and they adored the graven
@c    thing.

@c    105:20. And they changed their glory into the likeness of a calf that
@c    eateth grass.

@c    105:21. They forgot God, who saved them, who had done great things in
@c    Egypt,

@c    105:22. Wondrous works in the land of Cham:  terrible things in the Red
@c    Sea.

@c    105:23. And he said that he would destroy them:  had not Moses his
@c    chosen stood before him in the breach:  To turn away his wrath, lest he
@c    should destroy them.

@c    105:24. And they set at nought the desirable land.  They believed not
@c    his word,

@c    105:25. And they murmured in their tents:  they hearkened not to the
@c    voice of the Lord.

@c    105:26. And he lifted up his hand over them:  to overthrow them in the
@c    desert;

@c    105:27. And to cast down their seed among the nations, and to scatter
@c    them in the countries.

@c    105:28. They also were initiated to Beelphegor:  and ate the sacrifices
@c    of the dead.

@c    Initiated. . .That is, they dedicated, or consecrated themselves to the
@c    idol of the Moabites and Madianites, called Beelphegor, or Baal-Peor.
@c    Num. 25.3.--Ibid.  The dead. . .Viz., idols without life.

@c    105:29. And they provoked him with their inventions:  and destruction
@c    was multiplied among them.

@c    105:30. Then Phinees stood up, and pacified him:  and the slaughter
@c    ceased.

@c    105:31. And it was reputed to him unto justice, to generation and
@c    generation for evermore.

@c    105:32. They provoked him also at the waters of contradiction:  and
@c    Moses was afflicted for their sakes:

@c    105:33. Because they exasperated his spirit.  And he distinguished with
@c    his lips.

@c    He distinguished with his lips. . .Moses, by occasion of the people's
@c    rebellion and incredulity, was guilty of distinguishing with his lips;
@c    when, instead of speaking to the rock, as God had commanded, he said to
@c    the people, with a certain hesitation in his faith, Hear ye, rebellious
@c    and incredulous:  Can we from this rock bring out water for you?  Num.
@c    20.10.

@c    105:34. They did not destroy the nations of which the Lord spoke unto
@c    them.

@c    105:35. And they were mingled among the heathens, and learned their
@c    works:

@c    105:36. And served their idols, and it became a stumblingblock to them.

@c    105:37. And they sacrificed their sons, and their daughters to devils.

@c    105:38. And they shed innocent blood:  the blood of their sons and of
@c    their daughters which they sacrificed to the idols of Chanaan.  And the
@c    land was polluted with blood,

@c    105:39. And was defiled with their works:  and they went aside after
@c    their own inventions.

@c    105:40. And the Lord was exceedingly angry with his people:  and he
@c    abhorred his inheritance.

@c    105:41. And he delivered them into the hands of the nations:  and they
@c    that hated them had dominion over them.

@c    105:42. And their enemies afflicted them:  and they were humbled under
@c    their hands:

@c    105:43. Many times did he deliver them.  But they provoked him with
@c    their counsel:  and they were brought low by their iniquities.

@c    105:44. And he saw when they were in tribulation:  and he heard their
@c    prayer.

@c    105:45. And he was mindful of his covenant:  and repented according to
@c    the multitude of his mercies.

@c    105:46. And he gave them unto mercies, in the sight of all those that
@c    had made them captives.

@c    105:47. Save us, O Lord, our God:  and gather us from among the nations:
@c    That we may give thanks to thy holy name, and may glory in thy praise.

@c    105:48. Blessed be the Lord the God of Israel, from everlasting to
@c    everlasting:  and let all the people say:  So be it, so be it.



@c    Psalms Chapter 106


@c    Confitemini Domino.

@c    All are invited to give thanks to God for his perpetual providence over
@c    men.

@c    Alleluia.

@c    106:1. Give glory to the Lord, for he is good:  for his mercy endureth
@c    for ever.

@c    106:2. Let them say so that have been redeemed by the Lord, whom he
@c    hath redeemed from the hand of the enemy:  and gathered out of the
@c    countries.

@c    106:3. From the rising and from the setting of the sun, from the north
@c    and from the sea.

@c    106:4. They wandered in a wilderness, in a place without water:  they
@c    found not the way of a city for their habitation.

@c    106:5. They were hungry and thirsty:  their soul fainted in them.

@c    106:6. And they cried to the Lord in their tribulation:  and he
@c    delivered them out of their distresses.

@c    106:7. And he led them into the right way, that they might go to a city
@c    of habitation.

@c    106:8. Let the mercies of the Lord give glory to him:  and his wonderful
@c    works to the children of men.

@c    106:9. For he hath satisfied the empty soul, and hath filled the hungry
@c    soul with good things.

@c    106:10. Such as sat in darkness and in the shadow of death:  bound in
@c    want and in iron.

@c    106:11. Because they had exasperated the words of God:  and provoked the
@c    counsel of the most High:

@c    106:12. And their heart was humbled with labours:  they were weakened,
@c    and there was none to help them.

@c    106:13. Then they cried to the Lord in their affliction:  and he
@c    delivered them out of their distresses.

@c    106:14. And he brought them out of darkness, and the shadow of death;
@c    and broke their bonds in sunder.

@c    106:15. Let the mercies of the Lord give glory to him, and his
@c    wonderful works to the children of men.

@c    106:16. Because he hath broken gates of brass, and burst iron bars.

@c    106:17. He took them out of the way of their iniquity:  for they were
@c    brought low for their injustices.

@c    106:18. Their soul abhorred all manner of meat:  and they drew nigh even
@c    to the gates of death.

@c    106:19. And they cried to the Lord in their affliction:  and he
@c    delivered them out of their distresses.

@c    106:20. He sent his word, and healed them:  and delivered them from
@c    their destructions.

@c    106:21. Let the mercies of the Lord give glory to him:  and his
@c    wonderful works to the children of men.

@c    106:22. And let them sacrifice the sacrifice of praise:  and declare his
@c    works with joy.

@c    106:23. They that go down to the sea in ships, doing business in the
@c    great waters:

@c    106:24. These have seen the works of the Lord, and his wonders in the
@c    deep.

@c    106:25. He said the word, and there arose a storm of wind:  and the
@c    waves thereof were lifted up.

@c    106:26. They mount up to the heavens, and they go down to the depths:
@c    their soul pined away with evils.

@c    106:27. They were troubled, and reeled like a drunken man; and all
@c    their wisdom was swallowed up.

@c    106:28. And they cried to the Lord in their affliction:  and he brought
@c    them out of their distresses.

@c    106:29. And he turned the storm into a breeze:  and its waves were
@c    still.

@c    106:30. And they rejoiced because they were still:  and he brought them
@c    to the haven which they wished for.

@c    106:31. Let the mercies of the Lord give glory to him, and his
@c    wonderful works to the children of men.

@c    106:32. And let them exalt him in the church of the people:  and praise
@c    him in the chair of the ancients.

@c    106:33. He hath turned rivers into a wilderness:  and the sources of
@c    waters into dry ground:

@c    106:34. A fruitful land into barrenness, for the wickedness of them
@c    that dwell therein.

@c    106:35. He hath turned a wilderness into pools of waters, and a dry
@c    land into water springs.

@c    106:36. And hath placed there the hungry; and they made a city for
@c    their habitation.

@c    106:37. Anti they sowed fields, and planted vineyards:  and they yielded
@c    fruit of birth.

@c    106:38. And he blessed them, and they were multiplied exceedingly:  and
@c    their cattle he suffered not to decrease.

@c    106:39. Then they were brought to be few:  and they were afflicted
@c    through the trouble of evils and sorrow.

@c    106:40. Contempt was poured forth upon their princes:  and he caused
@c    them to wander where there was no passing, and out of the way.

@c    106:41. And he helped the poor out of poverty:  and made him families
@c    like a flock of sheep.

@c    106:42. The just shall see, and shall rejoice, and all iniquity shall
@c    stop her mouth.

@c    106:43. Who is wise, and will keep these things; and will understand
@c    the mercies of the Lord?



@c    Psalms Chapter 107


@c    Paratum cor meum.

@c    The prophet praiseth God for benefits received.

@c    107:1. A canticle of a psalm for David himself.

@c    107:2. My heart is ready, O God, my heart is ready:  I will sing, and
@c    will give praise, with my glory.

@c    107:3. Arise, my glory; arise, psaltery and harp:  I will arise in the
@c    morning early.

@c    107:4. I will praise thee, O Lord, among the people:  and I will sing
@c    unto thee among the nations.

@c    107:5. For thy mercy is great above the heavens:  and thy truth even
@c    unto the clouds.

@c    107:6. Be thou exalted, O God, above the heavens, and thy glory over
@c    all the earth:

@c    107:7. That thy beloved may be delivered.  Save with thy right hand and
@c    hear me.

@c    107:8. God hath spoken in his holiness.  I will rejoice, and I will
@c    divide Sichem and I will mete out the vale of tabernacles.

@c    107:9. Galaad is mine:  and Manasses is mine and Ephraim the protection
@c    of my head.  Juda is my king:

@c    107:10. Moab the pot of my hope.  Over Edom I will stretch out my shoe:
@c    the aliens are become my friends.

@c    107:11. Who will bring me into the strong city?  who will lead me into
@c    Edom?

@c    107:12. Wilt not thou, O God, who hast cast us off ?  and wilt not thou,
@c    O God, go forth with our armies?

@c    107:13. O grant us help from trouble:  for vain is the help of man.

@c    107:14. Through God we shall do mightily:  and he will bring our enemies
@c    to nothing.



@c    Psalms Chapter 108


@c    Deus, laudem meam.

@c    David in the person of Christ, prayeth against his persecutors; more
@c    especially the traitor Judas:  foretelling and approving his just
@c    punishment for his obstinacy in sin and final impenitence.

@c    108:1. Unto the end, a psalm for David.

@c    108:2. O God, be not thou silent in my praise:  for the mouth of the
@c    wicked and the mouth of the deceitful man is opened against me.

@c    108:3. They have spoken against me with deceitful tongues; and they
@c    have compassed me about with words of hatred; and have fought against
@c    me without cause.

@c    108:4. Instead of making me a return of love, they detracted me:  but I
@c    gave myself to prayer.

@c    108:5. And they repaid me evil for good:  and hatred for my love.

@c    108:6. Set thou the sinner over him:  and may the devil stand at his
@c    right hand.

@c    Set thou the sinner over him, etc. . .Give to the devil, that
@c    arch-sinner, power over him:  let him enter into him, and possess him.
@c    The imprecations, contained in the thirty verses of this psalm, are
@c    opposed to the thirty pieces of silver for which Judas betrayed our
@c    Lord; and are to be taken as prophetic denunciations of the evils that
@c    should befall the traitor and his accomplices the Jews; and not
@c    properly as curses.

@c    108:7. When he is judged, may he go out condemned; and may his prayer
@c    be turned to sin.

@c    108:8. May his days be few:  and his bishopric let another take.

@c    108:9. May his children be fatherless, and his wife a widow.

@c    108:10. Let his children be carried about vagabonds, and beg; and let
@c    them be cast out of their dwellings.

@c    108:11. May the usurer search all his substance:  and let strangers
@c    plunder his labours.

@c    108:12. May there be none to help him:  nor none to pity his fatherless
@c    offspring.

@c    108:13. May his posterity be cut off; in one generation may his name be
@c    blotted out.

@c    108:14. May the iniquity of his fathers be remembered in the sight of
@c    the Lord:  and let not the sin of his mother be blotted out.

@c    108:15. May they be before the Lord continually, and let the memory of
@c    them perish from the earth:

@c    108:16. because he remembered not to shew mercy,

@c    108:17. But persecuted the poor man and the beggar; and the broken in
@c    heart, to put him to death.

@c    108:18. And he loved cursing, and it shall come unto him:  and he would
@c    not have blessing, and it shall be far from him.  And he put on cursing,
@c    like a garment:  and it went in like water into his entrails, and like
@c    oil in his bones.

@c    108:19. May it be unto him like a garment which covereth him; and like
@c    a girdle with which he is girded continually.

@c    108:20. This is the work of them who detract me before the Lord; and
@c    who speak evils against my soul.

@c    108:21. But thou, O Lord, do with me for thy name's sake:  because thy
@c    mercy is sweet.  Do thou deliver me,

@c    108:22. For I am poor and needy, and my heart is troubled within me.

@c    108:23. I am taken away like the shadow when it declineth:  and I am
@c    shaken off as locusts.

@c    108:24. My knees are weakened through fasting:  and my flesh is changed
@c    for oil.

@c    For oil. . .Propter oleum.  The meaning is, my flesh is changed, being
@c    perfectly emaciated and dried up, as having lost all its oil or
@c    fatness.

@c    108:25. And I am become a reproach to them:  they saw me and they shaked
@c    their heads.

@c    108:26. Help me, O Lord my God; save me; according to thy mercy.

@c    108:27. And let them know that this is thy hand:  and that thou, O Lord,
@c    hast done it.

@c    108:28. They will curse and thou wilt bless:  let them that rise up
@c    against me be confounded:  but thy servant shall rejoice.

@c    108:29. Let them that detract me be clothed with shame:  and let them be
@c    covered with their confusion as with a double cloak.

@c    108:30. I will give great thanks to the Lord with my mouth:  and in the
@c    midst of many I will praise him.

@c    108:31. Because he hath stood at the right hand of the poor, to save my
@c    soul from persecutors.



@c    Psalms Chapter 109


@c    Dixit Dominus.

@c    Christ's exaltation and everlasting priesthood.

@c    109:1. A psalm for David.  The Lord said to my Lord:  Sit thou at my
@c    right hand:  Until I make thy enemies thy footstool.

@c    109:2. The Lord will send forth the sceptre of thy power out of Sion:
@c    rule thou in the midst of thy enemies.

@c    109:3. With thee is the principality in the day of thy strength:  in the
@c    brightness of the saints:  from the womb before the day star I begot
@c    thee.

@c    109:4. The Lord hath sworn, and he will not repent:  Thou art a priest
@c    for ever according to the order of Melchisedech.

@c    109:5. The Lord at thy right hand hath broken kings in the day of his
@c    wrath.

@c    109:6. He shall judge among nations, he shall fill ruins:  he shall
@c    crush the heads in the land of many.

@c    109:7. He shall drink of the torrent in the way:  therefore shall he
@c    lift up the head.



@c    Psalms Chapter 110


@c    Confitebor tibi, Domine.

@c    God is to be praised for his graces, and benefits to his church.

@c    Alleluia.

@c    110:1. I will praise thee, O Lord, with my whole heart; in the council
@c    of the just, and in the congregation.

@c    110:2. Great are the works of the Lord:  sought out according to all his
@c    wills.

@c    110:3. His work is praise and magnificence:  and his justice continueth
@c    for ever and ever.

@c    110:4. He hath made a remembrance of his wonderful works, being a
@c    merciful and gracious Lord:

@c    110:5. He hath given food to them that fear him.  He will be mindful for
@c    ever of his covenant:

@c    110:6. He will shew forth to his people the power of his works.

@c    110:7. That he may give them the inheritance of the Gentiles:  the works
@c    of his hands are truth and judgment.

@c    110:8. All his commandments are faithful:  confirmed for ever and ever,
@c    made in truth and equity.

@c    110:9. He hath sent redemption to his people:  he hath commanded his
@c    covenant for ever.  Holy and terrible is his name:

@c    110:10. The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom.  A good
@c    understanding to all that do it:  his praise continueth for ever and
@c    ever.



@c    Psalms Chapter 111


@c    Beatus vir.

@c    The good man is happy.

@c    Alleluia, of the returning of Aggeus and Zacharias.

@c    Of the returning, etc. . .This is in the Greek and Latin, but not in the
@c    Hebrew.  It signifies that this psalm was proper to be sung at the time
@c    of the return of the people from their captivity; to inculcate to them,
@c    how happy they might be, if they would be constant in the service of
@c    God.

@c    111:1. Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord:  he shall delight
@c    exceedingly in his commandments.

@c    111:2. His seed shall be mighty upon earth:  the generation of the
@c    righteous shall be blessed.

@c    111:3. Glory and wealth shall be in his house:  and his justice
@c    remaineth for ever and ever.

@c    111:4. To the righteous a light is risen up in darkness:  he is
@c    merciful, and compassionate and just.

@c    111:5. Acceptable is the man that sheweth mercy and lendeth:  he shall
@c    order his words with judgment:

@c    111:6. Because he shall not be moved for ever.

@c    111:7. The just shall be in everlasting remembrance:  he shall not fear
@c    the evil hearing.  His heart is ready to hope in the Lord:

@c    111:8. His heart is strengthened, he shall not be moved until he look
@c    over his enemies.

@c    111:9. He hath distributed, he hath given to the poor:  his justice
@c    remaineth for ever and ever:  his horn shall be exalted in glory.

@c    111:10. The wicked shall see, and shall be angry, he shall gnash with
@c    his teeth and pine away:  the desire of the wicked shall perish.



@c    Psalms Chapter 112


@c    Laudate, pueri.

@c    God is to be praised for his regard to the poor and humble.

@c    Alleluia.

@c    112:1. Praise the Lord, ye children:  praise ye the name of the Lord.

@c    112:2. Blessed be the name of the Lord, from henceforth now and for
@c    ever.

@c    112:3. From the rising of the sun unto the going down of the same, the
@c    name of the Lord is worthy of praise.

@c    112:4. The Lord is high above all nations; and his glory above the
@c    heavens.

@c    112:5. Who is as the Lord our God, who dwelleth on high:

@c    112:6. and looketh
@c    down on the low things in heaven and in earth?

@c    112:7. Raising up the needy from the earth, and lifting up the poor out
@c    of the dunghill:

@c    112:8. That he may place him with princes, with the princes of his
@c    people.

@c    112:9. Who maketh a barren woman to dwell in a house, the joyful mother
@c    of children.



@c    Psalms Chapter 113


@c    In exitu Israel.

@c    God hath shewn his power in delivering his people:  idols are vain.  The
@c    Hebrews divide this into two psalms.

@c    Alleluia.

@c    113:1. When Israel went out of Egypt, the house of Jacob from a
@c    barbarous people:

@c    113:2. Judea was made his sanctuary, Israel his dominion.

@c    113:3. The sea saw and fled:  Jordan was turned back.

@c    113:4. The mountains skipped like rams, and the hills like the lambs of
@c    the flock.

@c    113:5. What ailed thee, O thou sea, that thou didst flee: and thou,
@c    O Jordan, that thou wast turned back?

@c    113:6. Ye mountains, that ye skipped like rams, and ye hills, like
@c    lambs of the flock?

@c    113:7. At the presence of the Lord the earth was moved, at the presence
@c    of the God of Jacob:

@c    113:8. Who turned the rock into pools of water, and the stony hill into
@c    fountains of waters.

@c    113:1. Not to us, O Lord, not to us; but to thy name give glory.

@c    113:2. For thy mercy, and for thy truth's sake:  lest the Gentiles
@c    should say:  Where is their God?

@c    113:3. But our God is in heaven:  he hath done all things whatsoever he
@c    would.

@c    113:4. The idols of the Gentiles are silver and gold, the works of the
@c    hands of men.

@c    113:5. They have mouths and speak not:  they have eyes and see not.

@c    113:6. They have ears and hear not:  they have noses and smell not.

@c    113:7. They have hands and feel not:  they have feet and walk not:
@c    neither shall they cry out through their throat.

@c    113:8. Let them that make them become like unto them:  and all such as
@c    trust in them.

@c    113:9. The house of Israel hath hoped in the Lord:  he is their helper
@c    and their protector.

@c    113:10. The house of Aaron hath hoped in the Lord:  he is their helper
@c    and their protector.

@c    113:11. They that fear the Lord have hoped in the Lord:  he is their
@c    helper and their protector.

@c    113:12. The Lord hath been mindful of us, and hath blessed us.  He hath
@c    blessed the house of Israel:  he hath blessed the house of Aaron.

@c    113:13. He hath blessed all that fear the Lord, both little and great.

@c    113:14. May the Lord add blessings upon you:  upon you, and upon your
@c    children.

@c    113:15. Blessed be you of the Lord, who made heaven and earth.

@c    113:16. The heaven of heaven is the Lord's:  but the earth he has given
@c    to the children of men.

@c    113:17. The dead shall not praise thee, O Lord:  nor any of them that go
@c    down to hell.

@c    113:18. But we that live bless the Lord:  from this time now and for
@c    ever.



@c    Psalms Chapter 114


@c    Dilexi.

@c    The prayer of a just man in affliction, with a lively confidence in
@c    God.

@c    Alleluia.

@c    114:1. I have loved, because the Lord will hear the voice of my prayer.

@c    114:2. Because he hath inclined his ear unto me:  and in my days I will
@c    call upon him.

@c    114:3. The sorrows of death have compassed me:  and the perils of hell
@c    have found me.  I met with trouble and sorrow:

@c    114:4. And I called upon the name of the Lord.  O Lord, deliver my soul.

@c    114:5. The Lord is merciful and just, and our God sheweth mercy.

@c    114:6. The Lord is the keeper of little ones:  I was humbled, and he
@c    delivered me.

@c    114:7. Turn, O my soul, into thy rest:  for the Lord hath been bountiful
@c    to thee.

@c    114:8. For he hath delivered my soul from death:  my eyes from tears, my
@c    feet from falling.

@c    114:9. I will please the Lord in the land of the living.



@c    Psalms Chapter 115


@c    Credidi.

@c    This in the Hebrew is joined with the foregoing psalm, and continues to
@c    express the faith and gratitude of the psalmist.

@c    Alleluia.

@c    115:10. I have believed, therefore have I spoken; but I have
@c    been humbled exceedingly.

@c    115:11. I said in my excess:  Every man is a liar.

@c    115:12. What shall I render to the Lord, for all the things that he
@c    hath rendered to me?

@c    115:13. I will take the chalice of salvation; and I will call upon the
@c    name of the Lord.

@c    115:14. I will pay my vows to the Lord before all his people:

@c    115:15. Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of his saints.

@c    115:16. O Lord, for I am thy servant:  I am thy servant, and the son of
@c    thy handmaid.  Thou hast broken my bonds:

@c    115:17. I will sacrifice to thee the sacrifice of praise, and I will
@c    call upon the name of the Lord.

@c    115:18. I will pay my vows to the Lord in the sight of all his people:

@c    115:19. In the courts of the house of the Lord, in the midst of thee, O
@c    Jerusalem.



@c    Psalms Chapter 116


@c    Laudate Dominum.

@c    All nations are called upon to praise God for his mercy and truth.

@c    Alleluia.

@c    116:1. O Praise the Lord, all ye nations:  praise him, all ye people.

@c    116:2. For his mercy is confirmed upon us:  and the truth of the Lord
@c    remaineth for ever.



@c    Psalms Chapter 117


@c    Confitemini Domino.

@c    The psalmist praiseth God for his delivery from evils:  putteth his
@c    whole trust in him; and foretelleth the coming of Christ.

@c    Alleluia.

@c    117:1. Give praise to the Lord, for he is good:  for his mercy endureth
@c    for ever.

@c    117:2. Let Israel now say, that he is good:  that his mercy endureth for
@c    ever.

@c    117:3. Let the house of Aaron now say, that his mercy endureth for
@c    ever.

@c    117:4. Let them that fear the Lord now say, that his mercy endureth for
@c    ever.

@c    117:5. In my trouble I called upon the Lord:  and the Lord heard me, and
@c    enlarged me.

@c    117:6. The Lord is my helper:  I will not fear what man can do unto me.

@c    117:7. The Lord is my helper:  and I will look over my enemies.

@c    117:8. It is good to confide in the Lord, rather than to have
@c    confidence in man.

@c    117:9. It is good to trust in the Lord, rather than to trust in
@c    princes.

@c    117:10. All nations compassed me about; and, in the name of the Lord I
@c    have been revenged on them.

@c    117:11. Surrounding me they compassed me about:  and in the name of the
@c    Lord I have been revenged on them.

@c    117:12. They surrounded me like bees, and they burned like fire among
@c    thorns:  and in the name of the Lord I was revenged on them.

@c    117:13. Being pushed I was overturned that I might fall:  but the Lord
@c    supported me.

@c    117:14. The Lord is my strength and my praise:  and he is become my
@c    salvation.

@c    117:15. The voice of rejoicing and of salvation is in the tabernacles
@c    of the just.

@c    117:16. The right hand of the Lord hath wrought strength:  the right
@c    hand of the Lord hath exalted me:  the right hand of the Lord hath
@c    wrought strength.

@c    117:17. I shall not die, but live:  and shall declare the works of the
@c    Lord.

@c    117:18. The Lord chastising hath chastised me:  but he hath not
@c    delivered me over to death.

@c    117:19. Open ye to me the gates of justice:  I will go in to them, and
@c    give praise to the Lord.

@c    117:20. This is the gate of the Lord, the just shall enter into it.

@c    117:21. I will give glory to thee because thou hast heard me:  and art
@c    become my salvation.

@c    117:22. The stone which the builders rejected; the same is become the
@c    head of the corner.

@c    117:23. This is the Lord's doing , and it is wonderful in our eyes.

@c    117:24. This is the day which the Lord hath made:  let us be glad and
@c    rejoice therein.

@c    117:25. O Lord, save me:  O Lord, give good success.

@c    117:26. Blessed be he that cometh in the name of the Lord.  We have
@c    blessed you out of the house of the Lord.

@c    117:27. The Lord is God, and he hath shone upon us.  Appoint a solemn
@c    day, with shady boughs, even to the horn of the altar.

@c    117:28. Thou art my God, and I will praise thee:  thou art my God, and I
@c    will exalt thee.  I will praise thee, because thou hast heard me, and
@c    art become my salvation.

@c    117:29. O praise ye the Lord, for he is good:  for his mercy endureth
@c    for ever.



@c    Psalms Chapter 118


@c    Beati immaculati.

@c    Of the excellence of virtue consisting in the love and observance of
@c    the commandments of God.

@c    Alleluia.

@c    ALEPH.

@c    Aleph. . .The first eight verses of this psalm in the original begin
@c    with Aleph, which is the name of the first letter of the Hebrew
@c    alphabet.  The second eight verses begin with Beth, the name of the
@c    second letter of the Hebrew alphabet; and so to the end of the whole
@c    alphabet, in all twenty-two letters, each letter having eight verses.
@c    This order is variously expounded by the holy fathers; which shews the
@c    difficulty of understanding the holy scriptures, and consequently with
@c    what humility, and submission to the Church they are to be read.

@c    118:1. Blessed are the undefiled in the way, who walk in the law of the
@c    Lord.

@c    118:2. Blessed are they that search his testimonies:  that seek him with
@c    their whole heart.

@c    His testimonies. . .The commandments of God are called his testimonies,
@c    because they testify his holy will unto us.  Note here, that in almost
@c    every verse of this psalm (which in number are 176) the word and law of
@c    God, and the love and observance of it, is perpetually inculcated,
@c    under a variety of denominations, all signifying the same thing.

@c    118:3. For they that work iniquity, have not walked in his ways.

@c    118:4. Thou hast commanded thy commandments to be kept most diligently.

@c    118:5. O! that my ways may be directed to keep thy justifications.

@c    118:6. Then shall I not be confounded, when I shall look into all thy
@c    commandments.

@c    118:7. I will praise thee with uprightness of heart, when I shall have
@c    learned the judgments of thy justice.

@c    118:8. I will keep thy justifications:  O! do not thou utterly forsake
@c    me.

@c    BETH.

@c    118:9. By what doth a young man correct his way?  by observing thy
@c    words.

@c    118:10. With my whole heart have I sought after thee:  let me not stray
@c    from thy commandments.

@c    118:11. Thy words have I hidden in my heart, that I may not sin against
@c    thee.

@c    118:12. Blessed art thou, O Lord:  teach me thy justifications.

@c    118:13. With my lips I have pronounced all the judgments of thy mouth.

@c    118:14. I have been delighted in the way of thy testimonies, as in all
@c    riches.

@c    118:15. I will meditate on thy commandments:  and I will consider thy
@c    ways.

@c    118:16. I will think of thy justifications:  I will not forget thy
@c    words.

@c    GIMEL.

@c    118:17. Give bountifully to thy servant, enliven me:  and I shall keep
@c    thy words.

@c    118:18. Open thou my eyes:  and I will consider the wondrous things of
@c    thy law.

@c    118:19. I am a sojourner on the earth:  hide not thy commandments from
@c    me.

@c    118:20. My soul hath coveted to long for thy justifications, at all
@c    times.

@c    118:21. Thou hast rebuked the proud:  they are cursed who decline from
@c    thy commandments.

@c    118:22. Remove from me reproach and contempt:  because I have sought
@c    after thy testimonies.

@c    118:23. For princes sat, and spoke against me:  but thy servant was
@c    employed in thy justifications.

@c    118:24. For thy testimonies are my meditation:  and thy justifications
@c    my counsel.

@c    DALETH.

@c    118:25. My soul hath cleaved to the pavement:  quicken thou me according
@c    to thy word.

@c    118:26. I have declared my ways, and thou hast heard me:  teach me thy
@c    justifications.

@c    118:27. Make me to understand the way of thy justifications:  and I
@c    shall be exercised in thy wondrous works.

@c    118:28. My soul hath slumbered through heaviness:  strengthen thou me in
@c    thy words.

@c    118:29. Remove from me the way of iniquity:  and out of thy law have
@c    mercy on me.

@c    118:30. I have chosen the way of truth:  thy judgments I have not
@c    forgotten.

@c    118:31. I have stuck to thy testimonies, O Lord:  put me not to shame.

@c    118:32. I have run the way of thy commandments, when thou didst enlarge
@c    my heart.

@c    HE.

@c    118:33. Set before me for a law the way of thy justifications, O Lord:
@c    and I will always seek after it.

@c    118:34. Give me understanding, and I will search thy law; and I will
@c    keep it with my whole heart.

@c    118:35. Lead me into the path of thy commandments; for this same I have
@c    desired.

@c    118:36. Incline my heart into thy testimonies and not to covetousness.

@c    118:37. Turn away my eyes that they may not behold vanity:  quicken me
@c    in thy way.

@c    118:38. Establish thy word to thy servant, in thy fear.

@c    118:39. Turn away my reproach, which I have apprehended:  for thy
@c    judgments are delightful.

@c    118:40. Behold I have longed after thy precepts:  quicken me in thy
@c    justice.

@c    VAU.

@c    118:41. Let thy mercy also come upon me, O Lord:  thy salvation
@c    according to thy word.

@c    118:42. So shall I answer them that reproach me in any thing; that I
@c    have trusted in thy words.

@c    118:43. And take not thou the word of truth utterly out of my mouth:
@c    for in thy words, I have hoped exceedingly.

@c    118:44. So shall I always keep thy law, for ever and ever.

@c    118:45. And I walked at large:  because I have sought after thy
@c    commandments.

@c    118:46. And I spoke of thy testimonies before kings:  and I was not
@c    ashamed.

@c    118:47. I meditated also on thy commandments, which I loved.

@c    118:48. And I lifted up my hands to thy commandments, which I loved:
@c    and I was exercised in thy justifications.

@c    ZAIN.

@c    118:49. Be thou mindful of thy word to thy servant, in which thou hast
@c    given me hope.

@c    118:50. This hath comforted me in my humiliation:  because thy word hath
@c    enlivened me.

@c    118:51. The proud did iniquitously altogether:  but I declined not from
@c    thy law.

@c    118:52. I remembered, O Lord, thy judgments of old:  and I was
@c    comforted.

@c    118:53. A fainting hath taken hold of me, because of the wicked that
@c    forsake thy law.

@c    118:54. Thy justifications were the subject of my song, in the place of
@c    my pilgrimage.

@c    118:55. In the night I have remembered thy name, O Lord:  and have kept
@c    thy law.

@c    118:56. This happened to me:  because I sought after thy justifications.

@c    HETH.

@c    118:57. O Lord, my portion, I have said, I would keep thy law.

@c    118:58. I entreated thy face with all my heart:  have mercy on me
@c    according to thy word.

@c    118:59. I have thought on my ways:  and turned my feet unto thy
@c    testimonies.

@c    118:60. I am ready, and am not troubled:  that I may keep thy
@c    commandments.

@c    118:61. The cords of the wicked have encompassed me:  but I have not
@c    forgotten thy law.

@c    118:62. I rose at midnight to give praise to thee; for the judgments of
@c    thy justification.

@c    118:63. I am a partaker with all them that fear thee, and that keep thy
@c    commandments.

@c    118:64. The earth, O Lord, is full of thy mercy:  teach me thy
@c    justifications.

@c    TETH.

@c    118:65. Thou hast done well with thy servant, O Lord, according to thy
@c    word.

@c    118:66. Teach me goodness and discipline and knowledge; for I have
@c    believed thy commandments.

@c    118:67. Before I was humbled I offended; therefore have I kept thy
@c    word.

@c    118:68. Thou art good; and in thy goodness teach me thy justifications.

@c    118:69. The iniquity of the proud hath been multiplied over me:  but I
@c    will seek thy commandments with my whole heart.

@c    118:70. Their heart is curdled like milk:  but I have meditated on thy
@c    law.

@c    118:71. It is good for me that thou hast humbled me, that I may learn
@c    thy justifications.

@c    118:72. The law of thy mouth is good to me, above thousands of gold and
@c    silver.

@c    JOD.

@c    118:73. Thy hands have made me and formed me:  give me understanding,
@c    and I will learn thy commandments.

@c    118:74. They that fear thee shall see me, and shall be glad :  because I
@c    have greatly hoped in thy words.

@c    118:75. I know, O Lord, that thy judgments are equity:  and in thy truth
@c    thou hast humbled me.

@c    118:76. O! let thy mercy be for my comfort, according to thy word unto
@c    thy servant.

@c    118:77. Let thy tender mercies come unto me, and I shall live:  for thy
@c    law is my meditation.

@c    118:78. Let the proud be ashamed, because they have done unjustly
@c    towards me:  but I will be employed in thy commandments.

@c    118:79. Let them that fear thee turn to me:  and they that know thy
@c    testimonies.

@c    118:80. Let my heart be undefiled in thy justifications, that I may not
@c    be confounded.

@c    CAPH.

@c    118:81. My soul hath fainted after thy salvation:  and in thy word I
@c    have very much hoped.

@c    118:82. My eyes have failed for thy word, saying:  When wilt thou
@c    comfort me?

@c    118:83. For I am become like a bottle in the frost:  I have not
@c    forgotten thy justifications.

@c    118:84. How many are the days of thy servant:  when wilt thou execute
@c    judgment on them that persecute me?

@c    118:85. The wicked have told me fables:  but not as thy law.

@c    118:86. All thy statutes are truth:  they have persecuted me unjustly,
@c    do thou help me.

@c    118:87. They had almost made an end of me upon earth:  but I have not
@c    forsaken thy commandments.

@c    118:88. Quicken thou me according to thy mercy:  and I shall keep the
@c    testimonies of thy mouth.

@c    LAMED.

@c    118:89. For ever, O Lord, thy word standeth firm in heaven.

@c    118:90. Thy truth unto all generations:  thou hast founded the earth,
@c    and it continueth.

@c    118:91. By thy ordinance the day goeth on:  for all things serve thee.

@c    118:92. Unless thy law had been my meditation, I had then perhaps
@c    perished in my abjection.

@c    118:93. Thy justifications I will never forget:  for by them thou hast
@c    given me life.

@c    118:94. I am thine, save thou me:  for I have sought thy justifications.

@c    118:95. The wicked have waited for me to destroy me:  but I have
@c    understood thy testimonies.

@c    118:96. I have seen an end of all perfection:  thy commandment is
@c    exceeding broad.

@c    MEM.

@c    118:97. O how have I loved thy law, O Lord! it is my meditation all the
@c    day.

@c    118:98. Through thy commandment, thou hast made me wiser than my
@c    enemies:  for it is ever with me.

@c    118:99. I have understood more than all my teachers:  because thy
@c    testimonies are my meditation.

@c    118:100. I have had understanding above ancients:  because I have sought
@c    thy commandments.

@c    118:101. I have restrained my feet from every evil way:  that I may keep
@c    thy words.

@c    118:102. I have not declined from thy judgments, because thou hast set
@c    me a law.

@c    118:103. How sweet are thy words to my palate! more than honey to my
@c    mouth.

@c    118:104. By thy commandments I have had understanding:  therefore have I
@c    hated every way of iniquity.

@c    NUN.

@c    118:105. Thy word is a lamp to my feet, and a light to my paths.

@c    118:106. I have sworn and am determined to keep the judgments of thy
@c    justice.

@c    118:107. I have been humbled, O Lord, exceedingly:  quicken thou me
@c    according to thy word.

@c    118:108. The free offerings of my mouth make acceptable, O Lord:  and
@c    teach me thy judgments.

@c    118:109. My soul is continually in my hands:  and I have not forgotten
@c    thy law.

@c    118:110. Sinners have laid a snare for me:  but I have not erred from
@c    thy precepts.

@c    118:111. I have purchased thy testimonies for an inheritance for ever:
@c    because they are the joy of my heart.

@c    118:112. I have inclined my heart to do thy justifications for ever,
@c    for the reward.

@c    SAMECH.

@c    118:113. I have hated the unjust:  and have loved thy law.

@c    118:114. Thou art my helper and my protector:  and in thy word I have
@c    greatly hoped.

@c    118:115. Depart from me, ye malignant:  and I will search the
@c    commandments of my God.

@c    118:116. Uphold me according to thy word, and I shall live:  and let me
@c    not be confounded in my expectation.

@c    118:117. Help me, and I shall be saved:  and I will meditate always on
@c    thy justifications.

@c    118:118. Thou hast despised all them that fall off from thy judgments;
@c    for their thought is unjust.

@c    118:119. I have accounted all the sinners of the earth prevaricators:
@c    therefore have I loved thy testimonies.

@c    118:120. Pierce thou my flesh with thy fear:  for I am afraid of thy
@c    judgments.

@c    AIN.

@c    118:121. I have done judgment and justice:  give me not up to them that
@c    slander me.

@c    118:122. Uphold thy servant unto good:  let not the proud calumniate me.

@c    118:123. My eyes have fainted after thy salvation:  and for the word of
@c    thy justice.

@c    118:124. Deal with thy servant according to thy mercy:  and teach me thy
@c    justifications.

@c    118:125. I am thy servant:  give me understanding that I may know thy
@c    testimonies.

@c    118:126. It is time, O Lord, to do:  they have dissipated thy law.

@c    118:127. Therefore have I loved thy commandments above gold and the
@c    topaz.

@c    118:128. Therefore was I directed to all thy commandments:  I have hated
@c    all wicked ways.

@c    PHE.

@c    118:129. Thy testimonies are wonderful:  therefore my soul hath sought
@c    them.

@c    118:130. The declaration of thy words giveth light:  and giveth
@c    understanding to little ones.

@c    118:131. I opened my mouth, and panted:  because I longed for thy
@c    commandments.

@c    118:132. Look thou upon me, and have mercy on me according to the
@c    judgment of them that love thy name.

@c    118:133. Direct my steps according to thy word:  and let no iniquity
@c    have dominion over me.

@c    118:134. Redeem me from the calumnies of men:  that I may keep thy
@c    commandments.

@c    118:135. Make thy face to shine upon thy servant:  and teach me thy
@c    justifications.

@c    118:136. My eyes have sent forth springs of water:  because they have
@c    not kept thy law.

@c    SADE.

@c    118:137. Thou art just, O Lord:  and thy judgment is right.

@c    118:138. Thou hast commanded justice thy testimonies:  and thy truth
@c    exceedingly.

@c    118:139. My zeal hath made me pine away:  because my enemies forgot thy
@c    words.

@c    118:140. Thy word is exceedingly refined:  and thy servant hath loved
@c    it.

@c    118:141. I am very young and despised; but I forget not thy
@c    justifications.

@c    118:142. Thy justice is justice for ever:  and thy law is the truth.

@c    118:143. Trouble and anguish have found me:  thy commandments are my
@c    meditation.

@c    118:144. Thy testimonies are justice for ever:  give me understanding,
@c    and I shall live.

@c    COPH.

@c    118:145. I cried with my whole heart, hear me, O Lord:  I will seek thy
@c    justifications.

@c    118:146. I cried unto thee, save me:  that I may keep thy commandments.

@c    118:147. I prevented the dawning of the day, and cried:  because in thy
@c    words I very much hoped.

@c    118:148. My eyes to thee have prevented the morning:  that I might
@c    meditate on thy words.

@c    118:149. Hear thou my voice, O Lord, according to thy mercy:  and
@c    quicken me according to thy judgment.

@c    118:150. They that persecute me have drawn nigh to iniquity; but they
@c    are gone far off from thy law.

@c    118:151. Thou art near, O Lord:  and all thy ways are truth.

@c    118:152. I have known from the beginning concerning thy testimonies:
@c    that thou hast founded them for ever.

@c    RES.

@c    118:153. See my humiliation and deliver me for I have not forgotten thy
@c    law.

@c    118:154. Judge my judgment and redeem me:  quicken thou me for thy
@c    word's sake.

@c    118:155. Salvation is far from sinners; because they have not sought
@c    thy justifications.

@c    118:156. Many, O Lord, are thy mercies:  quicken me according to thy
@c    judgment.

@c    118:157. Many are they that persecute me and afflict me; but I have not
@c    declined from thy testimonies.

@c    118:158. I beheld the transgressors, and pined away; because they kept
@c    not thy word.

@c    118:159. Behold I have loved thy commandments, O Lord; quicken me thou
@c    in thy mercy.

@c    118:160. The beginning of thy words is truth:  all the judgments of thy
@c    justice are for ever.

@c    SIN.

@c    118:161. Princes have persecuted me without cause:  and my heart hath
@c    been in awe of thy words.

@c    118:162. I will rejoice at thy words, as one that hath found great
@c    spoil.

@c    118:163. I have hated and abhorred iniquity; but I have loved thy law.

@c    118:164. Seven times a day I have given praise to thee, for the
@c    judgments of thy justice.

@c    118:165. Much peace have they that love thy law, and to them there is
@c    no stumbling.  block.

@c    118:166. I looked for thy salvation, O Lord:  and I loved thy
@c    commandments.

@c    118:167. My soul hath kept thy testimonies and hath loved them
@c    exceedingly.

@c    118:168. I have kept thy commandments and thy testimonies:  because all
@c    my ways are in thy sight.

@c    TAU.

@c    118:169. Let my supplication, O Lord, come near in thy sight:  give me
@c    understanding according to thy word.

@c    118:170. Let my request come in before thee; deliver thou me according
@c    to thy word.

@c    118:171. My lips shall utter a hymn, when thou shalt teach me thy
@c    justifications.

@c    118:172. My tongue shall pronounce thy word:  because all thy
@c    commandments are justice.

@c    118:173. Let thy hand be with me to save me; for I have chosen thy
@c    precepts.

@c    118:174. I have longed for thy salvation, O Lord; and thy law is my
@c    meditation.

@c    118:175. My soul shall live and shall praise thee:  and thy judgments
@c    shall help me.

@c    118:176. I have gone astray like a sheep that is lost:  seek thy
@c    servant, because I have not forgotten thy commandments.



@c    Psalms Chapter 119


@c    Ad Dominum.

@c    A prayer in tribulation.

@c    A gradual canticle.

@c    A gradual canticle. . .The following psalms, in number fifteen, are
@c    called gradual psalms, or canticles, from the word gradus, signifying
@c    steps, ascensions, or degrees:  either because they were appointed to be
@c    sung on the fifteen steps, by which the people ascended to the temple:
@c    or, that in the singing of them the voice was to be raised by certain
@c    steps or ascensions:  or, that they were to be sung by the people
@c    returning from their captivity and ascending to Jerusalem, which was
@c    seated amongst mountains.  The holy fathers, in a mystical sense,
@c    understand these steps, or ascensions, of the degrees by which
@c    Christians spiritually ascend to virtue and perfection; and to the true
@c    temple of God in the heavenly Jerusalem.

@c    119:1. In my trouble I cried to the Lord:  and he heard me.

@c    119:2. O Lord, deliver my soul from wicked lips, and a deceitful
@c    tongue.

@c    119:3. What shall be given to thee, or what shall be added to thee, to
@c    a deceitful tongue?

@c    119:4. The sharp arrows of the mighty, with coals that lay waste.

@c    119:5. Woe is me, that my sojourning is prolonged!  I have dwelt with
@c    the inhabitants of Cedar:

@c    119:6. My soul hath been long a sojourner.

@c    119:7. With them that hated peace I was peaceable:  when I spoke to them
@c    they fought against me without cause.



@c    Psalms Chapter 120


@c    Levavi oculos.

@c    God is the keeper of his servants.

@c    A gradual canticle.

@c    120:1. I have lifted up my eyes to the mountains, from whence help
@c    shall come to me.

@c    120:2. My help is from the Lord, who made heaven and earth.

@c    120:3. May he not suffer thy foot to be moved:  neither let him slumber
@c    that keepeth thee.

@c    120:4. Behold he shall neither slumber nor sleep, that keepeth Israel.

@c    120:5. The Lord is thy keeper, the Lord is thy protection upon thy
@c    right hand.

@c    120:6. The sun shall not burn thee by day:  nor the moon by night.

@c    120:7. The Lord keepeth thee from all evil:  may the Lord keep thy soul.

@c    120:8. May the Lord keep thy coming in and thy going out; from
@c    henceforth now and for ever.



@c    Psalms Chapter 121


@c    Laetatus sum in his.

@c    The desire and hope of the just for the coming of the kingdom of God,
@c    and the peace of his church.

@c    121:1. A gradual canticle.

@c    I rejoiced at the things that were said to me:  We shall go into the
@c    house of the Lord.

@c    121:2. Our feet were standing in thy courts, O Jerusalem.

@c    121:3. Jerusalem, which is built as a city, which is compact together.

@c    121:4. For thither did the tribes go up, the tribes of the Lord:  the
@c    testimony of Israel, to praise the name of the Lord.

@c    121:5. Because their seats have sat in judgment, seats upon the house
@c    of David.

@c    121:6. Pray ye for the things that are for the peace of Jerusalem:  and
@c    abundance for them that love thee.

@c    121:7. Let peace be in thy strength:  and abundance in thy towers.

@c    121:8. For the sake of my brethren, and of my neighbours, I spoke peace
@c    of thee.

@c    121:9. Because of the house of the Lord our God, I have sought good
@c    things for thee.



@c    Psalms Chapter 122


@c    Ad te levavi.

@c    A prayer in affliction, with confidence in God.

@c    A gradual canticle.

@c    122:1. To thee have I lifted up my eyes, who dwellest in heaven.

@c    122:2. Behold as the eyes of servants are on the hands of their
@c    masters, As the eyes of the handmaid are on the hands of her mistress:
@c    so are our eyes unto the Lord our God, until he have mercy on us.

@c    122:3. Have mercy on us, O Lord, have mercy on us:  for we are greatly
@c    filled with contempt.

@c    122:4. For our soul is greatly filled:  we are a reproach to the rich,
@c    and contempt to the proud.



@c    Psalms Chapter 123


@c    Nisi quia Domini.

@c    The church giveth glory to God for her deliverance, from the hands of
@c    her enemies.

@c    123:1. A gradual canticle.  If it had not been that the Lord was with
@c    us, let Israel now say:

@c    123:2. If it had not been that the Lord was with us, When men rose up
@c    against us,

@c    123:3. Perhaps they had swallowed us up alive.  When their fury was
@c    enkindled against us,

@c    123:4. Perhaps the waters had swallowed us up.

@c    123:5. Our soul hath passed through a torrent:  perhaps our soul had
@c    passed through a water insupportable.

@c    123:6. Blessed be the Lord, who hath not given us to be a prey to their
@c    teeth.

@c    123:7. Our soul hath been delivered as a sparrow out of the snare of
@c    the fowlers.  The snare is broken, and we are delivered.

@c    123:8. Our help is in the name of the Lord, who made heaven and earth.



@c    Psalms Chapter 124


@c    Qui confidunt.

@c    The just are always under God's protection.

@c    124:1. A gradual canticle.  They that trust in the Lord shall be as
@c    mount Sion:  he shall not be moved for ever that dwelleth

@c    124:2. In Jerusalem.  Mountains are round about it:  so the Lord is round
@c    about his people from henceforth now and for ever.

@c    124:3. For the Lord will not leave the rod of sinners upon the lot of
@c    the just:  that the just may not stretch forth their hands to iniquity.

@c    124:4. Do good, O Lord, to those that are good, and to the upright of
@c    heart.

@c    124:5. But such as turn aside into bonds, the Lord shall lead out with
@c    the workers of iniquity:  peace upon Israel.



@c    Psalms Chapter 125


@c    In convertendo.

@c    The people of God rejoice at their delivery from captivity.

@c    125:1. A gradual canticle.  When the Lord brought back the captivity of
@c    Sion, we became like men comforted.

@c    125:2. Then was our mouth filled with gladness; and our tongue with
@c    joy.  Then shall they say among the Gentiles:  The Lord hath done great
@c    things for them.

@c    125:3. The Lord hath done great things for us:  we are become joyful.

@c    125:4. Turn again our captivity, O Lord, as a stream in the south.

@c    125:5. They that sow in tears shall reap in joy.

@c    125:6. Going they went and wept, casting their seeds.

@c    125:7. But coming they shall come with joyfulness, carrying their
@c    sheaves.



@c    Psalms Chapter 126


@c    Nisi Dominus.

@c    Nothing can be done without God's grace and blessing.

@c    126:1. A gradual canticle of Solomon.  Unless the Lord build the house,
@c    they labour in vain that build it.  Unless the Lord keep the city, he
@c    watcheth in vain that keepeth it.

@c    126:2. It is vain for you to rise before light, rise ye after you have
@c    sitten, you that eat the bread of sorrow.  When he shall give sleep to
@c    his beloved,

@c    It is vain for you to rise before light. . .That is, your early rising,
@c    your labour and worldly solicitude, will be vain, that is, will avail
@c    you nothing, without the light, grace, and blessing of God.

@c    126:3. Behold the inheritance of the Lord are children:  the reward, the
@c    fruit of the womb.

@c    126:4. As arrows in the hand of the mighty, so the children of them
@c    that have been shaken.

@c    126:5. Blessed is the man that hath filled the desire with them; he
@c    shall not be confounded when he shall speak to his enemies in the gate.



@c    Psalms Chapter 127


@c    Beati omnes.

@c    The fear of God is the way to happiness.

@c    127:1. A gradual canticle.  Blessed are all they that fear the Lord:
@c    that walk in his ways.

@c    127:2. For thou shalt eat the labours of thy hands:  blessed art thou,
@c    and it shall be well with thee.

@c    127:3. Thy wife as a fruitful vine, on the sides of thy house.  Thy
@c    children as olive plants, round about thy table.

@c    127:4. Behold, thus shall the man be blessed that feareth the Lord.

@c    127:5. May the Lord bless thee out of Sion:  and mayst thou see the good
@c    things of Jerusalem all the days of thy life.

@c    127:6. And mayst thou see thy children's children, peace upon Israel.



@c    Psalms Chapter 128


@c    Saepe expugnaverunt.

@c    The church of God is invincible :  her persecutors come to nothing.

@c    128:1. A gradual canticle.  Often have they fought against me from my
@c    youth, let Israel now say.

@c    128:2. Often have they fought against me from my youth:  but they could
@c    not prevail over me.

@c    128:3. The wicked have wrought upon my back:  they have lengthened their
@c    iniquity.

@c    128:4. The Lord who is just will cut the necks of sinners:

@c    128:5. Let them all be confounded and turned back that hate Sion.

@c    128:6. Let them be as grass upon the tops of houses:  which withereth
@c    before it be plucked up:

@c    128:7. Who with the mower filleth not his hand:  nor he that gathereth
@c    sheaves his bosom.

@c    128:8. And they that passed by have not said:  The blessing of the Lord
@c    be upon you:  we have blessed you in the name of the Lord.



@c    Psalms Chapter 129


@c    De profundis.

@c    A prayer of a sinner, trusting in the mercies of God.  The sixth
@c    penitential psalm.

@c    129:1. A gradual canticle.  Out of the depths I have cried to thee, O
@c    Lord:

@c    129:2. Lord, hear my voice.  Let thy ears be attentive to the voice of
@c    my supplication.

@c    129:3. If thou, O Lord, wilt mark iniquities:  Lord, who shall stand it.

@c    129:4. For with thee there is merciful forgiveness:  and by reason of
@c    thy law, I have waited for thee, O Lord.  My soul hath relied on his
@c    word:

@c    129:5. my soul hath hoped in the Lord.

@c    129:6. From the morning watch even until night, let Israel hope in the
@c    Lord.

@c    129:7. Because with the Lord there is mercy:  and with him plentiful
@c    redemption.

@c    129:8. And he shall redeem Israel from all his iniquities.



@c    Psalms Chapter 130


@c    Domine, none est.

@c    The prophet's humility.

@c    130:1. A gradual canticle of David.  Lord, my heart is not exalted:  nor
@c    are my eyes lofty.  Neither have I walked in great matters, nor in
@c    wonderful things above me.

@c    130:2. If I was not humbly minded, but exalted my soul:  As a child that
@c    is weaned is towards his mother, so reward in my soul.

@c    130:3. Let Israel hope in the Lord, from henceforth now and for ever.



@c    Psalms Chapter 131


@c    Memento, Domine.

@c    A prayer for the fulfilling of the promise made to David.

@c    131:1. A gradual canticle.  O Lord, remember David, and all his
@c    meekness.

@c    131:2. How he swore to the Lord, he vowed a vow to the God of Jacob:

@c    131:3. If I shall enter into the tabernacle of my house:  if I shall go
@c    up into the bed wherein I lie:

@c    131:4. If I shall give sleep to my eyes, or slumber to my eyelids,

@c    131:5. Or rest to my temples:  until I find out a place for the Lord, a
@c    tabernacle for the God of Jacob.

@c    131:6. Behold we have heard of it in Ephrata:  we have found it in the
@c    fields of the wood.

@c    We have heard of it in Ephrata. . .When I was young, and lived in
@c    Bethlehem, otherwise called Ephrata, I heard of God's tabernacle and
@c    ark, and had a devout desire of seeking it; and accordingly I found it
@c    at Cariathiarim, the city of the woods:  where it was till it was
@c    removed to Jerusalem.  See 1 Par. 13.

@c    131:7. We will go into his tabernacle:  we will adore in the place where
@c    his feet stood.

@c    131:8. Arise, O Lord, into thy resting place:  thou and the ark, which
@c    thou hast sanctified.

@c    131:9. Let thy priests be clothed with justice:  and let thy saints
@c    rejoice.

@c    131:10. For thy servant David's sake, turn not away the face of thy
@c    anointed.

@c    131:11. The Lord hath sworn truth to David, and he will not make it
@c    void:  of the fruit of thy womb I will set upon thy throne.

@c    131:12. If thy children will keep my covenant, and these my testimonies
@c    which I shall teach them:  Their children also for evermore shall sit
@c    upon thy throne.

@c    131:13. For the Lord hath chosen Sion:  he hath chosen it for his
@c    dwelling.

@c    131:14. This is my rest for ever and ever:  here will I dwell, for I
@c    have chosen it.

@c    131:15. Blessing I will bless her widow:  I will satisfy her poor with
@c    bread.

@c    131:16. I will clothe her priests with salvation, and her saints shall
@c    rejoice with exceeding great joy.

@c    131:17. There will I bring forth a horn to David:  I have prepared a
@c    lamp for my anointed.

@c    131:18. His enemies I will clothe with confusion:  but upon him shall my
@c    sanctification flourish.



@c    Psalms Chapter 132


@c    Ecce quam bonum.

@c    The happiness of brotherly love and concord.

@c    132:1. A gradual canticle of David.  Behold how good and how pleasant it
@c    is for brethren to dwell together in unity:

@c    132:2. Like the precious ointment on the head, that ran down upon the
@c    beard, the beard of Aaron, Which ran down to the skirt of his garment:

@c    132:3. As the dew of Hermon, which descendeth upon mount Sion.  For
@c    there the Lord hath commanded blessing, and life for evermore.



@c    Psalms Chapter 133


@c    Ecce nunc benedicite.

@c    An exhortation to praise God continually.

@c    133:1. A gradual canticle.  Behold now bless ye the Lord, all ye
@c    servants of the Lord:  Who stand in the house of the Lord, in the courts
@c    of the house of our God.

@c    133:2. In the nights lift up your hands to the holy places, and bless
@c    ye the Lord.

@c    133:3. May the Lord out of Sion bless thee, he that made heaven and
@c    earth.



@c    Psalms Chapter 134


@c    Laudate nomen.

@c    An exhortation to praise God:  the vanity of idols.

@c    134:1. Alleluia.  Praise ye the name of the Lord:  O you his servants,
@c    praise the Lord:

@c    134:2. You that stand in the house of the Lord, in the courts of the
@c    house of our God.

@c    134:3. Praise ye the Lord, for the Lord is good:  sing ye to his name,
@c    for it is sweet.

@c    134:4. For the Lord hath chosen Jacob unto himself:  Israel for his own
@c    possession.

@c    134:5. For I have known that the Lord is great, and our God is above
@c    all gods.

@c    134:6. Whatsoever the Lord pleased he hath done, in heaven, in earth,
@c    in the sea, and in all the deeps.

@c    134:7. He bringeth up clouds from the end of the earth:  he hath made
@c    lightnings for the rain.  He bringeth forth winds out of his stores:

@c    134:8. He slew the firstborn of Egypt from man even unto beast.

@c    134:9. He sent forth signs and wonders in the midst of thee, O Egypt:
@c    upon Pharao, and upon all his servants.

@c    134:10. He smote many nations, and slew mighty kings:

@c    134:11. Sehon king of the Amorrhites, and Og king of Basan, and all the
@c    kingdoms of Chanaan.

@c    134:12. And gave their land for an inheritance, for an inheritance to
@c    his people Israel.

@c    134:13. Thy name, O Lord, is for ever:  thy memorial, O Lord, unto all
@c    generations.

@c    134:14. For the Lord will judge his people, and will be entreated in
@c    favour of his servants.

@c    134:15. The idols of the Gentiles are silver and gold, the works of
@c    men's hands.

@c    134:16. They have a mouth, but they speak not:  they have eyes, but they
@c    see not.

@c    134:17. They have ears, but they hear not:  neither is there any breath
@c    in their mouths.

@c    134:18. Let them that make them be like to them:  and every one that
@c    trusteth in them.

@c    134:19. Bless the Lord, O house of Israel:  bless the Lord, O house of
@c    Aaron.

@c    134:20. Bless the Lord, O house of Levi:  you that fear the Lord, bless
@c    the Lord.

@c    134:21. Blessed be the Lord out of Sion, who dwelleth in Jerusalem.



@c    Psalms Chapter 135


@c    Confitemini Domino.

@c    God is to be praised for his wonderful works.

@c    135:1. Alleluia.  Praise the Lord, for he is good:  for his mercy
@c    endureth for ever.

@c    Praise the Lord. . .By this invitation to praise the Lord, thrice
@c    repeated, we profess the Blessed Trinity, One God in three distinct
@c    Persons, the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Ghost.

@c    135:2. Praise ye the God of gods:  for his mercy endureth for ever.

@c    135:3. Praise ye the Lord of lords:  for his mercy endureth for ever.

@c    135:4. Who alone doth great wonders:  for his mercy endureth for ever.

@c    135:5. Who made the heavens in understanding:  for his mercy endureth
@c    for ever.

@c    135:6. Who established the earth above the waters:  for his mercy
@c    endureth for ever.

@c    135:7. Who made the great lights:  for his mercy endureth for ever.

@c    135:8. The sun to rule the day:  for his mercy endureth for ever.

@c    135:9. The moon and the stars to rule the night:  for his mercy endureth
@c    for ever.

@c    135:10. Who smote Egypt with their firstborn:  for his mercy endureth
@c    for ever.

@c    135:11. Who brought out Israel from among them:  for his mercy endureth
@c    for ever.

@c    135:12. With a mighty hand and with a stretched out arm:  for his mercy
@c    endureth for ever.

@c    135:13. Who divided the Red Sea into parts:  for his mercy endureth for
@c    ever.

@c    135:14. And brought out Israel through the midst thereof:  for his mercy
@c    endureth for ever.

@c    135:15. And overthrew Pharao and his host in the Red Sea:  for his mercy
@c    endureth for ever.

@c    135:16. Who led his people through the desert:  for his mercy endureth
@c    for ever.

@c    135:17. Who smote great kings:  for his mercy endureth for ever.

@c    135:18. And slew strong kings:  for his mercy endureth for ever.

@c    135:19. Sehon king of the Amorrhites:  for his mercy endureth for ever.

@c    135:20. And Og king of Basan:  for his mercy endureth for ever.

@c    135:21. And he gave their land for an inheritance:  for his mercy
@c    endureth for ever.

@c    135:22. For an inheritance to his servant Israel:  for his mercy
@c    endureth for ever.

@c    135:23. For he was mindful of us in our affliction:  for his mercy
@c    endureth for ever.

@c    135:24. And he redeemed us from our enemies:  for his mercy endureth for
@c    ever.

@c    135:25. Who giveth food to all flesh:  for his mercy endureth for ever.

@c    135:26. Give glory to the God of heaven:  for his mercy endureth for
@c    ever.

@c    135:27. Give glory to the Lord of lords:  for his mercy endureth for
@c    ever.



@c    Psalms Chapter 136


@c    Super flumina.

@c    The lamentation of the people of God in their captivity in Babylon.

@c    A psalm of David, for Jeremias.

@c    For Jeremias. . .For the time of Jeremias, and the captivity of Babylon.

@c    136:1. Upon the rivers of Babylon, there we sat and wept:  when we
@c    remembered Sion:

@c    136:2. On the willows in the midst thereof we hung up our instruments.

@c    136:3. For there they that led us into captivity required of us the
@c    words of songs.  And they that carried us away, said:  Sing ye to us a
@c    hymn of the songs of Sion.

@c    136:4. How shall we sing the song of the Lord in a strange land?

@c    136:5. If I forget thee, O Jerusalem, let my right hand be forgotten.

@c    136:6. Let my tongue cleave to my jaws, if I do not remember thee:  If I
@c    make not Jerusalem the beginning of my joy.

@c    136:7. Remember, O Lord, the children of Edom, in the day of Jerusalem:
@c    Who say:  Rase it, rase it, even to the foundation thereof.

@c    136:8. O daughter of Babylon, miserable:  blessed shall he be who shall
@c    repay thee thy payment which thou hast paid us.

@c    136:9. Blessed be he that shall take and dash thy little ones against
@c    the rock.

@c    Dash thy little ones, etc. . .In the spiritual sense, we dash the little
@c    ones of Babylon against the rock, when we mortify our passions, and
@c    stifle the first motions of them, by a speedy recourse to the rock
@c    which is Christ.



@c    Psalms Chapter 137


@c    Confitebor tibi.

@c    Thanksgiving to God for his benefits.

@c    137:1. For David himself.  I will praise thee, O Lord, with my whole
@c    heart:  for thou hast heard the words of my mouth.  I will sing praise to
@c    thee in the sight of the angels:

@c    137:2. I will worship towards thy holy temple, and I will give glory to
@c    thy name.  For thy mercy, and for thy truth:  for thou hast magnified thy
@c    holy name above all.

@c    137:3. In what day soever I shall call upon thee, hear me:  thou shalt
@c    multiply strength in my soul.

@c    137:4. May all the kings of the earth give glory to thee:  for they have
@c    heard all the words of thy mouth.

@c    137:5. And let them sing in the ways of the Lord:  for great is the
@c    glory of the Lord.

@c    137:6. For the Lord is high, and looketh on the low:  and the high he
@c    knoweth afar off.

@c    137:7. If I shall walk in the midst of tribulation, thou wilt quicken
@c    me:  and thou hast stretched forth thy hand against the wrath of my
@c    enemies:  and thy right hand hath saved me.

@c    137:8. The Lord will repay for me:  thy mercy, O Lord, endureth for
@c    ever:  O despise not the works of thy hands.



@c    Psalms Chapter 138


@c    Domine, probasti.

@c    God's special providence over his servants.

@c    138:1. Unto the end, a psalm of David.  Lord, thou hast proved me, and
@c    known me:

@c    138:2. Thou hast known my sitting down, and my rising up.

@c    138:3. Thou hast understood my thoughts afar off:  my path and my line
@c    thou hast searched out.

@c    138:4. And thou hast foreseen all my ways:  for there is no speech in my
@c    tongue.

@c    There is no speech, etc. . .Viz., unknown to thee:  or when there is no
@c    speech in my tongue; yet my whole interior and my most secret thoughts
@c    are known to thee.

@c    138:5. Behold, O Lord, thou hast known all things, the last and those
@c    of old:  thou hast formed me, and hast laid thy hand upon me.

@c    138:6. Thy knowledge is become wonderful to me:  it is high, and I
@c    cannot reach to it.

@c    138:7. Whither shall I go from thy spirit?  or whither shall I flee from
@c    thy face?

@c    138:8. If I ascend into heaven, thou art there:  if I descend into hell,
@c    thou art present.

@c    138:9. If I take my wings early in the morning, and dwell in the
@c    uttermost parts of the sea:

@c    138:10. Even there also shall thy hand lead me:  and thy right hand
@c    shall hold me.

@c    138:11. And I said:  Perhaps darkness shall cover me:  and night shall be
@c    my light in my pleasures.

@c    138:12. But darkness shall not be dark to thee, and night shall be
@c    light all the day:  the darkness thereof, and the light thereof are
@c    alike to thee.

@c    138:13. For thou hast possessed my reins:  thou hast protected me from
@c    my mother's womb.

@c    138:14. I will praise thee, for thou art fearfully magnified:  wonderful
@c    are thy works, and my soul knoweth right well.

@c    138:15. My bone is not hidden from thee, which thou hast made in
@c    secret:  and my substance in the lower parts of the earth.

@c    138:16. Thy eyes did see my imperfect being, and in thy book all shall
@c    be written:  days shall be formed, and no one in them.

@c    138:17. But to me thy friends, O God, are made exceedingly honourable:
@c    their principality is exceedingly strengthened.

@c    138:18. I will number them, and they shall be multiplied above the
@c    sand, I rose up and am still with thee.

@c    138:19. If thou wilt kill the wicked, O God:  ye men of blood, depart
@c    from me:

@c    138:20. Because you say in thought:  They shall receive thy cities in
@c    vain.

@c    Because you say in thought, etc. . .Depart from me, you wicked, who plot
@c    against the servants of God, and think to cast them out of the cities
@c    of their habitation; as if they have received them in vain, and to no
@c    purpose.

@c    138:21. Have I not hated them, O Lord, that hated thee:  and pined away
@c    because of thy enemies?

@c    138:22. I have hated them with a perfect hatred:  and they are become
@c    enemies to me.

@c    I have hated them. . .Not with an hatred of malice, but a zeal for the
@c    observance of God's commandments; which he saw were despised by the
@c    wicked, who are to be considered enemies to God.

@c    138:23. Prove me, O God, and know my heart:  examine me, and know my
@c    paths.

@c    138:24. And see if there be in me the way of iniquity:  and lead me in
@c    the eternal way.



@c    Psalms Chapter 139


@c    Eripe me, Domine.

@c    A prayer to be delivered from the wicked.

@c    139:1. Unto the end, a psalm of David.

@c    139:2. Deliver me, O Lord, from the evil man:  rescue me from the unjust
@c    man.

@c    139:3. Who have devised iniquities in their hearts:  all the day long
@c    they designed battles.

@c    139:4. They have sharpened their tongues like a serpent:  the venom of
@c    asps is under their lips.

@c    139:5. Keep me, O Lord, from the hand of the wicked:  and from unjust
@c    men deliver me.  Who have proposed to supplant my steps:

@c    139:6. The proud have hidden a net for me.  And they have stretched out
@c    cords for a snare:  they have laid for me a stumblingblock by the
@c    wayside.

@c    139:7. I said to the Lord:  Thou art my God:  hear, O Lord, the voice of
@c    my supplication.

@c    139:8. O Lord, Lord, the strength of my salvation:  thou hast
@c    overshadowed my head in the day of battle.

@c    139:9. Give me not up, O Lord, from my desire to the wicked:  they have
@c    plotted against me; do not thou forsake me, lest they should triumph.

@c    139:10. The head of them compassing me about:  the labour of their lips
@c    shall overwhelm them.

@c    139:11. Burning coals shall fall upon them; thou wilt cast them down
@c    into the fire:  in miseries they shall not be able to stand.

@c    139:12. A man full of tongue shall not be established in the earth:
@c    evil shall catch the unjust man unto destruction.

@c    139:13. I know that the Lord will do justice to the needy, and will
@c    revenge the poor.

@c    139:14. But as for the just, they shall give glory to thy name:  and the
@c    upright shall dwell with thy countenance.



@c    Psalms Chapter 140


@c    Domine, clamavi.

@c    A prayer against sinful words, and deceitful flatterers.

@c    A psalm of David.

@c    140:1. I have cried to thee, O Lord, hear me:  hearken to my voice, when
@c    I cry to thee.

@c    140:2. Let my prayer be directed as incense in thy sight; the lifting
@c    up of my hands, as evening sacrifice.

@c    140:3. Set a watch, O Lord, before my mouth:  and a door round about my
@c    lips.

@c    140:4. Incline not my heart to evil words; to make excuses in sins.
@c    With men that work iniquity:  and I will not communicate with the
@c    choicest of them.

@c    140:5. The just man shall correct me in mercy, and shall reprove me:
@c    but let not the oil of the sinner fatten my head.  For my prayer shall
@c    still be against the things with which they are well pleased:

@c    Let not the oil of the sinner, etc. . .That is, the flattery, or
@c    deceitful praise.--Ibid.  For my prayer, etc. . .So far from coveting
@c    their praises, who are never well pleased but with things that are
@c    evil; I shall continually pray to be preserved from such things as they
@c    are delighted with.

@c    140:6. Their judges falling upon the rock have been swallowed up.  They
@c    shall hear my words, for they have prevailed:

@c    Their judges, etc. . .Their rulers, or chiefs, quickly vanish and
@c    perish, like ships dashed against the rocks, and swallowed up by the
@c    waves.  Let them then hear my words, for they are powerful and will
@c    prevail; or, as it is in the Hebrew, for they are sweet.

@c    140:7. As when the thickness of the earth is broken up upon the ground:
@c    Our bones are scattered by the side of hell.

@c    140:8. But to thee, O Lord, Lord, are my eyes:  in thee have I put my
@c    trust, take not away my soul.

@c    140:9. Keep me from the snare, which they have laid for me, and from
@c    the stumblingblocks of them that work iniquity.

@c    140:10. The wicked shall fall in his net:  I am alone until I pass.

@c    I am alone, etc. . .Singularly protected by the Almighty, until I pass
@c    all their nets and snares.



@c    Psalms Chapter 141


@c    Voce mea.

@c    A prayer of David in extremity of danger.

@c    141:1. Of understanding for David, A prayer when he was in the cave.  [1
@c    Kings 24.]

@c    141:2. I cried to the Lord with my voice:  with my voice I made
@c    supplication to the Lord.

@c    141:3. In his sight I pour out my prayer, and before him I declare my
@c    trouble:

@c    141:4. When my spirit failed me, then thou knewest my paths.  In this
@c    way wherein I walked, they have hidden a snare for me.

@c    141:5. I looked on my right hand, and beheld, and there was no one that
@c    would know me.  Flight hath failed me:  and there is no one that hath
@c    regard to my soul.

@c    141:6. I cried to thee, O Lord:  I said:  Thou art my hope, my portion in
@c    the land of the living.

@c    141:7. Attend to my supplication:  for I am brought very low.  Deliver me
@c    from my persecutors; for they are stronger than I.

@c    141:8. Bring my soul out of prison, that I may praise thy name:  the
@c    just wait for me, until thou reward me.



@c    Psalms Chapter 142


@c    Domine, exaudi.

@c    The psalmist in tribulation calleth upon God for his delivery.  The
@c    seventh penitential psalm.

@c    142:1. A psalm of David, when his son Absalom pursued him.  [2 Kings 17.]
@c    Hear, O Lord, my prayer:  give ear to my supplication in thy truth:
@c    hear me in thy justice.

@c    142:2. And enter not into judgment with thy servant:  for in thy sight
@c    no man living shall be justified.

@c    142:3. For the enemy hath persecuted my soul:  he hath brought down my
@c    life to the earth.  He hath made me to dwell in darkness as those that
@c    have been dead of old:

@c    142:4. And my spirit is in anguish within me:  my heart within me is
@c    troubled.

@c    142:5. I remembered the days of old, I meditated on all thy works:  I
@c    meditated upon the works of thy hands.

@c    142:6. I stretched forth my hands to thee:  my soul is as earth without
@c    water unto thee.

@c    142:7. Hear me speedily, O Lord:  my spirit hath fainted away.  Turn not
@c    away thy face from me, lest I be like unto them that go down into the
@c    pit.

@c    142:8. Cause me to hear thy mercy in the morning; for in thee have I
@c    hoped.  Make the way known to me, wherein I should walk:  for I have
@c    lifted up my soul to thee.

@c    142:9. Deliver me from my enemies, O Lord, to thee have I fled:

@c    142:10. Teach me to do thy will, for thou art my God.  Thy good spirit
@c    shall lead me into the right land:

@c    142:11. for thy name's sake, O Lord, thou wilt quicken me in thy justice.
@c    Thou wilt bring my soul out of trouble:

@c    142:12. And in thy mercy thou wilt destroy my enemies.  And thou wilt
@c    cut off all them that afflict my soul:  for I am thy servant.



@c    Psalms Chapter 143


@c    Benedictus Dominus.

@c    The prophet praiseth God, and prayeth to be delivered from his enemies.
@c    No worldly happiness is to be compared with that of serving God.

@c    A psalm of David against Goliath.

@c    143:1. Blessed be the Lord my God, who teacheth my hands to fight, and
@c    my fingers to war.

@c    143:2. My mercy, and my refuge:  my support, and my deliverer:  My
@c    protector, and I have hoped in him:  who subdueth my people under me.

@c    143:3. Lord, what is man, that thou art made known to him?  or the son
@c    of man, that thou makest account of him?

@c    143:4. Man is like to vanity:  his days pass away like a shadow.

@c    143:5. Lord, bow down thy heavens and descend:  touch the mountains, and
@c    they shall smoke.

@c    143:6. Send forth lightning, and thou shalt scatter them:  shoot out thy
@c    arrows, and thou shalt trouble them.

@c    143:7. Put forth thy hand from on high, take me out, and deliver me
@c    from many waters:  from the hand of strange children:

@c    143:8. Whose mouth hath spoken vanity:  and their right hand is the
@c    right hand of iniquity.

@c    143:9. To thee, O God, I will sing a new canticle:  on the psaltery and
@c    an instrument of ten strings I will sing praises to thee.

@c    143:10. Who givest salvation to kings:  who hast redeemed thy servant
@c    David from the malicious sword:

@c    143:11. Deliver me, And rescue me out of the hand of strange children;
@c    whose mouth hath spoken vanity:  and their right hand is the right hand
@c    of iniquity:

@c    143:12. Whose sons are as new plants in their youth:  Their daughters
@c    decked out, adorned round about after the similitude of a temple:

@c    143:13. Their storehouses full, flowing out of this into that.  Their
@c    sheep fruitful in young, abounding in their goings forth:

@c    143:14. Their oxen fat.  There is no breach of wall, nor passage, nor
@c    crying out in their streets.

@c    143:15. They have called the people happy, that hath these things:  but
@c    happy is that people whose God is the Lord.



@c    Psalms Chapter 144


@c    Exaltabo te, Deus.

@c    A psalm of praise, to the infinite majesty of God.

@c    144:1. Praise, for David himself.  I will extol thee, O God my king:  and
@c    I will bless thy name for ever; yea, for ever and ever.

@c    144:2. Every day will I bless thee:  and I will praise thy name for
@c    ever; yea, for ever and ever.

@c    144:3. Great is the Lord, and greatly to be praised:  and of his
@c    greatness there is no end.

@c    144:4. Generation and generation shall praise thy works:  and they shall
@c    declare thy power.

@c    144:5. They shall speak of the magnificence of the glory of thy
@c    holiness:  and shall tell thy wondrous works.

@c    144:6. And they shall speak of the might of thy terrible acts:  and
@c    shall declare thy greatness.

@c    144:7. They shall publish the memory of the abundance of thy sweetness:
@c    and shall rejoice in thy justice.

@c    144:8. The Lord is gracious and merciful:  patient and plenteous in
@c    mercy.

@c    144:9. The Lord is sweet to all:  and his tender mercies are over all
@c    his works.

@c    144:10. Let all thy works, O lord, praise thee:  and let thy saints
@c    bless thee.

@c    144:11. They shall speak of the glory of thy kingdom:  and shall tell of
@c    thy power:

@c    144:12. To make thy might known to the sons of men:  and the glory of
@c    the magnificence of thy kingdom.

@c    144:13. Thy kingdom is a kingdom of all ages:  and thy dominion endureth
@c    throughout all generations.  The Lord is faithful in all his words:  and
@c    holy in all his works.

@c    144:14. The Lord lifteth up all that fall:  and setteth up all that are
@c    cast down.

@c    144:15. The eyes of all hope in thee, O Lord:  and thou givest them meat
@c    in due season.

@c    144:16. Thou openest thy hand, and fillest with blessing every living
@c    creature.

@c    144:17. The Lord is just in all his ways:  and holy in all his works.

@c    144:18. The Lord is nigh unto all them that call upon him:  to all that
@c    call upon him in truth.

@c    144:19. He will do the will of them that fear him:  and he will hear
@c    their prayer, and save them.

@c    144:20. The Lord keepeth all them that love him; but all the wicked he
@c    will destroy.

@c    144:21. My mouth shall speak the praise of the Lord:  and let all flesh
@c    bless his holy name forever; yea, for ever and ever.



@c    Psalms Chapter 145


@c    Lauda, anima.

@c    We are not to trust in men, but in God alone.

@c    145:1. Alleluia, of Aggeus and Zacharias.

@c    145:2. Praise the Lord, O my soul, in my life I will praise the Lord:  I
@c    will sing to my God as long as I shall be.  Put not your trust in
@c    princes:

@c    145:3. In the children of men, in whom there is no salvation.

@c    145:4. His spirit shall go forth, and he shall return into his earth:
@c    in that day all their thoughts shall perish.

@c    145:5. Blessed is he who hath the God of Jacob for his helper, whose
@c    hope is in the Lord his God:

@c    145:6. Who made heaven and earth, the sea, and all things that are in
@c    them.

@c    145:7. Who keepeth truth for ever:  who executeth judgment for them that
@c    suffer wrong:  who giveth food to the hungry.  The Lord looseth them that
@c    are fettered:

@c    145:8. The Lord enlighteneth the blind.  The Lord lifteth up them that
@c    are cast down:  the Lord loveth the just.

@c    145:9. The Lord keepeth the strangers, he will support the fatherless
@c    and the widow:  and the ways of sinners he will destroy.

@c    145:10. The Lord shall reign for ever:  thy God, O Sion, unto generation
@c    and generation.



@c    Psalms Chapter 146


@c    Laudate Dominum.

@c    An exhortation to praise God for his benefits.

@c    146:1. Alleluia.  Praise ye the Lord, because psalm is good:  to our God
@c    be joyful and comely praise.

@c    146:2. The Lord buildeth up Jerusalem:  he will gather together the
@c    dispersed of Israel.

@c    146:3. Who healeth the broken of heart, and bindeth up their bruises.

@c    146:4. Who telleth the number of the stars:  and calleth them all by
@c    their names.

@c    146:5. Great is our Lord, and great is his power:  and of his wisdom
@c    there is no number.

@c    146:6. The Lord lifteth up the meek, and bringeth the wicked down even
@c    to the ground.

@c    146:7. Sing ye to the Lord with praise:  sing to our God upon the harp.

@c    146:8. Who covereth the heaven with clouds, and prepareth rain for the
@c    earth.  Who maketh grass to grow on the mountains, and herbs for the
@c    service of men.

@c    146:9. Who giveth to beasts their food:  and to the young ravens that
@c    call upon him.

@c    146:10. He shall not delight in the strength of the horse:  nor take
@c    pleasure in the legs of a man.

@c    146:11. The Lord taketh pleasure in them that fear him:  and in them
@c    that hope in his mercy.



@c    Psalms Chapter 147


@c    Lauda, Jerusalem.

@c    The church is called upon to praise God for his peculiar graces and
@c    favours to his people.  In the Hebrew, this psalm is joined to the
@c    foregoing.

@c    Alleluia.

@c    147:12. Praise the Lord, O Jerusalem:  praise thy God, O Sion.

@c    147:13. Because he hath strengthened the bolts of thy gates, he hath
@c    blessed thy children within thee.

@c    147:14. Who hath placed peace in thy borders:  and filleth thee with the
@c    fat of corn.

@c    147:15. Who sendeth forth his speech to the earth:  his word runneth
@c    swiftly.

@c    147:16. Who giveth snow like wool:  scattereth mists like ashes.

@c    147:17. He sendeth his crystal like morsels:  who shall stand before the
@c    face of his cold?

@c    He sendeth his crystal. . .That is, his ice.  Some understand it of hail,
@c    which is, as it were, ice, divided into particles or morsels.

@c    147:18. He shall send out his word, and shall melt them:  his wind shall
@c    blow, and the waters shall run.

@c    147:19. Who declareth his word to Jacob:  his justices and his judgments
@c    to Israel.

@c    147:20. He hath not done in like manner to every nation:  and his
@c    judgments he hath not made manifest to them.  Alleluia.



@c    Psalms Chapter 148


@c    Laudate Dominum de caelis.

@c    All creatures are invited to praise their Creator.

@c    Alleluia.

@c    148:1. Praise ye the Lord from the heavens:  praise ye him in the high
@c    places.

@c    148:2. Praise ye him, all his angels, praise ye him, all his hosts.

@c    148:3. Praise ye him, O sun and moon:  praise him, all ye stars and
@c    light.

@c    148:4. Praise him, ye heavens of heavens:  and let all the waters that
@c    are above the heavens

@c    148:5. Praise the name of the Lord.  For he spoke, and they were made:
@c    he commanded, and they were created.

@c    148:6. He hath established them for ever, and for ages of ages:  he hath
@c    made a decree, and it shall not pass away.

@c    148:7. Praise the Lord from the earth, ye dragons, and all ye deeps:

@c    148:8. Fire, hail, snow, ice, stormy winds, which fulfil his word:

@c    148:9. Mountains and all hills, fruitful trees and all cedars:

@c    148:10. Beasts and all cattle:  serpents and feathered fowls:

@c    148:11. Kings of the earth and all people:  princes and all judges of
@c    the earth:

@c    148:12. Young men and maidens:  let the old with the younger, praise the
@c    name of the Lord:

@c    148:13. For his name alone is exalted.

@c    148:14. The praise of him is above heaven and earth:  and he hath
@c    exalted the horn of his people.  A hymn to all his saints to the
@c    children of Israel, a people approaching to him.  Alleluia.



@c    Psalms Chapter 149


@c    Cantate Domino.

@c    The church is particularly bound to praise God.

@c    Alleluia.

@c    149:1. Sing ye to the Lord a new canticle:  let his praise be in the
@c    church of the saints.

@c    149:2. Let Israel rejoice in him that made him:  and let the children of
@c    Sion be joyful in their king.

@c    149:3. Let them praise his name in choir:  let them sing to him with the
@c    timbrel and the psaltery.

@c    149:4. For the Lord is well pleased with his people:  and he will exalt
@c    the meek unto salvation.

@c    149:5. The saints shall rejoice in glory:  they shall be joyful in their
@c    beds.

@c    149:6. The high praises of God shall be in their mouth:  and two-edged
@c    swords in their hands:

@c    149:7. To execute vengeance upon the nations, chastisements among the
@c    people:

@c    149:8. To bind their kings with fetters, and their nobles with manacles
@c    of iron.

@c    149:9. To execute upon them the judgment that is written:  this glory is
@c    to all his saints.  Alleluia.



@c    Psalms Chapter 150


@c    Laudate Dominum in sanctis.

@c    An exhortation to praise God with all sorts of instruments.

@c    Alleluia.

@c    150:1. Praise ye the Lord in his holy places:  praise ye him in the
@c    firmament of his power.

@c    150:2. Praise ye him for his mighty acts:  praise ye him according to
@c    the multitude of his greatness.

@c    150:3. Praise him with the sound of trumpet:  praise him with psaltery
@c    and harp.

@c    150:4. Praise him with timbrel and choir:  praise him with strings and
@c    organs.

@c    150:5. Praise him on high sounding cymbals:  praise him on cymbals of
@c    joy:  let every spirit praise the Lord.  Alleluia.
