@c    THE BOOK OF RUTH



@c    This Book is called RUTH, from the name of the person whose history is
@c    here recorded:  who, being a Gentile, became a convert to the true
@c    faith, and marrying Booz, the great-grandfather of David, was one of
@c    those from whom Christ sprung according to the flesh, and an
@c    illustrious figure of the Gentile church.  It is thought this book was
@c    written by the prophet Samuel.



@c    Ruth Chapter 1


@c    Elimelech of Bethlehem going with his wife Noemi, and two sons, into
@c    the land of Moab, dieth there.  His sons marry wives of that country and
@c    die without issue.  Noemi returneth home with her daughter in law Ruth,
@c    who refuseth to part with her.

@c    1:1. In the days of the judges, when the judges ruled, there came a
@c    famine in the land.  And a certain man of Bethlehem Juda, went to
@c    sojourn in the land of Moab with his wife and his two sons.
1:1. ca'o lei pajni le ka xagji cu kampu lei xabji be le gugde .ije le nanmu
poi xabji la beitlexem .ie'uDAS ge'u .e le speni be ra be'o .e le re bersa
be ra cu fange klama le foldi poi zvati la mo,AV

@c    1:2. He was named Elimelech, and his wife Noemi:  and his two sons, the
@c    one Mahalon, and the other Chelion, Ephrathites of Bethlehem Juda.  And
@c    entering into the country of Moab, they abode there.
1:2. .i le nanmu cu se cmene zo .elimelek .ije le speni cu se cmene zo na,oMIN .ije
le re bersa cu se cmene zo maxLON jo'u zo kiLION .i ra se lanzu la .efRAT
gi'e pu xabji la beitlexem .ie'uDAS .i ra vitke klama gi'e xabju la mo.av

@c    1:3. And Elimelech the husband of Noemi died:  and she remained with her
@c    sons.
1:3. ni'o la .elimelek noi speni la na,oMIN cu morsi .ije ri goi ko'a .e le re
bersa cu stali

@c    1:4. And they took wives of the women of Moab, of which one was called
@c    Orpha, and the other Ruth.  And they dwelt their ten years,
1:4. .i ro ri speni pa ninmu poi xabju la mo,AV ge'u poi se cmene zo .orpat jo'u
zo rut .i lenu xabju cu nanca li ji'i pano

@c    1:5. And they both died, to wit, Mahalon and Chelion:  and the woman was
@c    left alone, having lost both her sons and her husband.
1:5. .i ji'a la maxLON .e la kiLION cu morsi .ije le ninmu cu claxu le speni .e
le re bersa

@c    1:6. And she arose to go from the land of Moab to her own country, with
@c    both her daughters in law:  for she had heard that the Lord had looked
@c    upon his people, and had given them food.
1:6. ni'o ko'a vi la mo.AV tirna le nu la .iaves. pu zi sarji le ri natmi le ka
xagji lo cidju kei .i la na,oMIN .e le ri be'aspe cu bregau co xrukla fi
la mo,AV

@c    1:7. Wherefore she went forth out of the place of her sojournment, with
@c    both her daughters in law:  and being now in the way to return into the
@c    land of Juda,
1:7. .i ko'a xrukla la .ie'uDAS le ko'a zasni zdani le dargu .ije le re be'aspe
cu kansa ko'a

@c    1:8. She said to them:  Go ye home to your mothers, the Lord deal
@c    mercifully with you, as you have dealt with the dead and with me.
1:8. .i la na,oMIN cusku fi le be'aspe lu re ko xrukla le zdani be le do mamta
.i .a'o la .iaves. xendo do ki'u le nu do xendo le morsi .e mi

@c    1:9. May he grant you to find rest in the houses of the husbands whom
@c    you shall take.  And she kissed them.  And they lifted up their voice,
@c    and began to weep,
1:9. .i .a'o la .iaves rinka le nu rodo facki lo zdani surla lo do speni li'u
.i ko'a cinba le be'aspe .ije ri cladu klaku

@c    1:10. And to say:  We will go on with thee to thy people.
1:10. .i ri cusku lu mi kansa do le nu klama le do natmi li'u ko'a

@c    1:11. But she answered them:  Return, my daughters:  why come ye with me?
@c    have I any more sons in my womb, that you may hope for husbands of me?
1:11. .i la na,oMIN cu cusku lu .uinai doi tixnu ko xrukla .i ki'u ma do kansa
mi .i paunai mi xu ba rorci lo bersa poi ba speni do

@c    1:12. Return again, my daughters, and go your ways:  for I am now spent
@c    with age, and not fit for wedlock.  Although I might conceive this
@c    night, and bear children,
1:12. .i doi tixnu ko xrukla .i mi citme'a le speni binxo .i .a'onai da'i mi ca
speni gi'e rorci re bersa

@c    1:13. If you would wait till they were grown up, and come to man's
@c    estate, you would be old women before you marry.  Do not so, my
@c    daughters, I beseech you:  for I am grieved the more for your distress,
@c    and the hand of the Lord is gone out against me.
1:13. .i paunai do xu denpa lenu le bersa cu makcu kei le ka nalspeni .i nago'i
doi tixnu .i mi selkurkymau do .iri'abo le xance be la .iaves. cu gunta mi

@c    1:14. And they lifted up their voice, and began to weep again:  Orpha
@c    kissed her mother in law, and returned:  Ruth stuck close to her mother
@c    in law.
1:14. .i le be'aspe di'a cladu klaku .i la .orPAT cu tolrinsa cinba ko'a .iku'i
la rut cu snipa ko'a

@c    1:15. And Noemi said to her:  Behold thy kinswoman is returned to her
@c    people, and to her gods, go thou with her.
1:15. .i la na,oMIN cu cusku lu za'a le do spebu'aspe cu xrukla le ri natmi .e
le ri cevni .i ko kansa ra li'u

@c    To her gods, etc. . .Noemi did not mean to persuade Ruth to return to
@c    the false gods she had formerly worshipped:  but by this manner of
@c    speech, insinuated to her, that if she would go with her, she must
@c    renounce her false gods and return to the Lord the God of Israel.

@c    1:16. She answered:  Be not against me, to desire that I should leave
@c    thee and depart:  for whithersoever thou shalt go, I will go:  and where
@c    thou shalt dwell, I also will dwell.  Thy people shall be my people, and
@c    thy God my God.
1:16. .i la rut cu dafcusku lu na ko minde mi le nu mi cliva do gi'a xrukla kei
.i .ai.i'i mi kansa do le nu klama .ije mi kansa do le nu stali .i le
natmi be do cu natmi mi .ije le cevni be do cu cevni mi

@c    1:17. The land that shall receive thee dying, in the same will I die:
@c    and there will I be buried.  The Lord do so and so to me, and add more
@c    also, if aught but death part me and thee.
1:17. .i ai.i'i vi lemu'e do mrobi'o kei mi mrobi'o gi'e se derni'agau .i .aicai
noda poi na'e nunmorsi zo'u da tersepli mi do .ija la .iaves. cu jursa
sfasa mi

@c    The Lord do so and so, etc. . .A form of swearing usual in the history
@c    of the Old Testament, by which the person wished such and such evils to
@c    fall upon them, if they did not do what they said.

@c    1:18. Then Noemi seeing that Ruth was steadfastly determined to go with
@c    her, would not be against it, nor persuade her any more to return to
@c    her friends:
1:18. .i la na,oMIN cu sanji ledu'u la rut .ai cu kansa ko'a .isemu'ibo ko'a
sisti co sa'urmi'e ra

@c    1:19. So they went together, and came to Bethlehem.  And when they were
@c    come into the city, the report was quickly spread among all:  and the
@c    women said:  This is that Noemi.
1:19. ni'o le re ninmu fe'epu'o klama la beitlexem .i ca lenu ra mo'u klama kei
piro lei tcaxa'u cu cinmo fi ra .ije le ninmu cu cusku lu .ui.ianai la
na,oMIN zvati li'u

@c    1:20. But she said to them:  Call me not Noemi (that is, beautiful,) but
@c    call me Mara (that is, bitter), for the Almighty hath quite filled me
@c    with bitterness.
1:20. .i ko'a cusku lu .uinai ko cmerinsa mi zo na'oMIN na.e zo maRAT .imu'ibo
la caDAIS cu gasnu lenu leli'i mi jmive kei cu kurki

@c    1:21. I went out full and the Lord hath brought me back empty.  Why then
@c    do you call me Noemi, whom the Lord hath humbled, and the Almighty hath
@c    afflicted?
1:21. .i mi mulno ca lenu mi cliva .iku'i mi kunti ca lenu la .iaves. cu xruti
mi .i .a'onai ko na cmerinsa mi zo na,oMIN .i la .iaves. cu raktu mi .i la
caDAIS cu malfu'agau fi mi

@c    1:22. So Noemi came with Ruth, the Moabitess, her daughter in law, from
@c    the land of her sojournment:  and returned into Bethlehem, in the
@c    beginning of the barley harvest.
1:22. .i la na,oMIN ce la rut noi se natmrmo'avi ge'u noi be'aspe ko'a cu xrukla
la beitlexem la mo.AV mo'u lenu co'a crepu loi bavmi



@c    Ruth Chapter 2


@c    Ruth gleaneth in the field of Booz, who sheweth her favour.

@c    2:1. Now her husband Elimelech had a kinsman, a powerful man, and very
@c    rich, whose name was Booz.
2:1. ni'o ko'a se ckini fi tu'a le nakspe no'u la .elimelek le vlipa be <xaiil>
be'o nanmu beme'e zo bo,az

@c    2:3. And Ruth, the Moabitess, said to her mother in law:  If thou wilt,
@c    I will go into the field, and glean the ears of corn that escape the
@c    hands of the reapers, wheresoever I shall find grace with a
@c    householder, that will be favourable to me.  And she answered her:  Go,
@c    my daughter.
2:2. .i la rut. noi se natmrmo'avi ge'u goi ko'e cu cusku fi la na,oMIN lu pe'u mamta mi
klama le foldi gi'e velvi'ucrepu le grustani le foldi lo selpu'a betu'a mi li'u
.i ko'a cu cusku lu je'e tixnu ko klama li'u

@c    2:3. She went, therefore, and gleaned the ears of corn after the
@c    reapers.  And it happened that the owner of that field was Booz, who was
@c    of the kindred of Elimelech.
2:3. .i ko'e klama gi'e velvi'ucrepu le grustani le foldi le crepu .i ko'e se funca le
nu le <xelkat> foldi se ponse la bo,AZ noi se lanzu la .elimelek
@c The Hebrew is "chelqat hasadeh". What's the difference between chelqah and sadeh? -phma

@c    2:4. And behold, he came out of Bethlehem, and said to the reapers:  The
@c    Lord be with you.  And they answered him:  The Lord bless thee.
2:4. .i la bo,AZ cu klama fi la beitlexem. gi'e cusku fi le crepu lu la .iaves. cu
kansa do li'u .i spusku lu la .iaves. cu zabgau do li'u

@c    2:5. And Booz said to the young man that was set over the reapers:
@c    Whose maid is this ?
2:5. .i la bo'AZ cu cusku lu le va citno ninmu cu ckini ma li'u le citno jatna
be le crepu

@c    2:6. And he answered him:  This is the Moabitess, who came with Noemi,
@c    from the land of Moab,
2:6. .i ri spusku lu ta se natmrmo'avi gi'e kansa la no,eMIN le nu klama fi
la mo,AV

@c    2:7. And she desired leave to glean the ears of corn that remain,
@c    following the steps of the reapers:  and she hath been in the field from
@c    morning till now, and hath not gone home for one moment.
2:7. .i ra cusku lu .e'o mi velvi'ucrepu le grustani fo le crepu li'u .i ra
zvati le foldi ca ze'apu le cerni de'a lenu surla ne'i le zdani li'u

@c    2:8. And Booz said to Ruth:  Hear me, daughter, do not go to glean in
@c    any other field, and do not depart from this place:  but keep with my
@c    maids,
2:8. .i la bo,AZ cu cusku lu ju'i tixnu ko na velvi'ucrepu fi lo drata foldi
.ije ko na cliva ti .ije ko nipkansa le mi citno ninmu

@c    2:9. And follow where they reap.  For I have charged my young men, not
@c    to molest thee:  and if thou art thirsty, go to the vessels, and drink
@c    of the waters whereof the servants drink.
2:9. gi'e catlu le foldi gi'e jersi ra .iki'ubo mi minde lemi citno lenu
na pencu do .i do pinxe fi le vasru poi te pinxe fi le selfu ku'o vau do
lenu do tasku li'u la rut

@c    2:10. She fell on her face, and worshipping upon the ground, said to
@c    him:  Whence cometh this to me, that I should find grace before thy
@c    eyes, and that thou shouldst vouchsafe to take notice of me, a woman of
@c    another country?

@c    2:11. And he answered her:  All hath been told me, that thou hast done
@c    to thy mother in law after the death of thy husband:  and how thou hast
@c    left thy parents, and the land wherein thou wast born, and art come to
@c    a people which thou knewest not heretofore.

@c    2:12. The Lord render unto thee for thy work, and mayst thou receive a
@c    full reward of the Lord the God of Israel, to whom thou art come, and
@c    under whose wings thou art fled.

@c    2:13. And she said:  I have found grace in thy eyes, my lord, who hast
@c    comforted me, and hast spoken to the heart of thy handmaid, who am not
@c    like to one of thy maids.

@c    2:14. And Booz said to her:  At mealtime come thou hither, and eat of
@c    the bread, and dip thy morsel in the vinegar.  So she sat at the side of
@c    the reapers, and she heaped to herself frumenty, and ate and was
@c    filled, and took the leavings.

@c    2:15. And she arose from thence, to glean the ears of corn as before.
@c    And Booz commanded his servants, saying:  If she would even reap with
@c    you, hinder her not:

@c    2:16. And let fall some of your handfuls of purpose, and leave them,
@c    that she may gather them without shame, and let no man rebuke her when
@c    she gathereth them.

@c    2:17. She gleaned therefore in the field till evening:  and beating out
@c    with a rod, and threshing what she had gleaned, she found about the
@c    measure of an ephi of barley, that is, three bushels:

@c    2:18. Which she took up, and returned into the city, and shewed it to
@c    her mother in law:  moreover, she brought out, and gave her of the
@c    remains of her meat, wherewith she had been filled.

@c    2:19. And her mother in law said to her:  Where hast thou gleaned today,
@c    and where hast thou wrought?  blessed be he that hath had pity on thee.
@c    And she told her with whom she had wrought:  and she told the man's
@c    name, that he was called Booz.

@c    2:20. And Noemi answered her:  Blessed be he of the Lord:  because the
@c    same kindness which he shewed to the living, he hath kept also to the
@c    dead.  And again she said:  The man is our kinsman.

@c    2:21. And Ruth said:  He also charged me, that I should keep close to
@c    his reapers, till all the corn should be reaped.

@c    2:22. And her mother in law said to her:  It is better for thee, my
@c    daughter, to go out to reap with his maids, lest in another man's field
@c    some one may resist thee.

@c    2:23. So she kept close to the maids of Booz:  and continued to glean
@c    with them, till all the barley and the wheat were laid up in the barns.



@c    Ruth Chapter 3


@c    Ruth instructed by her mother in law lieth at Booz's feet, claiming him
@c    for her husband by the law of affinity:  she receiveth a good answer,
@c    and six measures of barley.

@c    3:1. After she was returned to her mother in law, Noemi said to her:  My
@c    daughter, I will seek rest for thee, and will provide that it may be
@c    well with thee.

@c    3:2. This Booz, with whose maids thou wast joined in the field, is our
@c    near kinsman, and behold this night he winnoweth barley in the
@c    threshingfloor.

@c    3:3. Wash thyself therefore and anoint thee, and put on thy best
@c    garments, and go down to the barnfloor:  but let not the man see thee,
@c    till he shall have done eating and drinking.

@c    3:4. And when he shall go to sleep, mark the place wherein he sleepeth:
@c    and thou shalt go in, and lift up the clothes wherewith he is covered
@c    towards his feet, and shalt lay thyself down there:  and he will tell
@c    thee what thou must do.

@c    3:5. She answered:  Whatsoever thou shalt command, I will do.

@c    3:6. And she went down to the barnfloor, and did all that her mother in
@c    law had bid her.

@c    3:7. And when Booz had eaten, and drunk, and was merry, he went to
@c    sleep by the heap of sheaves, and she came softly, and uncovering his
@c    feet, laid herself down.

@c    3:8. And behold, when it was now midnight the man was afraid, and
@c    troubled:  and he saw a woman lying at his feet,

@c    3:9. And he said to her:  Who art thou ?  And she answered:  I am Ruth,
@c    thy handmaid:  spread thy coverlet over thy servant, for thou art a near
@c    kinsman.

@c    3:10. And he said:  Blessed art thou of the Lord, my daughter, and thy
@c    latter kindness has surpassed the former:  because thou hast not
@c    followed young men either poor or rich.

@c    Thy latter kindness, viz. . .to thy husband deceased in seeking to keep
@c    up his name and family by marrying his relation according to the law,
@c    and not following after young men.  For Booz, it seems, was then in
@c    years.

@c    3:11. Fear not therefore, but whatsoever thou shalt say to me I will do
@c    to thee.  For all the people that dwell within the gates of my city,
@c    know that thou art a virtuous woman.

@c    3:12. Neither do I deny myself to be near of kin, but there is another
@c    nearer than I.

@c    3:13. Rest thou this night:  and when morning is come, if he will take
@c    thee by the right of kindred, all is well:  but if he will not, I will
@c    undoubtedly take thee, so the Lord liveth:  sleep till the morning.

@c    3:14. So she slept at his feet till the night was going off.  And she
@c    arose before men could know one another, and Booz said:  Beware lest any
@c    man know that thou camest hither.

@c    3:15. And again he said:  Spread thy mantle, wherewith thou art covered,
@c    and hold it with both hands.  And when she spread it and held it, he
@c    measured six measures of barley, and laid it upon her.  And she carried
@c    it, and went into the city,

@c    3:16. And came to her mother in law; who said to her:  What hast thou
@c    done, daughter?  And she told her all that the man had done to her.

@c    3:17. And she said:  Behold he hath given me six measures of barley:  for
@c    he said:  I will not have thee return empty to thy mother in law.

@c    3:18. And Noemi said:  Wait, my daughter, till we see what end the thing
@c    will have.  For the man will not rest until he have accomplished what he
@c    hath said.



@c    Ruth Chapter 4


@c    Upon the refusal of the nearer kinsman, Booz marrieth Ruth, who
@c    bringeth forth Obed, the grandfather of David.

@c    4:1. Then Booz went up to the gate, and sat there.  And when he had seen
@c    the kinsman going by, of whom he had spoken before, he said to him,
@c    calling him by his name:  Turn aside for a little while, and sit down
@c    here.  He turned aside, and sat down.

@c    4:2. And Booz, taking ten men of the ancients of the city, said to
@c    them:  Sit ye down here.

@c    4:3. They sat down, and he spoke to the kinsman:  Noemi, who is returned
@c    from the country of Moab will sell a parcel of land that belonged to
@c    our brother Elimelech.

@c    4:4. I would have thee to understand this, and would tell thee before
@c    all that sit here, and before the ancients of my people.  If thou wilt
@c    take possession of it by the right of kindred:  buy it, and possess it:
@c    but if it please thee not, tell me so, that I may know what I have to
@c    do.  For there is no near kinsman besides thee, who art first, and me,
@c    who am second.  But he answered:  I will buy the field.

@c    4:5. And Booz said to him:  When thou shalt buy the field at the woman's
@c    hand, thou must take also Ruth, the Moabitess, who was the wife of the
@c    deceased:  to raise up the name of thy kinsman in his inheritance.

@c    4:6. He answered:  I yield up my right of next akin:  for I must not cut
@c    off the posterity of my own family.  Do thou make use of my privilege,
@c    which I profess I do willingly forego.

@c    4:7. Now this in former times was the manner in Israel between kinsmen,
@c    that if at any time one yielded his right to another:  that the grant
@c    might be sure, the man put off his shoe and gave it to his neighbour;
@c    this was a testimony of cession of right in Israel.

@c    4:8. So Booz said to his kinsman:  Put off thy shoe.  And immediately he
@c    took it off from his foot.

@c    4:9. And he said to the ancients, and to all the people:  You are
@c    witnesses this day, that I have bought all that was Elimelech's, and
@c    Chelion's, and Mahalon's, of the hand of Noemi:

@c    4:10. And have taken to wife Ruth, the Moabitess, the wife of Mahalon,
@c    to raise up the name of the deceased in his inheritance lest his name
@c    be cut off, from among his family and his brethren and his people.  You,
@c    I say, are witnesses of this thing.

@c    4:11. Then all the people that were in the gate, and the ancients,
@c    answered:  We are witnesses:  The Lord make this woman who cometh into
@c    thy house, like Rachel, and Lia, who built up the house of Israel:  that
@c    she may be an example of virtue in Ephrata, and may have a famous name
@c    in Bethlehem:

@c    Ephrata. . .Another name of Bethlehem.

@c    4:12. And that the house may be, as the house of Phares, whom Thamar
@c    bore unto Juda, of the seed which the Lord shall give thee of this
@c    young woman.

@c    4:13. Booz therefore took Ruth, and married her:  and went in unto her,
@c    and the Lord gave her to conceive, and to bear a son.

@c    4:14. And the women said to Noemi:  Blessed be the Lord, who hath not
@c    suffered thy family to want a successor:  that his name should be
@c    preserved in Israel.

@c    4:15. And thou shouldst have one to comfort thy soul, and cherish thy
@c    old age.  For he is born of thy daughter in law:  who loveth thee:  and
@c    is much better to thee, than if thou hadst seven sons.

@c    4:16. And Noemi taking the child, laid it in her bosom, and she carried
@c    it, and was a nurse unto it.

@c    4:17. And the women, her neighbours, congratulating with her, and
@c    saying, There is a son born to Noemi, called his name Obed:  he is the
@c    father of Isai, the father of David.

@c    4:18. These are the generations of Phares:  Phares begot Esron,

@c    4:19. Esron begot Aram, Aram begot Aminadab,

@c    4:20. Aminadab begot Nahasson, Nahasson begot Salmon,

@c    4:21. Salmon begot Booz, Booz begot Obed,

@c    4:22. Obed begot Isai, Isai begot David.
