@c    THE PROPHECY OF SOPHONIAS



@c    SOPHONIAS, whose name, saith St. Jerome, signifies The Watchman of the
@c    Lord, or The hidden of the Lord, prophesied in the beginning of the
@c    reign of Josias.  He was a native of Sarabatha, and of the tribe of
@c    Simeon, according to the more general opinion.  He prophesied the
@c    punishments of the Jews, for their idolatry and other crimes; also the
@c    punishments that were to come on divers nations; the coming of Christ,
@c    the conversion of the Gentiles, the blindness of the Jews, and their
@c    conversion towards the end of the world.



@c    Sophonias Chapter 1


@c    For divers enormous sins, the kingdom of Juda is threatened with severe
@c    judgment.

@c    1:1. The word of the Lord that came to Sophonias the son of Chusi, the
@c    son of Godolias, the son of Amarias, the son of Ezechias, in the days
@c    of Josias, the son of Amon king of Juda.

@c    1:2. Gathering, I will gather together all things from off the face of
@c    the land, saith the Lord:

@c    Gathering, I will gather, etc. . .That is, I will assuredly take away,
@c    and wholly consume, either by captivity, or death, both men and beasts
@c    out of this land.

@c    1:3. I will gather man, and beast, I will gather the birds of the air,
@c    and the fishes of the sea:  and the ungodly shall meet with ruin:  and I
@c    will destroy men from off the face of the land, saith the Lord.

@c    1:4. And I will stretch out my hand upon Juda, and upon all the
@c    inhabitants of Jerusalem:  and I will destroy out of this place the
@c    remnant of Baal, and the names of the wardens of the temples with the
@c    priests:

@c    The wardens, etc. . .Viz., of the temples of the idols.  AEdituos, in
@c    Hebrew, the Chemarims, that is, such as kindle the fires, or burn
@c    incense.

@c    1:5. And them that worship the host of heaven upon the tops of houses,
@c    and them that adore, and swear by the Lord, and swear by Melchom.

@c    Melchom. . .The idol of the Ammonites.

@c    1:6. And them that turn away from following after the Lord, and that
@c    have not sought the Lord, nor searched after him.

@c    1:7. Be silent before the face of the Lord God:  for the day of the Lord
@c    is near, for the Lord hath prepared a victim, he hath sanctified his
@c    guests.

@c    1:8. And it shall come to pass in the day of the victim of the Lord,
@c    that I will visit upon the princes, and upon the king's sons, and upon
@c    all such as are clothed with strange apparel:

@c    1:9. And I will visit in that day upon every one that entereth
@c    arrogantly over the threshold:  them that fill the house of the Lord
@c    their God with iniquity and deceit.

@c    1:10. And there shall be in that day, saith the Lord, the noise of a
@c    cry from the fish gate, and a howling from the Second, and a great
@c    destruction from the hills.

@c    The Second. . .A part of the city so called.

@c    1:11. Howl, ye inhabitants of the Morter.  All the people of Chanaan is
@c    hush, all are cut off that were wrapped up in silver.

@c    The Morter. . .Maktesh.  A valley in or near Jerusalem.  Ibid.  The
@c    people of Chanaan. . .So he calls the Jews, from their following the
@c    wicked ways of the Chanaanites.

@c    1:12. And it shall come to pass at that time, that I will search
@c    Jerusalem with lamps, and will visit upon the men that are settled on
@c    their lees:  that say in their hearts:  The Lord will not do good, nor
@c    will he do evil.

@c    Settled on their lees. . .That is, the wealthy, and such as live at
@c    their ease, resting upon their riches, like wine upon the lees.

@c    1:13. And their strength shall become a booty, and their houses as a
@c    desert:  and they shall build houses, and shall not dwell in them:  and
@c    they shall plant vineyards, and shall not drink the wine of them.

@c    1:14. The great day of the Lord is near, it is near and exceeding
@c    swift:  the voice of the day of the Lord is bitter, the mighty man shall
@c    there meet with tribulation.

@c    1:15. That day is a day of wrath, a day of tribulation and distress, a
@c    day of calamity and misery, a day of darkness and obscurity, a day of
@c    clouds and whirlwinds,

@c    1:16. A day of the trumpet and alarm against the fenced cities, and
@c    against the high bulwarks.

@c    1:17. And I will distress men, and they shall walk like blind men,
@c    because they have sinned against the Lord:  and their blood shall be
@c    poured out as earth, and their bodies as dung.

@c    1:18. Neither shall their silver and their gold be able to deliver them
@c    in the day of the wrath of the Lord:  all the land shall be devoured by
@c    the fire of his jealousy:  for he shall make even a speedy destruction
@c    of all them that dwell in the land.



@c    Sophonias Chapter 2


@c    An exhortation to repentance.  The judgment of the Philistines, of the
@c    Moabites, and the Ammonites; of the Ethiopians and the Assyrians.

@c    2:1.Assemble yourselves together, be gathered together, O nation not
@c    worthy to be loved:

@c    2:2. Before the decree bring forth the day as dust passing away, before
@c    the fierce anger of the Lord come upon you, before the day of the
@c    Lord's indignation come upon you.

@c    2:3. Seek the Lord, all ye meek of the earth, you that have wrought his
@c    judgment:  seek the just, seek the meek:  if by any means you may be hid
@c    in the day of the Lord's indignation.

@c    2:4. For Gaza shall be destroyed, and Ascalon shall be a desert, they
@c    shall cast out Azotus at noonday, and Accaron shall be rooted up.

@c    2:5. Woe to you that inhabit the sea coast, O nation of reprobates:  the
@c    word of the Lord upon you, O Chanaan, the land of the Philistines, and
@c    I will destroy thee, so that there shall not be an inhabitant.

@c    2:6. And the sea coast shall be the resting place of shepherds, and
@c    folds for cattle:

@c    2:7. And it shall be the portion of him that shall remain of the house
@c    of Juda, there they shall feed:  in the houses of Ascalon they shall
@c    rest in the evening:  because the Lord their God will visit them, and
@c    bring back their captivity.

@c    2:8. I have heard the reproach of Moab, and the blasphemies of the
@c    children of Ammon, with which they reproached my people, and have
@c    magnified themselves upon their borders.

@c    2:9. Therefore as I live, saith the Lord of hosts the God of Israel,
@c    Moab shall be as Sodom, and the children of Ammon as Gomorrha, the
@c    dryness of thorns, and heaps of salt, and a desert even for ever:  the
@c    remnant of my people shall make a spoil of them, and the residue of my
@c    nation shall possess them.

@c    2:10. This shall befall them for their pride:  because they have
@c    blasphemed, and have been magnified against the people of the Lord of
@c    hosts.

@c    2:11. The Lord shall be terrible upon them, and shall consume all the
@c    gods of the earth:  and they shall adore him every man from his own
@c    place, all the islands of the Gentiles.

@c    2:12. You Ethiopians, also shall be slain with my sword.

@c    2:13. And he will stretch out his hand upon the north, and will destroy
@c    Assyria:  and he will make the beautiful city a wilderness, and as a
@c    place not passable, and as a desert.

@c    The beautiful city, viz. . .Ninive, which was destroyed soon after this,
@c    viz., in the sixteenth year of the reign of Josias.

@c    2:14. And flocks shall lie down in the midst thereof, all the beasts of
@c    the nations:  and the bittern and the urchin shall lodge in the
@c    threshold thereof:  the voice of the singing bird in the window, the
@c    raven on the upper post, for I will consume her strength.

@c    2:15. This is the glorious city that dwelt in security:  that said in
@c    her heart:  I am, and there is none beside me:  how is she become a
@c    desert, a place for beasts to lie down in?  every one that passeth by
@c    her shall hiss, and wag his hand.



@c    Sophonias Chapter 3


@c    A woe to Jerusalem for her sins.  A prophecy of the conversion of the
@c    Gentiles, and of the poor of Israel:  God shall be with them.  The Jews
@c    shall be converted at last.

@c    3:1. Woe to the provoking and redeemed city, the dove.

@c    3:2. She hath not hearkened to the voice, neither hath she received
@c    discipline:  she hath not trusted in the Lord, she drew not near to her
@c    God.

@c    3:3. Her princes are in the midst of her as roaring lions:  her judges
@c    are evening wolves, they left nothing for the morning.

@c    3:4. Her prophets are senseless, men without faith:  her priests have
@c    polluted the sanctuary, they have acted unjustly against the law.

@c    3:5. The just Lord is in the midst thereof, he will not do iniquity:  in
@c    the morning, in the morning he will bring his judgment to light, and it
@c    shall not be hid:  but the wicked man hath not known shame.

@c    3:6. I have destroyed the nations, and their towers are beaten down:  I
@c    have made their ways desert, so that there is none that passeth by:
@c    their cities are desolate, there is not a man remaining, nor any
@c    inhabitant.

@c    3:7. I said:  Surely thou wilt fear me, thou wilt receive correction:
@c    and her dwelling shall not perish, for all things wherein I have
@c    visited her:  but they rose early, and corrupted all their thoughts.

@c    3:8. Wherefore expect me, saith the Lord, in the day of my resurrection
@c    that is to come, for my judgment is to assemble the Gentiles, and to
@c    gather the kingdoms:  and to pour upon them my indignation, all my
@c    fierce anger:  for with the fire of my jealousy shall all the earth be
@c    devoured.

@c    3:9. Because then I will restore to the people a chosen lip, that all
@c    may call upon the name of the Lord, and may serve him with one
@c    shoulder.

@c    3:10. From beyond the rivers of Ethiopia, shall my suppliants, the
@c    children of my dispersed people, bring me an offering.

@c    3:11. In that day thou shalt not be ashamed for all thy doings, wherein
@c    thou hast transgressed against me for then I will take away out of the
@c    midst of thee thy proud boasters, and thou shalt no more be lifted up
@c    because of my holy mountain.

@c    3:12. And I will leave in the midst of thee a poor and needy people:
@c    and they shall hope in the name of the Lord.

@c    3:13. The remnant of Israel shall not do iniquity, nor speak lies, nor
@c    shall a deceitful tongue be found in their mouth:  for they shall feed,
@c    and shall lie down, and there shall be none to make them afraid.

@c    3:14. Give praise, O daughter of Sion:  shout, O Israel:  be glad, and
@c    rejoice with all thy heart, O daughter of Jerusalem.

@c    3:15. The Lord hath taken away thy judgment, he hath turned away thy
@c    enemies:  the king of Israel, the Lord, is in the midst of thee, thou
@c    shalt fear evil no more.

@c    3:16. In that day it shall be said to Jerusalem:  Fear not:  to Sion:
@c    Let not thy hands be weakened.

@c    3:17. The Lord thy God in the midst of thee is mighty, he will save:  he
@c    will rejoice over thee with gladness, he will be silent in his love, he
@c    will be joyful over thee in praise.

@c    3:18. The triflers that were departed from the law, I will gather
@c    together, because they were of thee:  that thou mayest no more suffer
@c    reproach for them.

@c    3:19. Behold I will cut off all that have afflicted thee at that time:
@c    and I will save her that halteth, and will gather her that was cast
@c    out:  and I will get them praise, and a name, in all the land where they
@c    had been put to confusion.

@c    3:20. At that time, when I will bring you:  and at the time that I will
@c    gather you:  for I will give you a name, and praise among all the people
@c    of the earth, when I shall have brought back your captivity before your
@c    eyes, saith the Lord.
