@c    THE BOOK OF TOBIAS



@c    This Book takes its name from the holy man Tobias, whose wonderful
@c    virtues are herein recorded.  It contains most excellent documents of
@c    great piety, extraordinary patience, and of a perfect resignation to
@c    the will of God.  His humble prayer was heard, and the angel Raphael was
@c    sent to relieve him:  he is thankful and praises the Lord, calling on
@c    the children of Israel to do the same.  Having lived to the age of one
@c    hundred and two years, he exhorts his son and grandsons to piety,
@c    foretells the destruction of Ninive and the rebuilding of Jerusalem:  he
@c    dies happily.



@c    Tobias Chapter 1


@c    Tobias's early piety:  his works of mercy, particularly in burying the
@c    dead.

@c    1:1. Tobias of the tribe and city of Nephtali, (which is in the upper
@c    parts of Galilee above Naasson, beyond the way that leadeth to the
@c    west, having on the right hand the city of Sephet,)

@c    1:2. When he was made captive in the days of Salmanasar king of the
@c    Assyrians, even in his captivity, forsook not the way of truth,

@c    1:3. But every day gave all he could get to his brethren his fellow
@c    captives, that were of his kindred.

@c    1:4. And when he was younger than any of the tribe of Nephtali, yet did
@c    he no childish thing in his work.

@c    1:5. Moreover when all went to the golden calves which Jeroboam king of
@c    Israel had made, he alone fled the company of all,

@c    1:6. And went to Jerusalem to the temple of the Lord, and there adored
@c    the Lord God of Israel, offering faithfully all his firstfruits, and
@c    his tithes,

@c    1:7. So that in the third year he gave all his tithes to the
@c    proselytes, and strangers.

@c    1:8. These and such like things did he observe when but a boy according
@c    to the law of God.

@c    1:9. But when he was a man, he took to wife Anna of his own tribe, and
@c    had a son by her, whom he called after his own name,

@c    1:10. And from his infancy he taught him to fear God, and to abstain
@c    from all sin.

@c    1:11. And when by the captivity he with his wife and his son and all
@c    his tribe was come to the city of Ninive,

@c    1:12. (When all ate of the meats of the Gentiles) he kept his soul and
@c    never was defiled with their meats.

@c    1:13. And because he was mindful of the Lord with all his heart, God
@c    gave him favour in the sight of Salmanasar the king.

@c    1:14. And he gave him leave to go whithersoever he would, with liberty
@c    to do whatever he had a mind.

@c    1:15. He therefore went to all that were in captivity, and gave them
@c    wholesome admonitions.

@c    1:16. And when he was come to Rages a city of the Medes, and had ten
@c    talents of silver of that with which he had been honoured by the king:

@c    1:17. And when amongst a great multitude of his kindred, he saw Gabelus
@c    in want, who was one of his tribe, taking a note of his hand he gave
@c    him the aforesaid sum of money.

@c    1:18. But after a long time, Salmanasar the king being dead, when
@c    Sennacherib his son, who reigned in his place, had a hatred for the
@c    children of Israel:

@c    1:19. Tobias daily went among all his kindred and comforted them, and
@c    distributed to every one as he was able, out of his goods:

@c    1:20. He fed the hungry, and gave clothes to the naked, and was careful
@c    to bury the dead, and they that were slain.

@c    1:21. And when king Sennacherib was come back, fleeing from Judea by
@c    reason of the slaughter that God had made about him for his blasphemy,
@c    and being angry slew many of the children of Israel, Tobias buried
@c    their bodies.

@c    1:22. But when it was told the king, he commanded him to be slain, and
@c    took away all his substance.

@c    1:23. But Tobias fleeing naked away with his son and with his wife, lay
@c    concealed, for many loved him.

@c    1:24. But after forty-five days, the king was killed by his own sons.

@c    1:25. And Tobias returned to his house, and all his substance was
@c    restored to him.



@c    Tobias Chapter 2


@c    Tobias leaveth his dinner to bury the dead:  he loseth his sight by
@c    God's permission, for manifestation of his patience.

@c    2:1. But after this, when there was a festival of the Lord, and a good
@c    dinner was prepared in Tobias's house,

@c    2:2. He said to his son:  Go, and bring some of our tribe that fear God,
@c    to feast with us.

@c    2:3. And when he had gone, returning he told him, that one of the
@c    children of Israel lay slain in the street.  And he forthwith leaped up
@c    from his place at the table, and left his dinner, and came fasting to
@c    the body.

@c    2:4. And taking it up carried it privately to his house, that after the
@c    sun was down, he might bury him cautiously.

@c    2:5. And when he had hid the body, he ate bread with mourning and fear,

@c    2:6. Remembering the word which the Lord spoke by Amos the prophet:
@c    Your festival days shall be turned into lamentation and mourning.

@c    2:7. So when the sun was down, he went and buried him.

@c    2:8. Now all his neighbours blamed him, saying:  once already
@c    commandment was given for thee to be slain because of this matter, and
@c    thou didst scarce escape the sentence of death, and dost thou again
@c    bury the dead?

@c    2:9. But Tobias fearing God more than the king, carried off the bodies
@c    of them that were slain, and hid them in his house, and at midnight
@c    buried them.

@c    2:10. Now it happened one day that being wearied with burying, he came
@c    to his house, and cast himself down by the wall and slept,

@c    2:11. And as he was sleeping, hot dung out of a swallow's nest fell
@c    upon his eyes, and he was made blind.

@c    2:12. Now this trial the Lord therefore permitted to happen to him,
@c    that an example might be given to posterity of his patience, as also of
@c    holy Job.

@c    2:13. For whereas he had always feared God from his infancy, and kept
@c    his commandments, he repined not against God because the evil of
@c    blindness had befallen him,

@c    2:14. But continued immoveable in the fear of God, giving thanks to God
@c    all the days of his life.

@c    2:15. For as the kings insulted over holy Job:  so his relations and
@c    kinsmen mocked at his life, saying:

@c    Kings. . .So Job's three friends are here called, because they were
@c    princes in their respective territories.

@c    2:16. Where is thy hope, for which thou gavest alms, and buriedst the
@c    dead?

@c    2:17. But Tobias rebuked them, saying:  Speak not so:

@c    2:18. For we are the children of saints, and look for that life which
@c    God will give to those that never change their faith from him.

@c    2:19. Now Anna his wife went daily to weaving work, and she brought
@c    home what she could get for their living by the labour of her hands.

@c    2:20. Whereby it came to pass, that she received a young kid, and
@c    brought it home:

@c    2:21. And when her husband heard it bleating, he said:  Take heed, lest
@c    perhaps it be stolen:  restore ye it to its owners, for it is not lawful
@c    for us either to eat or to touch any thing that cometh by theft.

@c    2:22. At these words his wife being angry answered:  It is evident the
@c    hope is come to nothing, and thy alms now appear.

@c    2:23. And with these and other, such like words she upbraided him.



@c    Tobias Chapter 3


@c    The prayer of Tobias, and of Sara, in their several afflictions, are
@c    heard by God, and the angel Raphael is sent to relieve them.

@c    3:1. Then Tobias sighed, and began to pray with tears,

@c    3:2. Saying, Thou art just, O Lord, and all thy judgments are just, and
@c    all thy ways mercy, and truth, and judgment:

@c    3:3. And now, O Lord, think of me, and take not revenge of my sins,
@c    neither remember my offences, nor those of my parents.

@c    3:4. For we have not obeyed thy commandments, therefore are we
@c    delivered to spoil and to captivity, and death, and are made a fable,
@c    and a reproach to all nations, amongst which thou hast scattered us.

@c    3:5. And now, O Lord, great are thy judgments, because we have not done
@c    according to thy precepts, and have not walked sincerely before thee.

@c    3:6. And now, O Lord, do with me according to thy will, and command my
@c    spirit to be received in peace:  for it is better for me to die, than to
@c    live.

@c    3:7. Now it happened on the same day, that Sara daughter of Raguel, in
@c    Rages a city of the Medes, received a reproach from one of her father's
@c    servant maids,

@c    Rages. . .In the Greek it is Ecbatana, which was also called Rages.  For
@c    there were two cities in Media of the name of Rages.  Raguel dwelt in
@c    one of them, and Gabelus in the other.

@c    3:8. Because she had been given to seven husbands and a devil named
@c    Asmodeus had killed them, at their first going in unto her.

@c    3:9. So when she reproved the maid for her fault, she answered her,
@c    saying:  May we never see son, or daughter of thee upon the earth, thou
@c    murderer of thy husbands.

@c    3:10. Wilt thou kill me also, as thou hast already killed seven
@c    husbands?  At these words, she went into an upper chamber of her house:
@c    and for three days and three nights did neither eat nor drink:

@c    3:11. But continuing in prayer with tears besought God, that he would
@c    deliver her from this reproach.

@c    3:12. And it came to pass on the third day when she was making an end
@c    of her prayer, blessing the Lord,

@c    3:13. She said:  Blessed is thy name, O God of our fathers, who when
@c    thou hast been angry, wilt shew mercy, and in the time of tribulation
@c    forgivest the sins of them that call upon thee.

@c    3:14. To thee, O Lord, I turn my face, to thee I direct my eyes.

@c    3:15. I beg, O Lord, that thou loose me from the bond of this reproach,
@c    or else take me away from the earth.

@c    3:16. Thou knowest, O Lord, that I never coveted a husband, and have
@c    kept my soul clean from all lust.

@c    3:17. Never have I joined myself with them that play:  neither have I
@c    made myself partaker with them that walk in lightness.

@c    3:18. But a husband I consented to take, with thy fear, not with my
@c    lust.

@c    3:19. And either I was unworthy of them, or they perhaps were not
@c    worthy of me:  because perhaps thou hast kept me for another man,

@c    3:20. For thy counsel is not in man's power.

@c    3:21. But this every one is sure of that worshippeth thee, that his
@c    life, if it be under trial, shall be crowned and if it be under
@c    tribulation, it shall be delivered:  and if it be under correction, it
@c    shall be allowed to come to thy mercy.

@c    3:22. For thou art not delighted in our being lost, because after a
@c    storm thou makest a calm, and after tears and weeping thou pourest in
@c    joyfulness.

@c    3:23. Be thy name, O God of Israel, blessed for ever,

@c    3:24. At that time the prayers of them both were heard in the sight of
@c    the glory of the most high God:

@c    3:25. And the holy angel of the Lord, Raphael was sent to heal them
@c    both, whose prayers at one time were rehearsed in the sight of the
@c    Lord.



@c    Tobias Chapter 4


@c    Tobias thinking he shall die, giveth his son godly admonitions:  and
@c    telleth him of money he had lent to a friend.

@c    4:1. Therefore when Tobias thought that his prayer was heard that he
@c    might die, he called to him Tobias his son,

@c    4:2. And said to him:  Hear, my son, the words of my mouth, and lay them
@c    as a foundation in thy heart.

@c    4:3. When God shall take my soul, thou shalt bury my body:  and thou
@c    shalt honour thy mother all the days of her life:

@c    4:4. For thou must be mindful what and how great perils she suffered
@c    for thee in her womb.

@c    4:5. And when she also shall have ended the time of her life, bury her
@c    by me.

@c    4:6. And all the days of thy life have God in thy mind:  and take heed
@c    thou never consent to sin, nor transgress the commandments of the Lord
@c    our God.

@c    4:7. Give alms out of thy substance, and turn not away thy face from
@c    any poor person:  for so it shall come to pass that the face of the Lord
@c    shall not be turned from thee.

@c    4:8. According to thy ability be merciful.

@c    4:9. If thou have much give abundantly:  if thou have little, take care
@c    even so to bestow willingly a little.

@c    4:10. For thus thou storest up to thyself a good reward for the day of
@c    necessity.

@c    4:11. For alms deliver from all sin, and from death, and will not
@c    suffer the soul to go into darkness.

@c    4:12. Alms shall be a great confidence before the most high God, to all
@c    them that give it.

@c    4:13. Take heed to keep thyself, my son, from all fornication, and
@c    beside thy wife never endure to know a crime.

@c    4:14. Never suffer pride to reign in thy mind, or in thy words:  for
@c    from it all perdition took its beginning.

@c    4:15. If any man hath done any work for thee, immediately pay him his
@c    hire, and let not the wages of thy hired servant stay with thee at all.

@c    4:16. See thou never do to another what thou wouldst hate to have done
@c    to thee by another.

@c    4:17. Eat thy bread with the hungry and the needy, and with thy
@c    garments cover the naked,

@c    4:18. Lay out thy bread, and thy wine upon the burial of a just man,
@c    and do not eat and drink thereof with the wicked.

@c    4:19. Seek counsel always of a wise man.

@c    4:20. Bless God at all times:  and desire of him to direct thy ways, and
@c    that all thy counsels may abide in him.

@c    4:21. I tell thee also, my son, that I lent ten talents of silver,
@c    while thou wast yet a child, to Gabelus, in Rages a city of the Medes,
@c    and I have a note of his hand with me:

@c    4:22. Now therefore inquire how thou mayst go to him, and receive of
@c    him the foresaid sum of money, and restore to him the note of his hand.

@c    4:23. Fear not, my son:  we lead indeed a poor life, but we shall have
@c    many good things if we fear God, and depart from all sin, and do that
@c    which is good.



@c    Tobias Chapter 5


@c    Young Tobias seeking a guide for his journey, the angel Raphael, in
@c    shape of a man, undertaketh this office.

@c    5:1. Then Tobias answered his father, and said:  I will do all things,
@c    father, which thou hast commanded me.

@c    5:2. But how I shall get this money, I cannot tell; he knoweth not me,
@c    and I know not him:  what token shall I give him?  nor did I ever know
@c    the way which leadeth thither.

@c    5:3. Then his father answered him, and said:  I have a note of his hand
@c    with me, which when thou shalt shew him, he will presently pay it.

@c    5:4. But go now, and seek thee out some faithful man, to go with thee
@c    for his hire:  that thou mayst receive it, while I yet live.

@c    5:5. Then Tobias going forth, found a beautiful young man, standing
@c    girded, and as it were ready to walk.

@c    5:6. And not knowing that he was an angel of God, he saluted him, and
@c    said:  From whence art thou, good young man?

@c    5:7. But he answered:  Of the children of Israel.  And Tobias said to
@c    him:  Knowest thou the way that leadeth to the country of the Medes?

@c    5:8. And he answered:  I know it:  and I have often walked through all
@c    the ways thereof, and I have abode with Gabelus our brother, who
@c    dwelleth at Rages a city of the Medes, which is situate in the mount of
@c    Ecbatana.

@c    5:9. And Tobias said to him:  Stay for me, I beseech thee, till I tell
@c    these same things to my father.

@c    5:10. Then Tobias going in told all these things to his father.  Upon
@c    which his father being in admiration, desired that he would come in
@c    unto him.

@c    5:11. So going in he saluted him, and said:  Joy be to thee always.

@c    5:12. And Tobias said:  What manner of joy shall be to me, who sit in
@c    darkness and see not the light of heaven?

@c    5:13. And the young man said to him:  Be of good courage, thy cure from
@c    God is at hand.

@c    5:14. And Tobias said to him:  Canst thou conduct my son to Gabelus at
@c    Rages, a city of the Medes?  and when thou shalt return, I will pay thee
@c    thy hire.

@c    5:15. And the angel said to him:  I will conduct him thither, and bring
@c    him back to thee.

@c    5:16. And Tobias said to him:  I pray thee, tell me, of what family, or
@c    what tribe art thou?

@c    5:17. And Raphael the angel answered:  Dost thou seek the family of him
@c    thou hirest, or the hired servant himself to go with thy son?

@c    5:18. But lest I should make thee uneasy, I am Azarias the son of the
@c    great Ananias.

@c    Azarias. . .The angel took the form of Azarias:  and therefore might call
@c    himself by the name of the man whom he personated.  Azarias, in Hebrew,
@c    signifies the help of God, and Ananias the grace of God.

@c    5:19. And Tobias answered:  Thou art of a great family.  But I pray thee
@c    be not angry that I desired to know thy family.

@c    5:20. And the angel said to him:  I will lead thy son safe, and bring
@c    him to thee again safe.

@c    5:21. And Tobias answering, said:  May you have a good journey, and God
@c    be with you in your way, and his angel accompany you.

@c    5:22. Then all things being ready, that were to be carried in their
@c    journey, Tobias bade his father and his mother farewell, and they set
@c    out both together.

@c    5:23. And when they were departed, his mother began to weep, and to
@c    say:  Thou hast taken the staff of our old age, and sent him away from
@c    us.

@c    5:24. I wish the money for which thou hast sent him, had never been.

@c    5:25. For our poverty was sufficient for us, that we might account it
@c    as riches, that we saw our son.

@c    5:26. And Tobias said to her:  Weep not, our son will arrive thither
@c    safe, and will return safe to us, and thy eyes shall see him.

@c    5:27. For I believe that the good angel of God doth accompany him, and
@c    doth order all things well that are done about him, so that he shall
@c    return to us with joy.

@c    5:28. At these words his mother ceased weeping, and held her peace.



@c    Tobias Chapter 6


@c    By the angel's advice young Tobias taketh hold on a fish that
@c    assaulteth him.  Reserveth the heart, the gall, and the liver for
@c    medicines.  They lodge at the house of Raguel, whose daughter Sara,
@c    Tobias is to marry; she had before been married to seven husbands, who
@c    were all slain by a devil.

@c    6:1. And Tobias went forward, and the dog followed him, and he lodged
@c    the first night by the river of Tigris.

@c    6:2. And he went out to wash his feet, and behold a monstrous fish came
@c    up to devour him.

@c    6:3. And Tobias being afraid of him, cried out with a loud voice,
@c    saying:  Sir, he cometh upon me.

@c    6:4. And the angel said to him:  Take him by the gill, and draw him to
@c    thee.  And when he had done so, he drew him out upon the land, and he
@c    began to pant before his feet.

@c    6:5. Then the angel said to him:  Take out the entrails of this fish,
@c    and lay up his heart, and his gall, and his liver for thee:  for these
@c    are necessary for useful medicines.

@c    6:6. And when he had done so, he roasted the flesh thereof, and they
@c    took it with them in the way:  the rest they salted as much as might
@c    serve them, till they came to Rages the city of the Medes.

@c    6:7. Then Tobias asked the angel, and said to him:  I beseech thee,
@c    brother Azarias, tell me what remedies are these things good for, which
@c    thou hast bid me keep of the fish?

@c    6:8. And the angel, answering, said to him:  If thou put a little piece
@c    of its heart upon coals, the smoke thereof driveth away all kind of
@c    devils, either from man or from woman, so that they come no more to
@c    them.

@c    Its heart, etc.  The liver (ver. 19). . .God was pleased to give these
@c    things a virtue against those proud spirits, to make them, who affected
@c    to be like the Most High, subject to such mean corporeal creatures as
@c    instruments of his power.

@c    6:9. And the gall is good for anointing the eyes, in which there is a
@c    white speck, and they shall be cured.

@c    6:10. And Tobias said to him:  Where wilt thou that we lodge?

@c    6:11. And the angel answering, said:  Here is one whose name is Raguel,
@c    a near kinsman of thy tribe, and he hath a daughter named Sara, but he
@c    hath no son nor any other daughter beside her.

@c    6:12. All his substance is due to thee, and thou must take her to wife.

@c    6:13. Ask her therefore of her father, and he will give her thee to
@c    wife.

@c    6:14. Then Tobias answered, and said:  I hear that she hath been given
@c    to seven husbands, and they all died:  moreover I have heard, that a
@c    devil killed them.

@c    6:15. Now I am afraid, lest the same thing should happen to me also:
@c    and whereas I am the only child of my parents, I should bring down
@c    their old age with sorrow to hell.

@c    Hell. . .That is, to the place where the souls of the good were kept
@c    before the coming of Christ.

@c    6:16. Then the angel Raphael said to him:  Hear me, and I will shew thee
@c    who they are, over whom the devil can prevail.

@c    6:17. For they who in such manner receive matrimony, as to shut out God
@c    from themselves, and from their mind, and to give themselves to their
@c    lust, as the horse and mule, which have not understanding, over them
@c    the devil hath power.

@c    6:18. But thou when thou shalt take her, go into the chamber, and for
@c    three days keep thyself continent from her, and give thyself to nothing
@c    else but to prayers with her.

@c    6:19. And on that night lay the liver of the fish on the fire, and the
@c    devil shall be driven away.

@c    6:20. But the second night thou shalt be admitted into the society of
@c    the holy Patriarchs.

@c    6:21. And the third night thou shalt obtain a blessing that sound
@c    children may be born of you.

@c    6:22. And when the third night is past, thou shalt take the virgin with
@c    the fear of the Lord, moved rather for love of children than for lust,
@c    that in the seed of Abraham thou mayst obtain a blessing in children.



@c    Tobias Chapter 7


@c    They are kindly entertained by Raguel.  Tobias demandeth Sara to wife.

@c    7:1. And they went in to Raguel, and Raguel received them with joy.

@c    7:2. And Raguel looking upon Tobias, said to Anna his wife:  How like is
@c    this young man to my cousin?

@c    7:3. And when he had spoken these words, he said:  Whence are ye young
@c    men our brethren?

@c    7:4. But they said:  We are of the tribe of Nephtali, of the captivity
@c    of Ninive.

@c    7:5. And Raguel said to them:  Do you know Tobias my brother?  And they
@c    said:  We know him.

@c    7:6. And when he was speaking many good things of him, the angel said
@c    to Raguel:  Tobias concerning whom thou inquirest is this young man's
@c    father.

@c    7:7. And Raguel went to him, and kissed him with tears and weeping upon
@c    his neck, said:  A blessing be upon thee, my son, because thou art the
@c    son of a good and most virtuous man.

@c    7:8. And Anna his wife, and Sara their daughter wept.

@c    7:9. And after they had spoken, Raguel commanded a sheep to be killed,
@c    and a feast to be prepared.  And when he desired them to sit down to
@c    dinner,

@c    7:10. Tobias said:  I will not eat nor drink here this day, unless thou
@c    first grant me my petition, and promise to give me Sara thy daughter.

@c    7:11. Now when Raguel heard this he was afraid, knowing what had
@c    happened to those seven husbands, that went in unto her:  and he began
@c    to fear lest it might happen to him also in like manner:  and as he was
@c    in suspense, and gave no answer to his petition,

@c    7:12. The angel said to him:  Be not afraid to give her to this man, for
@c    to him who feareth God is thy daughter due to be his wife:  therefore
@c    another could not have her.

@c    7:13. Then Raguel said:  I doubt not but God hath regarded my prayers
@c    and tears in his sight.

@c    7:14. And I believe he hath therefore made you come to me, that this
@c    maid might be married to one of her own kindred, according to the law
@c    of Moses:  and now doubt not but I will give her to thee.

@c    7:15. And taking the right hand of his daughter, he gave it into the
@c    right hand of Tobias, saying:  The God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac,
@c    and the God of Jacob be with you, and may he join you together, and
@c    fulfil his blessing in you.

@c    7:16. And taking paper they made a writing of the marriage.

@c    7:17. And afterwards they made merry, blessing God.

@c    7:18. And Raguel called to him Anna his wife, and bade her to prepare
@c    another chamber.

@c    7:19. And she brought Sara her daughter in thither, and she wept.

@c    7:20. And she said to her:  Be of good cheer, my daughter:  the Lord of
@c    heaven give thee joy for the trouble thou hast undergone.



@c    Tobias Chapter 8


@c    Tobias burneth part of the fish's liver, and Raphael bindeth the devil.
@c    Tobias and Sara pray.

@c    8:1. And after they had supped, they brought in the young man to her.

@c    8:2. And Tobias remembering the angel's word, took out of his bag part
@c    of the liver, and laid it upon burning coals.

@c    8:3. Then the angel Raphael took the devil, and bound him in the desert
@c    of upper Egypt.

@c    8:4. Then Tobias exhorted the virgin, and said to her:  Sara, arise, and
@c    let us pray to God to day, and to morrow, and the next day:  because for
@c    these three nights we are joined to God:  and when the third night is
@c    over, we will be in our own wedlock.

@c    8:5. For we are the children of saints, and we must not be joined
@c    together like heathens that know not God.

@c    8:6. So they both arose, and prayed earnestly both together that health
@c    might be given them,

@c    8:7. And Tobias said:  Lord God of our fathers, may the heavens and the
@c    earth, and the sea, and the fountains, and the rivers, and all thy
@c    creatures that are in them, bless thee.

@c    8:8. Thou madest Adam of the slime of the earth, and gavest him Eve for
@c    a helper.

@c    8:9. And now, Lord, thou knowest, that not for fleshly lust do I take
@c    my sister to wife, but only for the love of posterity, in which thy
@c    name may be blessed for ever and ever.

@c    8:10. Sara also said:  Have mercy on us, O Lord, have mercy on us, and
@c    let us grow old both together in health.

@c    8:11. And it came to pass about the cockcrowing, Raguel ordered his
@c    servants to be called for, and they went with him together to dig a
@c    grave.

@c    8:12. For he said:  Lest perhaps it may have happened to him, in like
@c    manner as it did to the other seven husbands, that went in unto her.

@c    8:13. And when they had prepared the pit, Raguel went back to his wife,
@c    and said to her:

@c    8:14. Send one of thy maids, and let her see if he be dead, that I may
@c    bury him before it be day.

@c    8:15. So she sent one of her maidservants, who went into the chamber,
@c    and found them safe and sound, sleeping both together.

@c    8:16. And returning she brought the good news:  and Raguel and Anna his
@c    wife blessed the Lord,

@c    8:17. And said:  We bless thee, O Lord God of Israel, because it hath
@c    not happened as we suspected.

@c    8:18. For thou hast shewn thy mercy to us, and hast shut out from us
@c    the enemy that persecuted us.

@c    8:19. And thou hast taken pity upon two only children.  Make them, O
@c    Lord, bless thee more fully:  and to offer up to thee a sacrifice of thy
@c    praise, and of their health, that all nations may know, that thou alone
@c    art God in all the earth.

@c    8:20. And immediately Raguel commanded his servants, to fill up the pit
@c    they had made, before it was day.

@c    8:21. And he spoke to his wife to make ready a feast, and prepare all
@c    kind of provisions that are necessary for such as go a journey.

@c    8:22. He caused also two fat kine, and four wethers to be killed, and a
@c    banquet to be prepared for all his neighbours, and all his friends,

@c    8:23. And Raguel adjured Tobias, to abide with him two weeks.

@c    8:24. And of all things which Raguel possessed, he gave one half to
@c    Tobias, and made a writing, that the half that remained should after
@c    their decease come also to Tobias.



@c    Tobias Chapter 9


@c    The angel Raphael goeth to Gabelus, receiveth the money, and bringeth
@c    him to the marriage.

@c    9:1. Then Tobias called the angel to him, whom he took to be a man, and
@c    said to him:  Brother Azarias, I pray thee hearken to my words:

@c    9:2. If I should give myself to be thy servant I should not make a
@c    worthy return for thy care.

@c    9:3. However, I beseech thee, to take with thee beasts and servants,
@c    and to go to Gabelus to Rages the city of the Medes:  and to restore to
@c    him his note of hand, and receive of him the money, and desire him to
@c    come to my wedding.

@c    9:4. For thou knowest that my father numbereth the days:  and if I stay
@c    one day more, his soul will be afflicted.

@c    9:5. And indeed thou seest how Raguel hath adjured me, whose adjuring I
@c    cannot despise.

@c    9:6. Then Raphael took four of Raguel's servants, and two camels, and
@c    went to Rages the city of the Medes:  and finding Gabelus, gave him his
@c    note of hand, and received of him all the money.

@c    9:7. And he told him concerning Tobias the son of Tobias, all that had
@c    been done:  and made him come with him to the wedding.

@c    9:8. And when he was come into Raguel's house he found Tobias sitting
@c    at the table:  and he leaped up, and they kissed each other:  and Gabelus
@c    wept, and blessed God,

@c    9:9. And said:  The God of Israel bless thee, because thou art the son
@c    of a very good and just man, and that feareth God, and doth almsdeeds:

@c    9:10. And may a blessing come upon thy wife and upon your parents.

@c    9:11. And may you see your children, and your children's children, unto
@c    the third and fourth generation:  and may your seed be blessed by the
@c    God of Israel, who reigneth for ever and ever.

@c    9:12. And when all had said, Amen, they went to the feast:  but the
@c    marriage feast they celebrated also with the fear of the Lord.



@c    Tobias Chapter 10


@c    The parents lament the long absence of their son Tobias.  He sets out to
@c    return.

@c    10:1. But as Tobias made longer stay upon occasion of the marriage,
@c    Tobias his father was solicitous, saying:  Why thinkest thou doth my son
@c    tarry, or why is he detained there?

@c    10:2. Is Gabelus dead, thinkest thou, and no man will pay him the
@c    money?

@c    10:3. And he began to be exceeding sad, both he and Anna his wife with
@c    him:  and they began both to weep together, because their son did not
@c    return to them on the day appointed.

@c    10:4. But his mother wept and was quite disconsolate, and said:  Woe,
@c    woe is me, my son; why did we send thee to go to a strange country, the
@c    light of our eyes, the staff of our old age, the comfort of our life,
@c    the hope of our posterity?

@c    10:5. We having all things together in thee alone, ought not to have
@c    let thee go from us.

@c    10:6. And Tobias said to her:  Hold thy peace, and be not troubled, our
@c    son is safe:  that man with whom we sent him is very trusty.

@c    10:7. But she could by no means be comforted, but daily running out
@c    looked round about, and went into all the ways by which there seemed
@c    any hope he might return, that she might if possible see him coming
@c    afar off.

@c    10:8. But Raguel said to his son in law:  Stay here, and I will send a
@c    messenger to Tobias thy father, that thou art in health.

@c    10:9. And Tobias said to him:  I know that my father and mother now
@c    count the days, and their spirit is grievously afflicted within them.

@c    10:10. And when Raguel had pressed Tobias with many words, and he by no
@c    means would hearken to him, he delivered Sara unto him, and half of all
@c    his substance in menservants, and womenservants, in cattle, in camels,
@c    and in kine, and in much money, and sent him away safe and joyful from
@c    him,

@c    10:11. Saying:  The holy angel of the Lord be with you in your journey,
@c    and bring you through safe, and that you may find all things well about
@c    your parents, and my eyes may see your children before I die.

@c    10:12. And the parents taking their daughter kissed her, and let her
@c    go:

@c    10:13. Admonishing her to honour her father and mother in law, to love
@c    her husband, to take care of the family, to govern the house, and to
@c    behave herself irreprehensibly.



@c    Tobias Chapter 11


@c    Tobias anointeth his father's eyes with the fish's gall, and he
@c    recovereth his sight.

@c    11:1. And as they were returning they came to Charan, which is in the
@c    midway to Ninive, the eleventh day.

@c    11:2. And the angel said:  Brother Tobias, thou knowest how thou didst
@c    leave thy father.

@c    11:3. If it please thee therefore, let us go before, and let the family
@c    follow softly after us, together with thy wife, and with the beasts.

@c    11:4. And as this their going pleased him, Raphael said to Tobias:  Take
@c    with thee of the gall of the fish, for it will be necessary.  So Tobias
@c    took some of that gall and departed.

@c    11:5. But Anna sat beside the way daily, on the top of a hill, from
@c    whence she might see afar off.

@c    11:6. And while she watched his coming from that place, she saw him
@c    afar off, and presently perceived it was her son coming:  and returning
@c    she told her husband, saying:  Behold thy son cometh.

@c    11:7. And Raphael said to Tobias:  As soon as thou shalt come into thy
@c    house, forthwith adore the Lord thy God:  and giving thanks to him, go
@c    to thy father, and kiss him.

@c    11:8. And immediately anoint his eyes with this gall of the fish, which
@c    thou carriest with thee.  For be assured that his eyes shall be
@c    presently opened, and thy father shall see the light of heaven, and
@c    shall rejoice in the sight of thee.

@c    11:9. Then the dog, which had been with them in the way, ran before,
@c    and coming as if he had brought the news, shewed his joy by his fawning
@c    and wagging his tail.

@c    The dog, etc. . .This may seem a very minute circumstance to be recorded
@c    in sacred history:  but as we learn from our Saviour, St. Matt. 5.18,
@c    there are iotas and tittles in the word of God:  that is to say, things
@c    that appear minute, but which have indeed a deep and mysterious meaning
@c    in them.

@c    11:10. And his father that was blind, rising up, began to run stumbling
@c    with his feet:  and giving a servant his hand, went to meet his son.

@c    11:11. And receiving him kissed him, as did also his wife, and they
@c    began to weep for joy.

@c    11:12. And when they had adored God, and given him thanks, they sat
@c    down together.

@c    11:13. Then Tobias taking of the gall of the fish, anointed his
@c    father's eyes.

@c    11:14. And he stayed about half an hour:  and a white skin began to come
@c    out of his eyes, like the skin of an egg.

@c    11:15. And Tobias took hold of it, and drew it from his eyes, and
@c    recovered his sight.

@c    11:16. And they glorified God, both he and his wife and all that knew
@c    him.

@c    11:17. And Tobias said:  I bless thee, O Lord God of Israel, because
@c    thou hast chastised me, and thou hast saved me and behold I see Tobias
@c    my son.

@c    11:18. And after seven days Sara his son's wife and all the family
@c    arrived safe, and the cattle, and the camels, and an abundance of money
@c    of his wife's:  and that money also which he had received of Gabelus,

@c    11:19. And he told his parents all the benefits of God, which he had
@c    done to him by the man that conducted him.

@c    11:20. And Achior and Nabath the kinsmen of Tobias came, rejoicing for
@c    Tobias, and congratulating with him for all the good things that God
@c    had done for him.

@c    11:21. And for seven days they feasted and rejoiced all with great joy.



@c    Tobias Chapter 12


@c    Raphael maketh himself known.

@c    12:1. Then Tobias called to him his son and said to him:  What can we
@c    give to this holy man, that is come with thee?

@c    12:2. Tobias answering, said to his father:  Father, what wages shall we
@c    give him?  or what can be worthy of his benefits?

@c    12:3. He conducted me and brought me safe again, he received the money
@c    of Gabelus, he caused me to have my wife, and he chased from her the
@c    evil spirit, he gave joy to her parents, myself he delivered from being
@c    devoured by the fish, thee also he hath made to see the light of
@c    heaven, and we are filled with all good things through him.  What can we
@c    give him sufficient for these things?

@c    12:4. But I beseech thee, my father, to desire him, that he would
@c    vouchsafe to accept of one half of all things that have been brought.

@c    12:5. So the father and the son calling him, took him aside:  and began
@c    to desire him that he would vouchsafe to accept of half of all things
@c    that they had brought,

@c    12:6. Then he said to them secretly, Bless ye the God of heaven, give
@c    glory to him in the sight of all that live, because he hath shewn his
@c    mercy to you.

@c    12:7. For it is good to hide the secret of a king:  to reveal and
@c    confess the works of God.

@c    12:8. Prayer is good with fasting and alms more than to lay up
@c    treasures of gold.

@c    12:9. For alms delivereth from death, and the same is that which
@c    purgeth away sins, and maketh to find mercy and life everlasting.

@c    12:10. But they that commit sin and iniquity, are enemies to their own
@c    soul.

@c    12:11. I discover then the truth unto you, and I will not hide the
@c    secret from you.

@c    12:12. When thou didst pray with tears, and didst bury the dead, and
@c    didst leave thy dinner, and hide the dead by day in thy house, and bury
@c    them by night, I offered thy prayer to the Lord.

@c    12:13. And because thou wast acceptable to God, it was necessary that
@c    temptation should prove thee.

@c    12:14. And now the Lord hath sent me to heal thee, and to deliver Sara
@c    thy son's wife from the devil.

@c    12:15. For I am the angel Raphael, one of the seven, who stand before
@c    the Lord.

@c    12:16. And when they had heard these things, they were troubled, and
@c    being seized with fear they fell upon the ground on their face.

@c    12:17. And the angel said to them:  Peace be to you, fear not.

@c    12:18. For when I was with you, I was there by the will of God:  bless
@c    ye him, and sing praises to him.

@c    12:19. I seemed indeed to eat and to drink with you but I use an
@c    invisible meat and drink, which cannot be seen by men.

@c    12:20. It is time therefore that I return to him that sent me:  but
@c    bless ye God, and publish all his wonderful works.

@c    12:21. And when he had said these things, he was taken from their
@c    sight, and they could see him no more.

@c    12:22. Then they lying prostrate for three hours upon their face,
@c    blessed God, and rising up, they told all his wonderful works.



@c    Tobias Chapter 13


@c    Tobias the father praiseth God, exhorting all Israel to do the same.
@c    Prophesieth the restoration and better state of Jerusalem.

@c    13:1. And Tobias the elder opening his mouth, blessed the Lord, and
@c    said:  Thou art great O Lord, for ever, and thy kingdom is unto all
@c    ages.

@c    13:2. For thou scourgest, and thou savest:  thou leadest down to hell,
@c    and bringest up again:  and there is none that can escape thy hand.

@c    13:3. Give glory to the Lord, ye children of Israel, and praise him in
@c    the sight of the Gentiles:

@c    13:4. Because he hath therefore scattered you among the Gentiles, who
@c    know not him, that you may declare his wonderful works, and make them
@c    know that there is no other almighty God besides him.

@c    13:5. He hath chastised us for our iniquities:  and he will save us for
@c    his own mercy.

@c    13:6. See then what he hath done with us, and with fear and trembling
@c    give ye glory to him:  and extol the eternal King of worlds in your
@c    works.

@c    13:7. As for me, I will praise him in the land of my captivity:  because
@c    he hath shewn his majesty toward a sinful nation,

@c    13:8. Be converted therefore, ye sinners, and do justice before God,
@c    believing that he will shew his mercy to you.

@c    13:9. And I and my soul will rejoice in him.

@c    13:10. Bless ye the Lord, all his elect, keep days of joy, and give
@c    glory to him.

@c    13:11. Jerusalem, city of God, the Lord hath chastised thee for the
@c    works of thy hands.

@c    Jerusalem. . .What is prophetically delivered here, and in the following
@c    chapter, with relation to Jerusalem, is partly to be understood of the
@c    rebuilding of the city after the captivity:  and partly of the spiritual
@c    Jerusalem, which is the church of Christ, and the eternal Jerusalem in
@c    heaven.

@c    13:12. Give glory to the Lord for thy good things, and bless the God
@c    eternal that he may rebuild his tabernacle in thee, and may call back
@c    all the captives to thee, and thou mayst rejoice for ever and ever.

@c    13:13. Thou shalt shine with a glorious light:  and all the ends of the
@c    earth shall worship thee,

@c    13:14. Nations from afar shall come to thee:  and shall bring gifts, and
@c    shall adore the Lord in thee, and shall esteem thy land as holy.

@c    13:15. For they shall call upon the great name in thee,

@c    13:16. They shall be cursed that shall despise thee:  and they shall be
@c    condemned that shall blaspheme thee:  and blessed shall they be that
@c    shall build thee up,

@c    13:17. But thou shalt rejoice in thy children, because they shall all
@c    be blessed, and shall be gathered together to the Lord.

@c    13:18. Blessed are all they that love thee, and that rejoice in thy
@c    peace,

@c    13:19. My soul, bless thou the Lord, because the Lord our God hath
@c    delivered Jerusalem his city from all her troubles.

@c    13:20. Happy shall I be if there shall remain of my seed, to see the
@c    glory of Jerusalem.

@c    13:21. The gates of Jerusalem shall be built of sapphire, and of
@c    emerald, and all the walls thereof round about of precious stones.

@c    13:22. All its streets shall be paved with white and clean stones:  and
@c    Alleluia shall be sung in its streets,

@c    13:23. Blessed be the Lord, who hath exalted it, and may he reign over
@c    it for ever and ever, Amen.



@c    Tobias Chapter 14


@c    Old Tobias dieth at the age of a hundred and two years, after exhorting
@c    his son and grandsons to piety, foreshewing that Ninive shall be
@c    destroyed, and Jerusalem rebuilt.  The younger Tobias returneth with his
@c    family to Raguel, and dieth happily as he had lived.

@c    14:1. And the words of Tobias were ended.  And after Tobias was restored
@c    to his sight, he lived two and forty years, and saw the children of his
@c    grandchildren.

@c    14:2. And after he had lived a hundred and two years, he was buried
@c    honorably in Ninive.

@c    14:3. For he was six and fifty years old when he lost the sight of his
@c    eyes, and sixty when he recovered it again.

@c    14:4. And the rest of his life was in joy, and with great increase of
@c    the fear of God he departed in peace.

@c    14:5. And at the hour of his death he called unto him his son Tobias
@c    and his children, seven young men, his grandsons, and said to them:

@c    14:6. The destruction of Ninive is at hand:  for the word of the Lord
@c    must be fulfilled:  and our brethren, that are scattered abroad from the
@c    land of Israel, shall return to it.

@c    14:7. And all the land thereof that is desert shall be filled with
@c    people, and the house of God which is burnt in it, shall again be
@c    rebuilt:  and all that fear God shall return thither.

@c    14:8. And the Gentiles shall leave their idols, and shall come into
@c    Jerusalem, and shall dwell in it.

@c    14:9. And all the kings of the earth shall rejoice in it, adoring the
@c    King of Israel.

@c    14:10. Hearken therefore, my children, to your father:  serve the Lord
@c    in truth, and seek to do the things that please him:

@c    14:11. And command your children that they do justice and almsdeeds,
@c    and that they be mindful of God, and bless him at all times in truth,
@c    and with all their power.

@c    14:12. And now, children, hear me, and do not stay here:  but as soon as
@c    you shall bury your mother by me in one sepulchre, without delay direct
@c    your steps to depart hence:

@c    14:13. For I see that its iniquity will bring it to destruction.

@c    14:14. And it came to pass that after the death of his mother, Tobias
@c    departed out of Ninive with his wife, and children, and children's
@c    children, and returned to his father and mother in law.

@c    14:15. And he found them in health in a good old age:  and he took care
@c    of them, and he closed their eyes:  and all the inheritance of Raguel's
@c    house came to him:  and he saw his children's children to the fifth
@c    generation.

@c    14:16. And after he had lived ninety-nine years in the fear of the
@c    Lord, with joy they buried him.

@c    14:17. And all his kindred, and all his generation continued in good
@c    life, and in holy conversation, so that they were acceptable both to
@c    God, and to men, and to all that dwelt in the land.
