@c    THE BOOK OF WISDOM



@c    This Book is so called, because it treats of the excellence of WISDOM,
@c    the means to obtain it, and the happy fruits it produces.  It is written
@c    in the person of Solomon, and contains his sentiments.  But it is
@c    uncertain who was the writer.  It abounds with instructions and
@c    exhortations to kings and all magistrates to minister justice in the
@c    commonwealth, teaching all kinds of virtues under the general names of
@c    justice and wisdom.  It contains also many prophecies of Christ's
@c    coming, passion, resurrection, and other Christian mysteries.  The whole
@c    may be divided into three parts.  In the first six chapters, the author
@c    admonishes all superiors to love and exercise justice and wisdom.  In
@c    the next three, he teacheth that wisdom proceedeth only from God, and
@c    is procured by prayer and a good life.  In the other ten chapters, he
@c    sheweth the excellent effects and utility of wisdom and justice.



@c    Wisdom Chapter 1


@c    An exhortation to seek God sincerely, who cannot be deceived, and
@c    desireth not our death.

@c    1:1. Love justice, you that are the judges of the earth.  Think of the
@c    Lord in goodness, and seek him in simplicity of heart:

@c    1:2. For he is found by them that tempt him not:  and he sheweth himself
@c    to them that have faith in him.

@c    1:3. For perverse thoughts separate from God:  and his power, when it is
@c    tried, reproveth the unwise:

@c    1:4. For wisdom will not enter into a malicious soul, nor dwell in a
@c    body subject to sins.

@c    1:5. For the Holy Spirit of discipline will flee from the deceitful,
@c    and will withdraw himself from thoughts that are without understanding,
@c    and he shall not abide when iniquity cometh in.

@c    1:6. For the spirit of wisdom is benevolent, and will not acquit the
@c    evil speaker from his lips:  for God is witness of his reins, and he is
@c    a true searcher of his heart, and a hearer of his tongue.

@c    1:7. For the Spirit of the Lord hath filled the whole world:  and that
@c    which containeth all things, hath knowledge of the voice.

@c    1:8. Therefore he that speaketh unjust things, cannot be hid, neither
@c    shall the chastising judgment pass him by.

@c    1:9. For inquisition shall be made into the thoughts of the ungodly,
@c    and the hearing of his words shall come to God, to the chastising of
@c    his iniquities.

@c    1:10. For the ear of jealousy heareth all things, and the tumult of
@c    murmuring shall not be hid.

@c    1:11. Keep yourselves, therefore, from murmuring, which profiteth
@c    nothing, and refrain your tongue from detraction, for an obscure speech
@c    shall not go for nought:  and the mouth that belieth, killeth the soul.

@c    1:12. Seek not death in the error of your life, neither procure ye
@c    destruction by the works of your hands.

@c    1:13. For God made not death, neither hath he pleasure in the
@c    destruction of the living.

@c    1:14. For he created all things that they might be:  and he made the
@c    nations of the earth for health:  and there is no poison of destruction
@c    in them, nor kingdom of hell upon the earth.

@c    1:15. For justice is perpetual and immortal.

@c    1:16. But the wicked with works and words have called it to them:  and
@c    esteeming it a friend, have fallen away and have made a covenant with
@c    it:  because they are worthy to be of the part thereof.



@c    Wisdom Chapter 2


@c    The vain reasonings of the wicked:  their persecuting the just,
@c    especially the Son of God.

@c    2:1. For they have said, reasoning with themselves, but not right:  The
@c    time of our life is short and tedious, and in the end of a man there is
@c    no remedy, and no man hath been known to have returned from hell:

@c    2:2. For we are born of nothing, and after this we shall be as if we
@c    had not been:  for the breath in our nostrils is smoke:  and speech a
@c    spark to move our heart,

@c    2:3. Which being put out, our body shall be ashes, and our spirit shall
@c    be poured abroad as soft air, and our life shall pass away as the trace
@c    of a cloud, and shall be dispersed as a mist, which is driven away by
@c    the beams of the sun, and overpowered with the heat thereof:

@c    2:4. And our name in time shall be forgotten, and no man shall have any
@c    remembrance of our works.

@c    2:5. For our time is as the passing of a shadow, and there is no going
@c    back of our end:  for it is fast sealed, and no man returneth:

@c    2:6. Come, therefore, and let us enjoy the good things that are
@c    present, and let us speedily use the creatures as in youth.

@c    2:7. Let us fill ourselves with costly wine, and ointments:  and let not
@c    the flower of the time pass by us.

@c    2:8. Let us crown ourselves with roses, before they be withered:  let no
@c    meadow escape our riot.

@c    2:9. Let none of us go without his part in luxury:  let us every where
@c    leave tokens of joy:  for this is our portion, and this our lot.

@c    2:10. Let us oppress the poor just man, and not spare the widow, nor
@c    honour the ancient grey hairs of the aged.

@c    2:11. But let our strength be the law of justice:  for that which is
@c    feeble is found to be nothing worth.

@c    2:12. Let us, therefore, lie in wait for the just, because he is not
@c    for our turn, and he is contrary to our doings, and upbraideth us with
@c    transgressions of the law, and divulgeth against us the sins of our way
@c    of life.

@c    2:13. He boasteth that he hath the knowledge of God, and calleth
@c    himself the son of God.

@c    2:14. He is become a censurer of our thoughts.

@c    2:15. He is grievous unto us, even to behold:  for his life is not like
@c    other men's, and his ways are very different.

@c    2:16. We are esteemed by him as triflers, and he abstaineth from our
@c    ways as from filthiness, and he preferreth the latter end of the just,
@c    and glorieth that he hath God for his father.

@c    2:17. Let us see then if his words be true, and let us prove what shall
@c    happen to him, and we shall know what his end shall be.

@c    2:18. For if he be the true son of God, he will defend him, and will
@c    deliver him from the hands of his enemies.

@c    2:19. Let us examine him by outrages and tortures, that we may know his
@c    meekness, and try his patience.

@c    2:20. Let us condemn him to a most shameful death:  for there shall be
@c    respect had unto him by his words.

@c    2:21. These things they thought, and were deceived:  for their own
@c    malice blinded them.

@c    2:22. And they knew not the secrets of God, nor hoped for the wages of
@c    justice, nor esteemed the honour of holy souls.

@c    2:23. For God created man incorruptible, and to the image of his own
@c    likeness he made him.

@c    2:24. But by the envy of the devil, death came into the world:

@c    2:25. And they follow him that are of his side.



@c    Wisdom Chapter 3


@c    The happiness of the just:  and the unhappiness of the wicked.

@c    3:1. But the souls of the just are in the hand of God, and the torment
@c    of death shall not touch them.

@c    3:2. In the sight of the unwise they seemed to die:  and their departure
@c    was taken for misery:

@c    3:3. And their going away from us, for utter destruction:  but they are
@c    in peace.

@c    3:4. And though in the sight of men they suffered torments, their hope
@c    is full of immortality.

@c    3:5. Afflicted in few things, in many they shall be well rewarded:
@c    because God hath tried them, and found them worthy of himself.

@c    3:6. As gold in the furnace, he hath proved them, and as a victim of a
@c    holocaust, he hath received them, and in time there shall be respect
@c    had to them.

@c    3:7. The just shall shine, and shall run to and fro like sparks among
@c    the reeds.

@c    3:8. They shall judge nations, and rule over people, and their Lord
@c    shall reign for ever.

@c    3:9. They that trust in him shall understand the truth:  and they that
@c    are faithful in love, shall rest in him:  for grace and peace are to his
@c    elect.

@c    3:10. But the wicked shall be punished according to their own devices:
@c    who have neglected the just, and have revolted from the Lord.

@c    3:11. For he that rejecteth wisdom, and discipline, is unhappy:  and
@c    their hope is vain, and their labours without fruit, and their works
@c    unprofitable.

@c    3:12. Their wives are foolish, and their children wicked.

@c    3:13. Their offspring is cursed, for happy is the barren:  and the
@c    undefiled, that hath not known bed in sin, she shall have fruit in the
@c    visitation of holy souls.

@c    3:14. And the eunuch, that hath not wrought iniquity with his hands,
@c    nor thought wicked things against God for the precious gift of faith
@c    shall be given to him, and a most acceptable lot in the temple of God.

@c    3:15. For the fruit of good labours is glorious, and the root of wisdom
@c    never faileth.

@c    3:16. But the children of adulterers shall not come to perfection, and
@c    the seed of the unlawful bed shall be rooted out.

@c    3:17. And if they live long, they shall be nothing regarded, and their
@c    last old age shall be without honour.

@c    3:18. And if they die quickly, they shall have no hope, nor speech of
@c    comfort in the day of trial.

@c    3:19. For dreadful are the ends of a wicked race.



@c    Wisdom Chapter 4


@c    The difference between the chaste and the adulterous generations:  and
@c    between the death of the just and the wicked.

@c    4:1. How beautiful is the chaste generation with glory:  for the memory
@c    thereof is immortal:  because it is known both with God and with men.

@c    4:2. When it is present, they imitate it:  and they desire it, when it
@c    hath withdrawn itself, and it triumpheth crowned for ever, winning the
@c    reward of undefiled conflicts.

@c    4:3. But the multiplied brood of the wicked shall not thrive, and
@c    bastard slips shall not take deep root, nor any fast foundation.

@c    4:4. And if they flourish in branches for a time, yet standing not
@c    fast, they shall be shaken with the wind, and through the force of
@c    winds they shall be rooted out.

@c    4:5. For the branches not being perfect, shall be broken, and their
@c    fruits shall be unprofitable, and sour to eat, and fit for nothing.

@c    4:6. For the children that are born of unlawful beds, are witnesses of
@c    wickedness against their parents in their trial.

@c    4:7. But the just man, if he be prevented with death, shall be in rest.

@c    4:8. For venerable old age is not that of long time, nor counted by the
@c    number of years:  but the understanding of a man is grey hairs.

@c    4:9. And a spotless life is old age.

@c    4:10. He pleased God, and was beloved, and living among sinners, he was
@c    translated.

@c    4:11. He was taken away, lest wickedness should alter his
@c    understanding, or deceit beguile his soul.

@c    4:12. For the bewitching of vanity obscureth good things, and the
@c    wandering of concupiscence overturneth the innocent mind.

@c    4:13. Being made perfect in a short space, he fulfilled a long time.

@c    4:14. For his soul pleased God:  therefore he hastened to bring him out
@c    of the midst of iniquities:  but the people see this, and understand
@c    not, nor lay up such things in their hearts:

@c    4:15. That the grace of God, and his mercy is with his saints, and that
@c    he hath respect to his chosen.

@c    4:16. But the just that is dead, condemneth the wicked that are living,
@c    and youth soon ended, the long life of the unjust.

@c    4:17. For they shall see the end of the wise man, and it shall not
@c    understand what God hath designed for him, and why the Lord hath set
@c    him in safety.

@c    4:18. They shall see him, and shall despise him:  but the Lord shall
@c    laugh them to scorn.

@c    4:19. And they shall fall after this without honour, and be a reproach
@c    among the dead for ever:  for he shall burst them puffed up and
@c    speechless, and shall shake them from the foundations, and they shall
@c    be utterly laid waste:  they shall be in sorrow, and their memory shall
@c    perish.

@c    4:20. They shall come with fear at the thought of their sins, and their
@c    iniquities shall stand against them to convict them.



@c    Wisdom Chapter 5


@c    The fruitless repentance of the wicked in another world:  the reward of
@c    the just.

@c    5:1. Then shall the just stand with great constancy against those that
@c    have afflicted them, and taken away their labours.

@c    5:2. These seeing it, shall be troubled with terrible fear, and shall
@c    be amazed at the suddenness of their unexpected salvation,

@c    5:3. Saying within themselves, repenting, and groaning for anguish of
@c    spirit:  These are they, whom we had sometime in derision, and for a
@c    parable of reproach.

@c    5:4. We fools esteemed their life madness, and their end without
@c    honour.

@c    5:5. Behold, how they are numbered among the children of God, and their
@c    lot is among the saints.

@c    5:6. Therefore we have erred from the way of truth, and the light of
@c    justice hath not shined unto us, and the sun of understanding hath not
@c    risen upon us.

@c    5:7. We wearied ourselves in the way of iniquity and destruction, and
@c    have walked through hard ways, but the way of the Lord we have not
@c    known.

@c    5:8. What hath pride profited us?  or what advantage hath the boasting
@c    of riches brought us?

@c    5:9. All those things are passed away like a shadow, and like a post
@c    that runneth on,

@c    5:10. And as a ship, that passeth through the waves:  whereof when it is
@c    gone by, the trace cannot be found.  nor the path of its keel in the
@c    waters:

@c    5:11. Or as when a bird flieth through the air, of the passage of which
@c    no mark can be found, but only the sound of the wings beating the light
@c    air, and parting it by the force of her flight:  she moved her wings,
@c    and hath flown through, and there is no mark found afterwards of her
@c    way:

@c    5:12. Or as when an arrow is shot at a mark, the divided air quickly
@c    cometh together again, so that the passage thereof is not known:

@c    5:13. So we also being born, forthwith ceased to be:  and have been able
@c    to shew no mark of virtue:  but are consumed in our wickedness.

@c    5:14. Such things as these the sinners said in hell:

@c    5:15. For the hope of the wicked is as dust, which is blown away with
@c    the wind, and as a thin froth which is dispersed by the storm:  and a
@c    smoke that is scattered abroad by the wind:  and as the remembrance of a
@c    guest of one day that passeth by.

@c    5:16. But the just shall live for evermore:  and their reward is with
@c    the Lord, and the care of them with the most High.

@c    5:17. Therefore shall they receive a kingdom of glory, and a crown of
@c    beauty at the hand of the Lord:  for with his right hand he will cover
@c    them, and with his holy arm he will defend them.

@c    5:18. And his zeal will take armour, and he will arm the creature for
@c    the revenge of his enemies.

@c    5:19. He will put on justice as a breastplate, and will take true
@c    judgment instead of a helmet:

@c    5:20. He will take equity for an invincible shield:

@c    5:21. And he will sharpen his severe wrath for a spear, and the whole
@c    world shall fight with him against the unwise.

@c    5:22. Then shafts of lightning shall go directly from the clouds, as
@c    from a bow well bent, they shall be shot out, and shall fly to the
@c    mark.

@c    5:23. And thick hail shall be cast upon them from the stone casting
@c    wrath:  the water of the sea shall rage against them, and the rivers
@c    shall run together in a terrible manner.

@c    5:24. A mighty wind shall stand up against them, and as a whirlwind
@c    shall divide them:  and their iniquity shall bring all the earth to a
@c    desert, and wickedness shall overthrow the thrones of the mighty.



@c    Wisdom Chapter 6


@c    An address to princes to seek after wisdom:  she is easily found by
@c    those that seek her.

@c    6:1. Wisdom is better than strength:  and a wise man is better than a
@c    strong man.

@c    6:2. Hear, therefore, ye kings, and understand, learn ye that are
@c    judges of the ends of the earth.

@c    6:3. Give ear, you that rule the people, and that please yourselves in
@c    multitudes of nations:

@c    6:4. For power is given you by the Lord, and strength by the most High,
@c    who will examine your works:  and search out your thoughts:

@c    6:6. Because being ministers of his kingdom, you have not judged
@c    rightly, nor kept the law of justice, nor walked according to the will
@c    of God.

@c    6:6. Horribly and speedily will he appear to you:  for a most severe
@c    judgment shall be for them that bear rule.

@c    6:7. For to him that is little, mercy is granted:  but the mighty shall
@c    be mightily tormented.

@c    6:8. For God will not except any man's person, neither will he stand in
@c    awe of any man's greatness:  for he made the little and the great, and
@c    he hath equally care of all.

@c    6:9. But a greater punishment is ready for the more mighty.

@c    6:10. To you, therefore, O kings, are these my words, that you may
@c    learn wisdom, and not fall from it.

@c    6:11. For they that have kept just things justly, shall be justified:
@c    and they that have learned these things, shall find what to answer.

@c    6:12. Covet ye, therefore, my words, and love them, and you shall have
@c    instruction.

@c    6:13. Wisdom is glorious, and never fadeth away, and is easily seen by
@c    them that love her, and is found by them that seek her.

@c    6:14. She preventeth them that covet her, so that she first sheweth
@c    herself unto them.

@c    6:15. He that awaketh early to seek her, shall not labour:  for he shall
@c    find her sitting at his door.

@c    6:16. To think, therefore, upon her, is perfect understanding:  and he
@c    that watcheth for her, shall quickly be secure.

@c    6:17. For she goeth about seeking such as are worthy of her, and she
@c    sheweth herself to them cheerfully in the ways, and meeteth them with
@c    all providence.

@c    6:18. For the beginning of her is the most true desire of discipline.

@c    6:19. And the care of discipline is love:  and love is the keeping of
@c    her laws:  and the keeping of her laws is the firm foundation of
@c    incorruption:

@c    6:20. And incorruption bringeth near to God.

@c    6:21. Therefore the desire of wisdom bringeth to the everlasting
@c    kingdom.

@c    6:22. If then your delight be in thrones, and sceptres, O ye kings of
@c    the people, love wisdom, that you may reign for ever.

@c    6:23. Love the light of wisdom, all ye that bear rule over peoples.

@c    6:24. Now what wisdom is, and what was her origin, I will declare:  and
@c    I will not hide from you the mysteries of God, but will seek her out
@c    from the beginning of her birth, and bring the knowledge of her to
@c    light, and will not pass over the truth:

@c    6:25. Neither will I go with consuming envy:  for such a man shall not
@c    be partaker of wisdom.

@c    6:26. Now the multitude of the wise is the welfare of the whole world:
@c    and a wise king is the upholding of the people.

@c    6:27. Receive, therefore, instruction by my words, and it shall be
@c    profitable to you.



@c    Wisdom Chapter 7


@c    The excellence of wisdom:  how she is to be found.

@c    7:1. I myself am a mortal man, like all others, and of the race of him,
@c    that was first made of the earth, and in the womb of my mother I was
@c    fashioned to be flesh.

@c    7:2. In the time of ten months I was compacted in blood, of the seed of
@c    man, and the pleasure of sleep concurring.

@c    7:3. And being born, I drew in the common air, and fell upon the earth,
@c    that is made alike, and the first voice which I uttered was crying, as
@c    all others do.

@c    7:4. I was nursed in swaddling clothes, and with great cares.

@c    7:5. For none of the kings had any other beginning of birth.

@c    7:6. For all men have one entrance into life, and the like going out.

@c    7:7. Wherefore I wished, and understanding was given me:  and I called
@c    upon God, and the spirit of wisdom came upon me:

@c    7:8. And I preferred her before kingdoms and thrones, and esteemed
@c    riches nothing in comparison of her.

@c    7:9. Neither did I compare unto her any precious stone:  for all gold,
@c    in comparison of her, is as a little sand; and silver, in respect to
@c    her, shall be counted as clay.

@c    7:10. I loved her above health and beauty, and chose to have her
@c    instead of light:  for her light cannot be put out.

@c    7:11. Now all good things came to me together with her, and innumerable
@c    riches through her hands,

@c    7:12. And I rejoiced in all these:  for this wisdom went before me, and
@c    I knew not that she was the mother of them all.

@c    7:13. Which I have learned without guile, and communicate without envy,
@c    and her riches I hide not.

@c    7:14. For she is an infinite treasure to men:  which they that use,
@c    become the friends of God, being commended for the gifts of discipline.

@c    7:15. And God hath given to me to speak as I would, and to conceive
@c    thoughts worthy of those things that are given me:  because he is the
@c    guide of wisdom, and the director of the wise:

@c    7:16. For in his hand are both we, and our words, and all wisdom, and
@c    the knowledge and skill of works.

@c    7:17. For he hath given me the true knowledge of the things that are:
@c    to know the disposition of the whole world, and the virtues of the
@c    elements,

@c    7:18. The beginning, and ending, and midst of the times, the
@c    alterations of their courses, and the changes of seasons,

@c    7:19. The revolutions of the year, and the dispositions of the stars,

@c    7:20. The natures of living creatures, and rage of wild beasts, the
@c    force of winds, and reasonings of men, the diversities of plants, and
@c    the virtues of roots,

@c    7:21. And all such things as are hid, and not foreseen, I have learned:
@c    for wisdom, which is the worker of all things, taught me.

@c    7:22. For in her is the spirit of understanding; holy, one, manifold,
@c    subtile, eloquent, active, undefiled, sure, sweet, loving that which is
@c    good, quick, which nothing hindereth, beneficent,

@c    7:23. Gentle, kind, steadfast, assured, secure, having all power,
@c    overseeing all things, and containing all spirits:  intelligible, pure,
@c    subtile:

@c    7:24. For wisdom is more active than all active things; and reacheth
@c    everywhere, by reason of her purity.

@c    7:25. For she is a vapour of the power of God, and a certain pure
@c    emmanation of the glory of the Almighty God:  and therefore no defiled
@c    thing cometh into her.

@c    7:26. For she is the brightness of eternal light, and the unspotted
@c    mirror of God's majesty, and the image of his goodness.

@c    7:27. And being but one, she can do all things:  and remaining in
@c    herself the same, she reneweth all things, and through nations
@c    conveyeth herself into holy souls, she maketh the friends of God and
@c    prophets.

@c    7:28. For God loveth none but him that dwelleth with wisdom.

@c    7:29. For she is more beautiful than the sun, and above all the order
@c    of the stars:  being compared with the light, she is found before it.

@c    7:30. For after this cometh night, but no evil can overcome wisdom.



@c    Wisdom Chapter 8


@c    Further praises of wisdom:  and her fruits.

@c    8:1. She reacheth, therefore, from end to end mightily, and ordereth
@c    all things sweetly.

@c    8:2. Her have I loved, and have sought her out from my youth, and have
@c    desired to take for my spouse, and I became a lover of her beauty.

@c    8:3. She glorifieth her nobility by being conversant with God:  yea, and
@c    the Lord of all things hath loved her.

@c    8:4. For it is she that teacheth the knowledge of God and is the
@c    chooser of his works.

@c    8:5. And if riches be desired in life, what is richer than wisdom,
@c    which maketh all things?

@c    8:6. And if sense do work:  who is a more artful worker than she of
@c    those things that are?

@c    8:7. And if a man love justice:  her labours have great virtues:  for she
@c    teacheth temperance, and prudence, and justice, and fortitude, which
@c    are such things as men can have nothing more profitable in life.

@c    8:8. And if a man desire much knowledge:  she knoweth things past, and
@c    judgeth of things to come:  she knoweth the subtilties of speeches, and
@c    the solutions of arguments:  she knoweth signs and wonders before they
@c    be done, and the events of times and ages.

@c    8:9. I purposed, therefore, to take her to me to live with me:  knowing
@c    that she will communicate to me of her good things, and will be a
@c    comfort in my cares and grief.

@c    8:10. For her sake I shall have glory among the multitude, and honour
@c    with the ancients, though I be young:

@c    8:11. And I shall be found of a quick conceit in judgment, and shall be
@c    admired in the sight of the mighty, and the faces of princes shall
@c    wonder at me.

@c    8:12. They shall wait for me when I hold my peace, and they shall look
@c    upon me when I speak; and if I talk much, they shall lay their hands on
@c    their mouth.

@c    8:13. Moreover, by the means of her I shall have immortality:  and shall
@c    leave behind me an everlasting memory to them that come after me.

@c    8:14. I shall set the people in order:  and nations shall be subject to
@c    me.

@c    8:15. Terrible kings hearing, shall be afraid of me:  among the
@c    multitude I shall be found good, and valiant in war.

@c    8:16. When I go into my house, I shall repose myself with her:  for her
@c    conversation hath no bitterness, nor her company any tediousness, but
@c    joy and gladness.

@c    8:17. Thinking these things with myself, and pondering them in my
@c    heart, that to be allied to wisdom is immortality,

@c    8:18. And that there is great delight in her friendship, and
@c    inexhaustible riches in the works of her hands, and in the exercise of
@c    conference with her, wisdom, and glory in the communication of her
@c    words:  I went about seeking, that I might take her to myself.

@c    8:19. And I was a witty child, and had received a good soul.

@c    8:20. And whereas I was more good, I came to a body undefiled.

@c    8:21. And as I knew that I could not otherwise be continent, except God
@c    gave it, and this also was a point of wisdom, to know whose gift it
@c    was, I went to the Lord, and besought him, and said with my whole
@c    heart:



@c    Wisdom Chapter 9


@c    Solomon's prayer for wisdom.

@c    9:1. God of my fathers, and Lord of mercy, who hast made all things
@c    with thy word,

@c    9:2. And by thy wisdom hast appointed man, that he should have dominion
@c    over the creature that was made by thee,

@c    9:3. That he should order the world according to equity and justice,
@c    and execute justice with an upright heart:

@c    9:4. Give me wisdom, that sitteth by thy throne, and cast me not off
@c    from among thy children:

@c    9:5. For I am thy servant, and the son of thy handmaid, a weak man, and
@c    of short time, and falling short of the understanding of judgment and
@c    laws.

@c    9:6. For if one be perfect among the children of men, yet if thy wisdom
@c    be not with him, he shall be nothing regarded.

@c    9:7. Thou hast chosen me to be king of thy people, and a judge of thy
@c    sons and daughters:

@c    9:8. And hast commanded me to build a temple on thy holy mount, and an
@c    altar in the city of thy dwelling place, a resemblance of thy holy
@c    tabernacle, which thou hast prepared from the beginning:

@c    9:9. And thy wisdom with thee, which knoweth thy works, which then also
@c    was present when thou madest the world, and knew what was agreeable to
@c    thy eyes, and what was right in thy commandments.

@c    9:10. Send her out of thy holy heaven, and from the throne of thy
@c    majesty, that she may be with me, and may labour with me, that I may
@c    know what is acceptable with thee:

@c    9:11. For she knoweth and understandeth all things, and shall lead me
@c    soberly in my works, and shall preserve me by her power.

@c    9:12. So shall my works be acceptable, and I shall govern thy people
@c    justly, and shall be worthy of the throne of my father.

@c    9:13. For who among men is he that can know the counsel of God?  or who
@c    can think what the will of God is?

@c    9:14. For the thoughts of mortal men are fearful, and our counsels
@c    uncertain.

@c    9:15. For the corruptible body is a load upon the soul, and the earthly
@c    habitation presseth down the mind that museth upon many things.

@c    9:16. And hardly do we guess aright at things that are upon earth:  and
@c    with labour do we find the things that are before us.  But the things
@c    that are in heaven, who shall search out?

@c    9:17. And who shall know thy thought, except thou give wisdom, and send
@c    thy holy Spirit from above:

@c    9:18. And so the ways of them that are upon earth may be corrected, and
@c    men may learn the things that please thee?

@c    9:19. For by wisdom they were healed, whosoever have pleased thee, O
@c    Lord, from the beginning.



@c    Wisdom Chapter 10


@c    What wisdom did for Adam, Noe, Abraham, Lot, Jacob, Joseph, and the
@c    people of Israel.

@c    10:1. She preserved him, that was first formed by God, the father of
@c    the world, when he was created alone,

@c    10:2. And she brought him out of his sin, and gave him power to govern
@c    all things.

@c    10:3. But when the unjust went away from her in his anger, he perished
@c    by the fury wherewith he murdered his brother.

@c    The unjust. . .Cain.

@c    10:4. For whose cause, when water destroyed the earth, wisdom healed it
@c    again, directing the course of the just by contemptible wood.

@c    For whose cause. . .Viz., for the wickedness of the race of Cain.--Ibid.
@c    The just. . .Noe.

@c    10:5. Moreover, when the nations had conspired together to consent to
@c    wickedness, she knew the just, and preserved him without blame to God,
@c    and kept him strong against the compassion for his son.

@c    She knew the just. . .She found out and approved Abraham.  Ibid.
@c    And kept him strong, etc. . .Gave him strength to stand firm against
@c    the efforts of his natural tenderness, when he was ordered to sacrifice
@c    his son.

@c    10:6. She delivered the just man, who fled from the wicked that were
@c    perishing, when the fire came down upon Pentapolis:

@c    The just man. . .Lot.--Ibid.  Pentapolis. . .The land of the five cities,
@c    Sodom, Gomorrha, etc.

@c    10:7. Whose land, for a testimony of their wickedness, is desolate, and
@c    smoketh to this day, and the trees bear fruits that ripen not, and a
@c    standing pillar of salt is a monument of an incredulous soul.

@c    10:8. For regarding not wisdom, they did not only slip in this, that
@c    they were ignorant of good things; but they left also unto men a
@c    memorial of their folly, so that in the things in which they sinned,
@c    they could not so much as lie hid.

@c    10:9. But wisdom hath delivered from sorrow them that attend upon her.

@c    10:10. She conducted the just, when he fled from his brother's wrath,
@c    through the right ways, and shewed him the kingdom of God, and gave him
@c    the knowledge of the holy things, made him honourable in his labours,
@c    and accomplished his labours.

@c    The just. . .Jacob.

@c    10:11. In the deceit of them that overreached him, she stood by him,
@c    and made him honourable.

@c    10:12. She kept him safe from his enemies, and she defended him from
@c    seducers, and gave him a strong conflict, that he might overcome, and
@c    know that wisdom is mightier than all.

@c    Conflict. . .Viz., with the angel.

@c    10:13. She forsook not the just when he was sold, but delivered him
@c    from sinners:  she went down with him into the pit.

@c    The just when he was sold. . .Viz., Joseph.

@c    10:14. And in bands she left him not, till she brought him the sceptre
@c    of the kingdom, and power against those that oppressed him:  and shewed
@c    them to be liars that had accused him, and gave him everlasting glory.

@c    10:15. She delivered the just people, and blameless seed, from the
@c    nations that oppressed them.

@c    10:16. She entered into the soul of the servant of God and stood
@c    against dreadful kings in wonders and signs.

@c    The servant of God. . .Viz., Moses.

@c    10:17. And she rendered to the just the wages of their labours, and
@c    conducted them in a wonderful way:  and she was to them for a covert by
@c    day, and for the light of stars by night:

@c    10:18. And she brought them through the Red Sea, and carried them over
@c    through a great water.

@c    10:19. But their enemies she drowned in the sea, and from the depth of
@c    hell she brought them out.  Therefore the just took the spoils of the
@c    wicked.

@c    10:20. And they sung to thy holy name, O Lord, and they praised with
@c    one accord thy victorious hand.

@c    10:21. For wisdom opened the mouth of the dumb, and made the tongues of
@c    infants eloquent.



@c    Wisdom Chapter 11


@c    Other benefits of wisdom to the people of God.

@c    11:1. She prospered their works in the hands of the holy prophet.

@c    The holy prophet. . .Moses.

@c    11:2. They went through wildernesses that were not inhabited, and in
@c    desert places they pitched their tents.

@c    11:3. They stood against their enemies, and revenged themselves of
@c    their adversaries.

@c    Their enemies. . .The Amalecites.

@c    11:4. They were thirsty, and they called upon thee, and water was given
@c    them out of the high rock, and a refreshment of their thirst out of the
@c    hard stone.

@c    11:5. For by what things their enemies were punished, when their drink
@c    failed them, while the children of Israel abounded therewith, and
@c    rejoiced:

@c    By what things, etc. . .The meaning is, that God, who wrought a miracle
@c    to punish the Egyptians by thirst, when he turned all their waters into
@c    blood, (at which time the Israelites, who were exempt from those
@c    plagues, had plenty of water,) wrought another miracle in favour of his
@c    own people in their thirst, by giving them water out of the rock.

@c    11:6. By the same things they in their need were benefited.

@c    11:7. For instead of a fountain of an ever running river, thou gavest
@c    human blood to the unjust.

@c    11:8. And whilst they were diminished for a manifest reproof of their
@c    murdering the infants, thou gavest to thine abundant water unlooked
@c    for:

@c    11:9. Shewing by the thirst that was then, how thou didst exalt thine,
@c    and didst kill their adversaries.

@c    11:10. For when they were tried, and chastised with mercy, they knew
@c    how the wicked were judged with wrath, and tormented.

@c    11:11. For thou didst admonish and try them as a father:  but the
@c    others, as a severe king, thou didst examine and condemn.

@c    11:12. For whether absent or present, they were tormented alike.

@c    11:13. For a double affliction came upon them, and a groaning for the
@c    remembrance of things past.

@c    11:14. For when they heard that by their punishments the others were
@c    benefited, they remembered the Lord, wondering at the end of what was
@c    come to pass.

@c    By their punishments, etc. . .That is, that the Israelites had been
@c    benefited and miraculously favoured in the same kind, in which they had
@c    been punished.

@c    11:15. For whom they scorned before, when he was thrown out at the time
@c    of his being wickedly exposed to perish, him they admired in the end,
@c    when they saw the event:  their thirsting being unlike to that of the
@c    just.

@c    11:16. But for the foolish devices of their iniquity, because some
@c    being deceived worshipped dumb serpents and worthless beasts, thou
@c    didst send upon them a multitude of dumb beasts for vengeance:

@c    Dumb beasts. . .Viz., frogs, sciniphs, flies, and locusts.

@c    11:17. That they might know that by what things a man sinneth, by the
@c    same also he is tormented.

@c    11:18. For thy almighty hand, which made the world of matter without
@c    form, was not unable to send upon them a multitude of bears, or fierce
@c    lions,

@c    11:19. Or unknown beasts of a new kind, full of rage; either breathing
@c    out a fiery vapour, or sending forth a stinking smoke, or shooting
@c    horrible sparks out of their eyes:

@c    11:20. Whereof not only the hurt might be able to destroy them, but
@c    also the very sight might kill them through fear.

@c    11:21. Yea, and without these, they might have been slain with one
@c    blast, persecuted by their own deeds, and scattered by the breath of
@c    thy power:  but thou hast ordered all things in measure, and number, and
@c    weight.

@c    11:22. For great power always belonged to thee alone:  and who shall
@c    resist the strength of thy arm?

@c    11:23. For the whole world before thee is as the least grain of the
@c    balance, and as a drop of the morning dew, that falleth down upon tho
@c    earth.

@c    11:24. But thou hast mercy upon all, because thou canst do all things,
@c    and overlookest the sins of men for the sake of repentance.

@c    11:25. For thou lovest all things that are, and hatest none of the
@c    things which thou hast made:  for thou didst not appoint, or make any
@c    thing hating it.

@c    11:26. And how could any thing endure, if thou wouldst not?  or be
@c    preserved, if not called by thee?

@c    11:27. But thou sparest all:  because they are thine, O Lord, who lovest
@c    souls.



@c    Wisdom Chapter 12


@c    God's wisdom and mercy in his proceedings with the Chanaanites.

@c    12:1. O how good and sweet is thy Spirit, O Lord, in all things!

@c    12:2. And therefore thou chastisest them that err, by little and
@c    little:  and admonishest them, and speakest to them, concerning the
@c    things wherein they offend:  that leaving their wickedness, they may
@c    believe in thee, O Lord.

@c    12:3. For those ancient inhabitants of thy holy land, whom thou didst
@c    abhor,

@c    12:4. Because they did works hateful to thee by their sorceries, and
@c    wicked sacrifices,

@c    12:5. And those merciless murderers of their own children, and eaters
@c    of men's bowels, and devourers of blood from the midst of thy
@c    consecration,

@c    From the midst of thy consecration. . .Literally, sacrament.  That is,
@c    the land sacred to thee, in which thy temple was to be established, and
@c    man's redemption to be wrought.

@c    12:6. And those parents sacrificing with their own hands helpless
@c    souls, it was thy will to destroy by the hands of our parents,

@c    12:7. That the land which of all is most dear to thee, might receive a
@c    worthy colony of the children of God.

@c    12:8. Yet even those thou sparedst as men, and didst send wasps
@c    forerunners of thy host, to destroy them by little and little.

@c    12:9. Not that thou wast unable to bring the wicked under the just by
@c    war, or by cruel beasts, or with one rough word to destroy them at
@c    once:

@c    12:10. But executing thy judgments by degrees, thou gavest them place
@c    of repentance, not being ignorant that they were a wicked generation,
@c    and their malice natural, and that their thought could never be
@c    changed.

@c    12:11. For it was a cursed seed from the beginning:  neither didst thou
@c    for fear of any one give pardon to their sins.

@c    12:12. For who shall say to thee:  What hast thou done?  or who shall
@c    withstand thy judgment?  or who shall come before thee to be a revenger
@c    of wicked men?  or who shall accuse thee, if the nations perish, which
@c    thou hast made ?

@c    12:13. For there is no other God but thou, who hast care of all, that
@c    thou shouldst shew that thou dost not give judgment unjustly.

@c    12:14. Neither shall king, nor tyrant, in thy sight inquire about them
@c    whom thou hast destroyed.

@c    12:15. For so much then, as thou art just, thou orderest all things
@c    justly:  thinking it not agreeable to the power, to condemn him who
@c    deserveth not to be punished.

@c    12:16. For thy power is the beginning of justice:  and because thou art
@c    Lord of all, thou makest thyself gracious to all.

@c    12:17. For thou shewest thy power, when men will not believe thee to be
@c    absolute in power, and thou convincest the boldness of them that know
@c    thee not.

@c    12:18. But thou being master of power, judgest with tranquillity, and
@c    with great favour disposest of us:  for thy power is at hand when thou
@c    wilt.

@c    12:19. But thou hast taught thy people by such works, that they must be
@c    just and humane, and hast made thy children to be of a good hope:
@c    because in judging, thou givest place for repentance for sins.

@c    12:20. For if thou didst punish the enemies of thy servants, and that
@c    deserved to die, with so great deliberation, giving them time and place
@c    whereby they might be changed from their wickedness:

@c    12:21. With what circumspection hast thou judged thy own children, to
@c    whose parents thou hast sworn, and made covenants of good promises?

@c    12:22. Therefore whereas thou chastisest us, thou scourgest our enemies
@c    very many ways, to the end that when we judge we may think on thy
@c    goodness:  and when we are judged, we may hope for thy mercy.

@c    12:23. Wherefore thou hast also greatly tormented them, who, in their
@c    life, have lived foolishly and unjustly, by the same things which they
@c    worshipped.

@c    12:24. For they went astray for a long time in the ways of error,
@c    holding those things for gods which are the most worthless among
@c    beasts, living after the manner of children without understanding.

@c    12:25. Therefore thou hast sent a judgment upon them, as senseless
@c    children, to mock them.

@c    12:26. But they that were not amended by mockeries and reprehensions,
@c    experienced the worthy judgment of God.

@c    12:27. For seeing, with indignation, that they suffered by those very
@c    things which they took for gods, when they were destroyed by the same,
@c    they acknowledged him the true God, whom in time past they denied that
@c    they knew:  for which cause the end also of their condemnation came upon
@c    them.



@c    Wisdom Chapter 13


@c    Idolaters are inexcusable:  and those most of all that worship for gods
@c    the works of the hands of men.

@c    13:1. But all men are vain, in whom there is not the knowledge of God:
@c    and who by these good things that are seen, could not understand him
@c    that is, neither by attending to the works have acknowledged who was
@c    the workman:

@c    13:2. But have imagined either the fire, or the wind, or the swift air,
@c    or the circle of the stars, or the great water, or the sun and moon, to
@c    be the gods that rule the world.

@c    13:3. With whose beauty, if they, being delighted, took them to be
@c    gods:  let them know how much the Lord of them is more beautiful than
@c    they:  for the first author of beauty made all those things.

@c    13:4. Or if they admired their power, and their effects, let them
@c    understand by them, that he that made them, is mightier than they:

@c    13:5. For by the greatness of the beauty, and of the creature, the
@c    creator of them may be seen, so as to be known thereby.

@c    13:6. But yet as to these they are less to be blamed.  For they perhaps
@c    err, seeking God, and desirous to find him.

@c    13:7. For being conversant among his works, they search:  and they are
@c    persuaded that the things are good which are seen.

@c    13:8. But then again they are not to be pardoned.

@c    13:9. For if they were able to know so much as to make a judgment of
@c    the world:  how did they not more easily find out the Lord thereof?

@c    13:10. But unhappy are they, and their hope is among the dead, who have
@c    called gods the works of the hand of men, gold and silver, the
@c    inventions of art, and the resemblances of beasts, or an unprofitable
@c    stone the work of an ancient hand.

@c    13:11. Or if an artist, a carpenter, hath cut down a tree proper for
@c    his use in the wood, and skilfully taken off all the bark thereof, and
@c    with his art, diligently formeth a vessel profitable for the common
@c    uses of life,

@c    13:12. And useth the chips of his work to dress his meat:

@c    13:13. And taking what was left thereof, which is good for nothing,
@c    being a crooked piece of wood, and full of knots, carveth it diligently
@c    when he hath nothing else to do, and by the skill of his art fashioneth
@c    it, and maketh it like the image of a man:

@c    13:14. Or the resemblance of some beast, laying it over with vermilion,
@c    and painting it red, and covering every spot that is in it:

@c    13:15. And maketh a convenient dwelling place for it, and setting it in
@c    a wall, and fastening it with iron,

@c    13:16. Providing for it, lest it should fall, knowing that it is unable
@c    to help itself:  for it is an image, and hath need of help.

@c    13:17. And then maketh prayer to it, enquiring concerning his
@c    substance, and his children, or his marriage.  And he is not ashamed to
@c    speak to that which hath no life:

@c    13:18. And for health he maketh supplication to the weak, and for life
@c    prayeth to that which is dead, and for help calleth upon that which is
@c    unprofitable:

@c    13:19. And for a good journey he petitioneth him that cannot walk:  and
@c    for getting, and for working, and for the event of all things he asketh
@c    him that is unable to do any thing.



@c    Wisdom Chapter 14


@c    The beginning of worshipping idols:  and the effects thereof.

@c    14:1. Again, another designing to sail, and beginning to make his
@c    voyage through the raging waves, calleth upon a piece of wood more
@c    frail than the wood that carrieth him.

@c    14:2. For this the desire of gain devised, and the workman built it by
@c    his skill.

@c    14:3. But thy providence, O Father, governeth it:  for thou hast made a
@c    way even in the sea, and a most sure path among the waves,

@c    14:4. Shewing that thou art able to save out of all things, yea, though
@c    a man went to sea without art.

@c    14:5. But that the works of thy wisdom might not be idle:  therefore men
@c    also trust their lives even to a little wood, and passing over the sea
@c    by ship, are saved.

@c    14:6. And from the beginning also, when the proud giants perished, the
@c    hope of the world fleeing to a vessel, which was governed by thy hand,
@c    left to the world seed of generation.

@c    14:7. For blessed is the wood, by which justice cometh

@c    14:8. But the idol that is made by hands, is cursed, as well it, as he
@c    that made it:  he because he made it; and it because being frail it is
@c    called a god.

@c    14:9. But to God the wicked and his wickedness are hateful alike.

@c    14:10. For that which is made, together with him that made it, shall
@c    suffer torments.

@c    14:11. Therefore there shall be no respect had even to the idols of the
@c    Gentiles:  because the creatures of God are turned to an abomination,
@c    and a temptation to the souls of men, and a snare to the feet of the
@c    unwise.

@c    14:12. For the beginning of fornication is the devising of idols:  and
@c    the invention of them is the corruption of life.

@c    14:13. For neither were they from the beginning, neither shall they be
@c    for ever.

@c    14:14. For by the vanity of men they came into the world:  and therefore
@c    they shall be found to come shortly to an end.

@c    14:15. For a father being afflicted with bitter grief, made to himself
@c    the image of his son, who was quickly taken away:  and him who then had
@c    died as a man, he began now to worship as a god, and appointed him
@c    rites and sacrifices among his servants.

@c    14:16. Then, in process of time, wicked custom prevailing, this error
@c    was kept as a law, and statues were worshipped by the commandment of
@c    tyrants.

@c    14:17. And those whom men could not honour in presence, because they
@c    dwelt far off, they brought their resemblance from afar, and made an
@c    express image of the king, whom they had a mind to honour:  that by this
@c    their diligence, they might honour as present, him that was absent.

@c    14:18. And to the worshipping of these, the singular diligence also of
@c    the artificer helped to set forward the ignorant.

@c    14:19. For he being willing to please him that employed him, laboured
@c    with all his art to make the resemblance in the best manner.

@c    14:20. And the multitude of men, carried away by the beauty of the
@c    work, took him now for a god, that little before was but honoured as a
@c    man.

@c    14:21. And this was the occasion of deceiving human life:  for men
@c    serving either their affection, or their kings, gave the incommunicable
@c    name to stones and wood.

@c    14:22. And it was not enough for them to err about the knowledge of
@c    God, but whereas they lived in a great war of ignorance, they call so
@c    many and so great evils peace.

@c    14:23. For either they sacrifice their own children, or use hidden
@c    sacrifices, or keep watches full of madness,

@c    14:24. So that now they neither keep life, nor marriage undefiled, but
@c    one killeth another through envy, or grieveth him by adultery:

@c    14:25. And all things are mingled together, blood, murder, theft, and
@c    dissimulation, corruption and unfaithfulness, tumults and perjury,
@c    disquieting of the good,

@c    14:26. Forgetfulness of God, defiling of souls, changing of nature,
@c    disorder in marriage, and the irregularity of adultery and uncleanness.

@c    14:27. For the worship of abominable idols is the cause, and the
@c    beginning and end of all evil.

@c    14:28. For either they are mad when they are merry:  or they prophesy
@c    lies, or they live unjustly, or easily forswear themselves.

@c    14:29. For whilst they trust in idols, which are without life, though
@c    they swear amiss, they look not to be hurt.

@c    14:30. But for both these things they shall be justly punished, because
@c    they have thought not well of God, giving heed to idols, and have sworn
@c    unjustly, in guile despising justice.

@c    14:31. For it is not the power of them, by whom they swear, but the
@c    just vengeance of sinners always punisheth the transgression of the
@c    unjust.



@c    Wisdom Chapter 15


@c    The servants of God praise him who hath delivered them from idolatry;
@c    condemning both the makers and the worshippers of idols.

@c    15:1. But thou, our God, art gracious and true, patient, and ordering
@c    all things in mercy.

@c    15:2. For if we sin, we are thine, knowing thy greatness:  and if we sin
@c    not, we know that we are counted with thee.

@c    15:3. For to know thee is perfect justice:  and to know thy justice, and
@c    thy power, is the root of immortality.

@c    15:4. For the invention of mischievous men hath not deceived us, nor
@c    the shadow of a picture, a fruitless labour, a graven figure with
@c    divers colours,

@c    15:5. The sight whereof enticeth the fool to lust after it, and he
@c    loveth the lifeless figure of a dead image.

@c    15:6. The lovers of evil things deserve to have no better things to
@c    trust in, both they that make them, and they that love them, and they
@c    that worship them.

@c    15:7. The potter also tempering soft earth, with labour fashioneth
@c    every vessel for our service, and of the same clay he maketh both
@c    vessels that are for clean uses, and likewise such as serve to the
@c    contrary:  but what is the use of these vessels, the potter is the
@c    judge.

@c    15:8. And of the same clay by a vain labour he maketh a god:  he who a
@c    little before was made of earth himself, and a little after returneth
@c    to the same out of which he was taken, when his life, which was lent
@c    him, shall be called for again.

@c    15:9. But his care is, not that he shall labour, nor that his life is
@c    short, but he striveth with the goldsmiths and silversmiths:  and he
@c    endeavoureth to do like the workers in brass, and counteth it a glory
@c    to make vain things.

@c    15:10. For his heart is ashes, and his hope vain earth and his life
@c    more base than clay:

@c    15:11. Forasmuch as he knew not his maker, and him that inspired into
@c    him the soul that worketh, and that breathed into him a living spirit.

@c    15:12. Yea, and they have counted our life a pastime and the business
@c    of life to be gain, and that we must be getting every way, even out of
@c    evil.

@c    15:13. For that man knoweth that he offendeth above all others, who of
@c    earthly matter maketh brittle vessels, and graven gods.

@c    15:14. But all the enemies of thy people that hold them in subjection,
@c    are foolish, and unhappy, and proud beyond measure:

@c    15:15. For they have esteemed all the idols of the heathens for gods,
@c    which neither have the use of eyes to see, nor noses to draw breath,
@c    nor ears to hear, nor fingers of hands to handle, and as for their
@c    feet, they are slow to walk.

@c    15:16. For man made them:  and he that borroweth his own breath,
@c    fashioned them.  For no man can make a god like to himself.

@c    15:17. For being mortal himself, he formeth a dead thing with his
@c    wicked hands.  For he is better than they whom he worshippeth, because
@c    he indeed hath lived, though he were mortal, but they never.

@c    15:18. Moreover, they worship also the vilest creatures:  but things
@c    without sense, compared to these, are worse than they.

@c    15:19. Yea, neither by sight can any man see good of these beasts.  But
@c    they have fled from the praise of God, and from his blessing.



@c    Wisdom Chapter 16


@c    God's different dealings with the Egyptians and with his own people.

@c    16:1. For these things, and by the like things to these, they were
@c    worthily punished, and were destroyed by a multitude of beasts.

@c    16:2. Instead of which punishment, dealing well with thy people, thou
@c    gavest them their desire of delicious food, of a new taste, preparing
@c    for them quails for their meat:

@c    16:3. To the end, that they indeed desiring food, by means of those
@c    things that were shewn and sent among them, might loath even that which
@c    was necessary to satisfy their desire.  But these, after suffering want
@c    for a short time, tasted a new meat.

@c    They indeed desiring food, etc. . .He means the Egyptians; who were
@c    restrained even from that food which was necessary, by the frogs and
@c    the flies that were sent amongst them, and spoiled all their
@c    meats.--Ibid.  But these. . .Viz., the Israelites.

@c    16:4. For it was requisite that inevitable destruction should come upon
@c    them that exercised tyranny:  but to these it should only be shewn how
@c    their enemies were destroyed.

@c    16:5. For when the fierce rage of beasts came upon these, they were
@c    destroyed by the bitings of crooked serpents.

@c    16:6. But thy wrath endured not for ever, but they were troubled for a
@c    short time for their correction, having a sign of salvation, to put
@c    them in remembrance of the commandment of thy law.

@c    Sign of salvation. . .The brazen serpent, an emblem of Christ our
@c    Saviour.

@c    16:7. For he that turned to it, was not healed by that which he saw,
@c    but by thee, the Saviour of all.

@c    16:8. And in this thou didst shew to our enemies, that thou art he who
@c    deliverest from all evil.

@c    16:9. For the bitings of locusts, and of flies, killed them, and there
@c    was found no remedy for their life:  because they were worthy to be
@c    destroyed by such things.

@c    16:10. But not even the teeth of venomous serpents overcame thy
@c    children:  for thy mercy came and healed them.

@c    16:11. For they were examined for the remembrance of thy words, and
@c    were quickly healed, lest falling into deep forgetfulness, they might
@c    not be able to use thy help.

@c    16:12. For it was neither herb, nor mollifying plaster, that healed
@c    them, but thy word, O Lord, which healeth all things.

@c    16:13. For it is thou, O Lord, that hast power of life and death, and
@c    leadest down to the gates of death, and bringest back again:

@c    16:14. A man indeed killeth through malice, and when the spirit is gone
@c    forth, it shall not return, neither shall he call back the soul that is
@c    received:

@c    16:15. But it is impossible to escape thy hand:

@c    16:16. For the wicked that denied to know thee, were scourged by the
@c    strength of thy arm, being persecuted by strange waters, and hail, and
@c    rain, and consumed by fire.

@c    16:17. And which was wonderful, in water, which extinguisheth all
@c    things, the fire had more force:  for the world fighteth for the just.

@c    The fire had more force. . .Viz., when the fire and hail mingled
@c    together laid waste the land of Egypt.  Ex. 9.

@c    16:18. For at one time the fire was mitigated, that the beasts which
@c    were sent against the wicked might not be burnt, but that they might
@c    see, and perceive that they were persecuted by the judgment of God.

@c    16:19. And at another time the fire, above its own power, burnt in the
@c    midst of water, to destroy the fruits of a wicked land.

@c    16:20. Instead of which things, thou didst feed thy people with the
@c    food of angels, and gavest them bread from heaven, prepared without
@c    labour; having in it all that is delicious, and the sweetness of every
@c    taste.

@c    16:21. For thy sustenance shewed thy sweetness to thy children, and
@c    serving every man's will, it was turned to what every man liked.

@c    16:22. But snow and ice endured the force of fire, and melted not:  that
@c    they might know that the fire, burning in the hail, and flashing in the
@c    rain, destroyed the fruits of the enemies.

@c    16:23. But this same again, that the just might be nourished, did even
@c    forget its own strength.

@c    16:24. For the creature serving thee, the Creator, is made fierce
@c    against the unjust for their punishment:  and abateth its strength for
@c    the benefit of them that trust in thee.

@c    16:25. Therefore even then it was transformed into all things, and was
@c    obedient to thy grace, that nourisheth all, according to the will of
@c    them that desired it of thee:

@c    16:26. That thy children, O Lord, whom thou lovedst, might know that it
@c    is not the growing of fruits that nourisheth men, but thy word
@c    preserveth them that believe in thee.

@c    16:27. For that which could not be destroyed by fire, being warmed with
@c    a little sunbeam, presently melted away:

@c    16:28. That it might be known to all, that we ought to prevent the sun
@c    to bless thee, and adore thee at the dawning of the light.

@c    16:29. For the hope of the unthankful shall melt away as the winter's
@c    ice, and shall run off as unprofitable water.



@c    Wisdom Chapter 17


@c    The Egyptian darkness.

@c    17:1. For thy judgments, O Lord, are great, and thy words cannot be
@c    expressed:  therefore undisciplined souls have erred.

@c    17:2. For while the wicked thought to be able to have dominion over the
@c    holy nation, they themselves being fettered with the bonds of darkness,
@c    and a long night, shut up in their houses, lay there exiled from the
@c    eternal providence.

@c    17:3. And while they thought to lie hid in their obscure sins, they
@c    were scattered under a dark veil of forgetfullness, being horribly
@c    afraid, and troubled with exceeding great astonishment.

@c    17:4. For neither did the den that held them, keep them from fear:  for
@c    noises coming down troubled them, and sad visions appearing to them,
@c    affrighted them.

@c    17:5. And no power of fire could give them light, neither could the
@c    bright flames of the stars enlighten that horrible night.

@c    17:6. But there appeared to them a sudden fire, very dreadful:  and
@c    being struck with the fear of that face, which was not seen, they
@c    thought the things which they saw to be worse:

@c    17:7. And the delusions of their magic art were put down, and their
@c    boasting of wisdom was reproachfully rebuked.

@c    17:8. For they who promised to drive away fears and troubles from a
@c    sick soul, were sick themselves of a fear worthy to be laughed at.

@c    17:9. For though no terrible thing disturbed them:  yet being scared
@c    with the passing by of beasts, and hissing of serpents, they died for
@c    fear and denying that they saw the air, which could by no means be
@c    avoided.

@c    17:10. For whereas wickedness is fearful, it beareth witness of its
@c    condemnation:  for a troubled conscience always forecasteth grievous
@c    things.

@c    17:11. For fear is nothing else but a yielding up of the succours from
@c    thought.

@c    17:12. And while there is less expectation from within, the greater
@c    doth it count the ignorance of that cause which bringeth the torment.

@c    17:13. But they that during that night, in which nothing could be done,
@c    and which came upon them from the lowest and deepest hell, slept the
@c    same sleep,

@c    17:14. Were sometimes molested with the fear of monsters, sometimes
@c    fainted away, their soul failing them:  for a sudden and unlooked for
@c    fear was come upon them.

@c    17:15. Moreover, if any of them had fallen down, he was kept shut up in
@c    prison without irons.

@c    17:16. For if any one were a husbandman, or a shepherd, or a labourer
@c    in the field, and was suddenly overtaken, he endured a necessity from
@c    which he could not fly.

@c    17:17. For they were all bound together with one chain of darkness.
@c    Whether it were a whistling wind, or the melodious voice of birds,
@c    among the spreading branches of trees, or a fall of water running down
@c    with violence,

@c    17:18. Or the mighty noise of stones tumbling down, or the running that
@c    could not be seen of beasts playing together, or the roaring voice of
@c    wild beasts, or a rebounding echo from the highest mountains:  these
@c    things made them to swoon for fear.

@c    17:19. For the whole world was enlightened, with a clear light, and
@c    none were hindered in their labours.

@c    17:20. But over them only was spread a heavy night, an image of that
@c    darkness which was to come upon them.  But they were to themselves more
@c    grievous than the darkness.



@c    Wisdom Chapter 18


@c    The slaughter of the firstborn in Egypt:  the efficacy of Aaron's
@c    intercession, in the sedition on occasion of Core.

@c    18:1. But thy saints had a very great light, and they heard their voice
@c    indeed, but did not see their shape.  And because they also did not
@c    suffer the same things, they glorified thee:

@c    18:2. And they that before had been wronged, gave thanks, because they
@c    were not hurt now:  and asked this gift, that there might be a
@c    difference.

@c    18:3. Therefore they received a burning pillar of fire for a guide of
@c    the way which they knew not, and thou gavest them a harmless sun of a
@c    good entertainment.

@c    A harmless sun. . .A light that should not hurt or molest them; but that
@c    should be an agreeable guest to them.

@c    18:4. The others indeed were worthy to be deprived of light, and
@c    imprisoned in darkness, who kept thy children shut up, by whom the pure
@c    light of the law was to be given to the world.

@c    18:5. And whereas they thought to kill the babes of the just:  one child
@c    being cast forth, and saved to reprove them, thou tookest away a
@c    multitude of their children, and destroyedst them altogether in a
@c    mighty water.

@c    One child. . .Viz., Moses.

@c    18:6. For that night was known before by our fathers, that assuredly
@c    knowing what oaths they had trusted to, they might be of better
@c    courage.

@c    18:7. So thy people received the salvation of the just, and destruction
@c    of the unjust.

@c    18:8. For as thou didst punish the adversaries so thou didst also
@c    encourage and glorify us.

@c    18:9. For the just children of good men were offering sacrifice
@c    secretly, and they unanimously ordered a law of justice:  that the just
@c    should receive both good and evil alike, singing now the praises of the
@c    fathers.

@c    Of good men. . .Viz., of the patriarchs.  Their children, the Israelites,
@c    offered in private the sacrifice of the paschal lamb; and were
@c    regulating what they were to do in their journey, when that last and
@c    most dreadful plague was coming upon their enemies.

@c    18:10. But on the other side there sounded an ill according cry of the
@c    enemies, and a lamentable mourning was heard for the children that were
@c    bewailed.

@c    18:11. And the servant suffered the same punishment as the master, and
@c    a common man suffered in like manner as the king.

@c    18:12. So all alike had innumerable dead, with one kind of death.
@c    Neither were the living sufficient to bury them:  for in one moment the
@c    noblest offspring of them was destroyed.

@c    The noblest offspring. . .That is, the firstborn.

@c    18:13. For whereas they would not believe any thing before by reason of
@c    the enchantments, then first upon the destruction of the firstborn,
@c    they acknowledged the people to be of God.

@c    18:14. For while all things were in quiet silence, and the night was in
@c    the midst of her course,

@c    18:15. Thy Almighty word leaped down from heaven from thy royal throne,
@c    as a fierce conqueror into the midst of the land of destruction,

@c    18:16. With a sharp sword carrying thy unfeigned commandment, and he
@c    stood and filled all things with death, and standing on the earth,
@c    reached even to heaven.

@c    18:17. Then suddenly visions of evil dreams troubled them, and fears
@c    unlooked for came upon them.

@c    18:18. And one thrown here, another there, half dead, shewed the cause
@c    of his death.

@c    18:19. For the visions that troubled them foreshewed these things, lest
@c    they should perish, and not know why they suffered these evils.

@c    18:20. But the just also were afterwards touched by an assault of
@c    death, and there was a disturbance of the multitude in the wilderness:
@c    but thy wrath did not long continue;

@c    18:21. For a blameless man made haste to pry for the people, bringing
@c    forth the shield of his ministry, prayer, and by incense making
@c    supplication, withstood the wrath, and put an end to the calamity,
@c    shewing that he was thy servant.

@c    18:22. And he overcame the disturbance, not by strength of body nor
@c    with force of arms, but with a word he subdued him that punished them,
@c    alleging the oath and covenant made with the fathers.

@c    18:23. For when they were now fallen down dead by heaps one upon
@c    another, he stood between and stayed the assault, and cut off the way
@c    to the living.

@c    18:24. For in the priestly robe which he wore, was the whole world:  and
@c    in the four rows of the stones, the glory of the fathers was graven,
@c    and thy majesty was written upon the diadem of his head.

@c    18:26. And to these the destroyer gave place, and was afraid of them:
@c    for the proof only of wrath was enough.



@c    Wisdom Chapter 19


@c    Why God shewed no mercy to the Egyptians.  His favour to the Israelites.
@c    All creatures obey God's orders for the service of the good, and the
@c    punishment of the wicked.

@c    19:1. But as to the wicked, even to the end there came upon them wrath
@c    without mercy.  For he knew before also what they would do:

@c    19:2. For when they had given them leave to depart and had sent them
@c    away with great care, they repented and pursued after them.

@c    19:3. For whilst they were yet mourning, and lamenting at the graves of
@c    the dead, they took up another foolish device:  and pursued them as
@c    fugitives whom they had pressed to be gone:

@c    19:4. For a necessity, of which they were worthy, brought them to this
@c    end:  and they lost the remembrance of those things which had happened,
@c    that their punishment might fill up what was wanting to their torments:

@c    19:5. And that thy people might wonderfully pass through, but they
@c    might find a new death.

@c    19:6. For every creature, according to its kind was fashioned again as
@c    from the beginning, obeying thy commandments, that thy children might
@c    be kept without hurt.

@c    19:7. For a cloud overshadowed their camps and where water was before,
@c    dry land appeared, and in the Red Sea a way without hindrance, and out
@c    of the great deep a springing field:

@c    19:8. Through which all the nation passed which was protected with thy
@c    hand, seeing thy miracles and wonders.

@c    19:9. For they fed on their food like horses, and they skipped like
@c    lambs, praising thee, O Lord, who hadst delivered them.

@c    19:10. For they were yet mindful of those things which had been done in
@c    the time of their sojourning, how the ground brought forth flies
@c    instead of cattle, and how the river cast up a multitude of frogs
@c    instead of fishes.

@c    19:11. And at length they saw a new generation of birds, when being led
@c    by their appetite, they asked for delicate meats.

@c    19:12. For to satisfy their desire, the quail came up to them from the
@c    sea:  and punishments came upon the sinners, not without foregoing signs
@c    by the force of thunders:  for they suffered justly according to their
@c    own wickedness.

@c    19:13. For they exercised a more detestable inhospitality than any:
@c    others indeed received not strangers unknown to them, but these brought
@c    their guests into bondage that had deserved well of them.

@c    19:14. And not only so, but in another respect also they were worse:
@c    for the others against their will received the strangers.

@c    19:15. But these grievously afflicted them whom they had received with
@c    joy, and who lived under the same laws.

@c    19:16. But they were struck with blindness:  as those others were at the
@c    doors of the just man, when they were covered with sudden darkness, and
@c    every one sought the passage of his own door.

@c    19:17. For while the elements are changed in themselves, as in an
@c    instrument the sound of the quality is changed, yet all keep their
@c    sound:  which may clearly be perceived by the very sight.

@c    Elements are changed, etc. . .The meaning is, that whatever changes God
@c    wrought in the elements by miracles in favour of his people, they still
@c    kept their harmony by obeying his will.

@c    19:18. For the things of the land were turned into things of the water:
@c    and the things that before swam in the water passed upon the land.

@c    19:19. The fire had power in water above its own virtue, and the water
@c    forgot its quenching nature.

@c    19:20. On the other side, the flames wasted not the flesh of
@c    corruptible animals walking therein, neither did they melt that good
@c    food, which was apt to melt as ice.  For in all things thou didst
@c    magnify thy people, O Lord, and didst honour them, and didst not
@c    despise them, but didst assist them at all times, and in every place.

@c    That good food. . .The manna.
