@c    THE PROPHECY OF ZACHARIAS



@c    ZACHARIAS began to prophesy in the same year as Aggeus, and upon the
@c    same occasion.  His prophecy is full of mysterious figures and promises
@c    of blessings, partly relating to the synagogue, and partly to the
@c    church of Christ.



@c    Zacharias Chapter 1


@c    The prophet exhorts the people to return to God, and declares his
@c    visions, by which he puts them in hopes of better times.

@c    1:1. In the eighth month, in the second year of king Darius, the word
@c    of the Lord came to Zacharias the son of Barachias, the son of Addo,
@c    the prophet, saying:

@c    1:2. The Lord hath been exceeding angry with your fathers.

@c    1:3. And thou shalt say to them:  Thus saith the Lord of hosts:  Turn ye
@c    to me, saith the Lord of hosts:  and I will turn to you, saith the Lord
@c    of hosts.

@c    1:4. Be not as your fathers, to whom the former prophets have cried,
@c    saying:  Thus saith the Lord of hosts:  Turn ye from your evil ways, and
@c    from your wicked thoughts:  but they did not give ear, neither did they
@c    hearken to me, saith the Lord.

@c    1:5. Your fathers, where are they?  and the prophets, shall they live
@c    always?

@c    1:6. But yet my words, and my ordinances, which I gave in charge to my
@c    servants the prophets, did they not take hold of your fathers, and they
@c    returned, and said:  As the Lord of hosts thought to do to us according
@c    to our ways, and according to our devices, so he hath done to us.

@c    1:7. In the four and twentieth day of the eleventh month which is
@c    called Sabath, in the second year of Darius, the word of the Lord came
@c    to Zacharias the son of Barachias, the son of Addo, the prophet,
@c    saying:

@c    1:8. I saw by night, and behold a man riding upon a red horse, and he
@c    stood among the myrtle trees, that were in the bottom:  and behind him
@c    were horses, red, speckled, and white.

@c    A man. . .An angel in the shape of a man.  It was probably Michael, the
@c    guardian angel of the church of God.

@c    1:9. And I said:  What are these, my Lord?  and the angel that spoke in
@c    me, said to me:  I will shew thee what these are:

@c    1:10. And the man that stood among the myrtle trees answered, and said:
@c    These are they, whom the Lord hath sent to walk through the earth.

@c    These are they, etc. . .The guardian angels of provinces and nations.

@c    1:11. And they answered the angel of the Lord, that stood among the
@c    myrtle trees, and said:  We have walked through the earth, and behold
@c    all the earth is inhabited, and is at rest.

@c    1:12. And the angel of the Lord answered, and said:  O Lord of hosts,
@c    how long wilt thou not have mercy on Jerusalem, and on the cities of
@c    Juda, with which thou hast been angry?  this is now the seventieth year.

@c    The seventieth year. . .Viz., from the beginning of the seige of
@c    Jerusalem, in the ninth year of king Sedecias, to the second year of
@c    king Darius.  These seventy years of the desolation of Jerusalem and the
@c    cities of Juda, are different from the seventy years of captivity
@c    foretold by Jeremias; which began in the fourth year of Joakim, and
@c    ended in the first year of king Cyrus.

@c    1:13. And the Lord answered the angel, that spoke in me, good words,
@c    comfortable words.

@c    1:14. And the angel that spoke in me, said to me:  Cry thou, saying:
@c    Thus saith the Lord of hosts:  I am zealous for Jerusalem, and Sion with
@c    a great zeal.

@c    1:15. And I am angry with a great anger with the wealthy nations:  for I
@c    was angry a little, but they helped forward the evil.

@c    1:16. Therefore thus saith the Lord:  I will return to Jerusalem in
@c    mercies:  my house shall be built in it, saith the Lord of hosts:  and
@c    the building line shall be stretched forth upon Jerusalem.

@c    1:17. Cry yet, saying:  Thus saith the Lord of hosts:  My cities shall
@c    yet flow with good things:  and the Lord will yet comfort Sion, and he
@c    will yet choose Jerusalem.

@c    1:18. And I lifted up my eyes, and saw:  and behold four horns.

@c    Four horns. . .The four horns represent the empires, or kingdoms, that
@c    persecute and oppress the kingdom of God.

@c    1:19. And I said to the angel that spoke in me:  What are these?  And he
@c    said to me:  These are the horns that have scattered Juda, and Israel,
@c    and Jerusalem.

@c    1:20. And the Lord shewed me four smiths.

@c    Four smiths. . .The four smiths, or carpenters ( for faber may signify
@c    either) represent those whom God makes his instruments in bringing to
@c    nothing the power of persecutors.

@c    1:21. And I said:  What come these to do?  and he spoke, saying:  These
@c    are the horns which have scattered Juda every man apart, and none of
@c    them lifted up his head:  and these are come to fray them, to cast down
@c    the horns of the nations, that have lifted up the horn upon the land of
@c    Juda to scatter it.



@c    Zacharias Chapter 2


@c    Under the name of Jerusalem, he prophesieth the progress of the church
@c    of Christ, by the conversion of some Jews and many Gentiles.

@c    2:1. And I lifted up my eyes, and saw, and behold a man, with a
@c    measuring line in his hand.

@c    2:2. And I said:  Whither goest thou?  and he said to me:  To measure
@c    Jerusalem, and to see how great is the breadth thereof, and how great
@c    the length thereof.

@c    2:3. And behold the angel that spoke in me went forth, and another
@c    angel went out to meet him.

@c    2:4. And he said to him:  Run, speak to this young man, saying:
@c    Jerusalem shall be inhabited without walls, by reason of the multitude
@c    of men, and of the beasts in the midst thereof.

@c    Jerusalem shall be inhabited without walls. . .This must be understood
@c    of the spiritual Jerusalem, the church of Christ.

@c    2:5. And I will be to it, saith the Lord, a wall of fire round about:
@c    and I will be in glory in the midst thereof.

@c    2:6. O, O flee ye out of the land of the north, saith the Lord, for I
@c    have scattered you into the four winds of heaven, saith the Lord.

@c    2:7. O Sion, flee, thou that dwellest with the daughter of Babylon:

@c    2:8. For thus saith the Lord of hosts:  After the glory he hath sent me
@c    to the nations that have robbed you:  for he that toucheth you, toucheth
@c    the apple of my eye:

@c    2:9. For behold, I lift up my hand upon them, and they shall be a prey
@c    to those that served them:  and you shall know that the Lord of hosts
@c    sent me.

@c    2:10. Sing praise, and rejoice, O daughter of Sion:  for behold I come,
@c    and I will dwell in the midst of thee:  saith the Lord.

@c    2:11. And many nations shall be joined to the Lord in that day, and
@c    they shall be my people, and I will dwell in the midst of thee:  and
@c    thou shalt know that the Lord of hosts hath sent me to thee.

@c    2:12. And the Lord shall possess Juda his portion in the sanctified
@c    land:  and he shall yet choose Jerusalem.

@c    2:13. Let all flesh be silent at the presence of the Lord:  for he is
@c    risen up out of his holy habitation.



@c    Zacharias Chapter 3


@c    In a vision Satan appeareth accusing the high priest.  He is cleansed
@c    from his sins.  Christ is promised, and great fruit from his passion.

@c    3:1. And the Lord shewed me Jesus the high priest standing before the
@c    angel of the Lord:  and Satan stood on his right hand to be his
@c    adversary.

@c    Jesus. . .Alias, Josue, the son of Josedec, the high priest of that
@c    time.

@c    3:2. And the Lord said to Satan:  The Lord rebuke thee, O Satan:  and the
@c    Lord that chose Jerusalem rebuke thee:  Is not this a brand plucked out
@c    of the fire?

@c    3:3. And Jesus was clothed with filthy garments:  and he stood before
@c    the face of the angel.

@c    With filthy garments. . .Negligences and sins.

@c    3:4. Who answered, and said to them that stood before him, saying:  Take
@c    away the filthy garments from him.  And he said to him:  Behold I have
@c    taken away thy iniquity, and have clothed thee with change of garments.

@c    3:5. And he said:  Put a clean mitre upon his head:  and they put a clean
@c    mitre upon his head, and clothed him with garments, and the angel of
@c    the Lord stood.

@c    3:6. And the angel of the Lord protested to Jesus, saying:

@c    3:7. Thus saith the Lord of hosts:  If thou wilt walk in my ways, and
@c    keep my charge, thou also shalt judge my house, and shalt keep my
@c    courts, and I will give thee some of them that are now present here to
@c    walk with thee.

@c    I will give thee, etc. . .Angels to attend and assist thee.

@c    3:8. Hear, O Jesus thou high priest, thou and thy friends that dwell
@c    before thee, for they are portending men:  for behold, I WILL BRING MY
@c    SERVANT THE ORIENT.

@c    Portending men. . .That is, men, who by words and actions are to
@c    foreshew wonders that are to come.--Ibid.  My servant the
@c    Orient. . .Christ, who according to his humanity is the servant of God,
@c    is called the Orient from his rising like the sun in the east to
@c    enlighten the world.

@c    3:9. For behold the stone that I have laid before Jesus:  upon one stone
@c    there are seven eyes:  behold I will grave the graving thereof, saith
@c    the Lord of hosts:  and I will take away the iniquity of that land in
@c    one day.

@c    The stone. . .Another emblem of Christ, the rock, foundation, and corner
@c    stone of his church.--Ibid.  Seven eyes. . .The manifold providence of
@c    Christ over his church, or the seven gifts of the spirit of God.--Ibid.
@c    One day. . .Viz., the day of the passion of Christ, the source of all
@c    our good:  when this precious stone shall be graved, that is, cut and
@c    pierced, with whips, thorns, nails, and spear.

@c    3:10. In that day, saith the Lord of hosts, every man shall call his
@c    friend under the vine and under the fig tree.



@c    Zacharias Chapter 4


@c    The vision of the golden candlestick and seven lamps, and of the two
@c    olive trees.

@c    4:1. And the angel that spoke in me came again:  and he waked me, as a
@c    man that is wakened out of his sleep.

@c    4:2. And he said to me:  What seest thou?  And I said:  I have looked,
@c    and behold a candlestick all of gold, and its lamp upon the top of it:
@c    and the seven lights thereof upon it:  and seven funnels for the lights
@c    that were upon the top thereof.

@c    A candlestick, etc. . .The temple of God that was then in building; and
@c    in a more sublime sense, the church of Christ.

@c    4:3. And two olive trees over it:  one upon the right side of the lamp,
@c    and the other upon the left side thereof.

@c    4:4. And I answered, and said to the angel that spoke in me, saying:
@c    What are these things, my lord?

@c    4:5. And the angel that spoke in me answered, and said to me:  Knowest
@c    thou not what these things are?  And I said:  No, my lord.

@c    4:6. And he answered, and spoke to me, saying:  This is the word of the
@c    Lord to Zorobabel, saying:  Not with an army, nor by might, but by my
@c    spirit, saith the Lord of hosts.

@c    To Zorobabel. . .This vision was in favour of Zorobabel:  to assure him
@c    of success in the building of the temple, which he had begun, signified
@c    by the candlestick; the lamp of which, without any other industry, was
@c    supplied with oil, dropping from the two olive trees, and distributed
@c    by the seven funnels or pipes, to maintain the seven lights.

@c    4:7. Who art thou, O great mountain, before Zorobabel?  thou shalt
@c    become a plain:  and he shall bring out the chief stone, and shall give
@c    equal grace to the grace thereof.

@c    Great mountain. . .So he calls the opposition made by the enemies of
@c    God's people; which nevertheless, without an army or might on their
@c    side, was quashed by divine providence.--Ibid.  Shall give equal grace,
@c    etc. . .Shall add grace to grace, or beauty to beauty.

@c    4:8. And the word of the Lord came to me, saying:

@c    4:9. The hands of Zorobabel have laid the foundations of this house,
@c    and his hands shall finish it:  and you shall know that the Lord of
@c    hosts hath sent me to you.

@c    4:10. For who hath despised little days?  and they shall rejoice, and
@c    shall see the tin plummet in the hand of Zorobabel.  These are the seven
@c    eyes of the Lord, that run to and fro through the whole earth.

@c    Little days. . .That is, these small and feeble beginnings of the temple
@c    of God.--Ibid.  The tin plummet. . .Literally, the stone of tin.  He
@c    means the builder's plummet, which Zorobabel shall hold in his hand for
@c    the finishing the building.--Ibid.  The seven eyes. . .The providence of
@c    God, that oversees and orders all things.

@c    4:11. And I answered, and said to him:  What are these two olive trees
@c    upon the right side of the candlestick, and upon the left side thereof
@c    ?

@c    4:12. And I answered again, and said to him:  What are the two olive
@c    branches, that are by the two golden beaks, in which are the funnels of
@c    gold?

@c    4:13. And he spoke to me, saying:  Knowest thou not what these are?  And
@c    I said:  No, my lord.

@c    4:14. And he said:  These are two sons of oil who stand before the Lord
@c    of the whole earth.

@c    Two sons of oil. . .That is, the two anointed ones of the Lord; viz.,
@c    Jesus the high priest, and Zorobabel the prince.



@c    Zacharias Chapter 5


@c    The vision of the flying volume, and of the woman in the vessel.

@c    5:1. And I turned and lifted up my eyes:  and I saw, and behold a volume
@c    flying.

@c    A volume. . .That is, a parchment, according to the form of the ancient
@c    books, which, from being rolled up, were called volumes.

@c    5:2. And he said to me:  What seest thou?  And I said:  I see a volume
@c    flying:  the length thereof is twenty cubits, and the breadth thereof
@c    ten cubits.

@c    5:3. And he said to me:  This is the curse that goeth forth over the
@c    face of the earth:  for every thief shall be judged as is there written:
@c    and every one that sweareth in like manner shall be judged by it.

@c    5:4. I will bring it forth, saith the Lord of hosts:  and it shall come
@c    to the house of the thief, and to the house of him that sweareth
@c    falsely by my name:  and it shall remain in the midst of his house, and
@c    shall consume it, with the timber thereof, and the stones thereof.

@c    5:5. And the angel went forth that spoke in me, and he said to me:  Lift
@c    up thy eyes, and see what this is, that goeth forth.

@c    5:6. And I said:  What is it?  And he said:  This is a vessel going
@c    forth.  And he said:  This is their eye in all the earth.

@c    This is their eye. . .This is what they fix their eye upon:  or this is a
@c    resemblance and figure of them, viz., of sinners.

@c    5:7. And behold a talent of lead was carried, and behold a woman
@c    sitting in the midst of the vessel.

@c    5:8. And he said:  This is wickedness.  And he cast her into the midst of
@c    the vessel, and cast the weight of lead upon the mouth thereof.

@c    5:9. And I lifted up my eyes and looked:  and behold there came out two
@c    women, and wind was in their wings, and they had wings like the wings
@c    of a kite:  and they lifted up the vessel between the earth and the
@c    heaven.

@c    5:10. And I said to the angel that spoke in me:  Whither do these carry
@c    the vessel?

@c    5:11. And he said to me:  That a house may be built for it in the land
@c    of Sennaar, and that it may be established, and set there upon its own
@c    basis.

@c    The land of Sennaar. . .Where Babel or Babylon was built, Gen. 11.,
@c    where note, that Babylon in holy writ is often taken for the city of
@c    the devil:  that is, for the whole congregation of the wicked:  as
@c    Jerusalem is taken for the city and people of God.



@c    Zacharias Chapter 6


@c    The vision of the four chariots.  Crowns are ordered for Jesus the high
@c    priest, as a type of Christ.

@c    6:1. And I turned, and lifted up my eyes, and saw:  and behold four
@c    chariots came out from the midst of two mountains:  and the mountains
@c    were mountains of brass.

@c    Four chariots. . .The four great empires of the Chaldeans, Persians,
@c    Grecians, and Romans.  Or perhaps by the fourth chariot are represented
@c    the kings of Egypt and of Asia, the descendants of Ptolemeus and
@c    Seleucus.

@c    6:2. In the first chariot were red horses, and in the second chariot
@c    black horses.

@c    6:3. And in the third chariot white horses, and in the fourth chariot
@c    grisled horses, and strong ones.

@c    6:4. And I answered, and said to the angel that spoke in me:  What are
@c    these, my lord?

@c    6:5. And the angel answered, and said to me:  These are the four winds
@c    of the heaven, which go forth to stand before the Lord of all the
@c    earth.

@c    6:6. That in which were the black horses went forth into the land of
@c    the north, and the white went forth after them:  and the grisled went
@c    forth to the land the south.

@c    The land of the north. . .So Babylon is called; because it lay to the
@c    north in respect of Jerusalem.  The black horses, that is, the Medes and
@c    Persians:  and after them Alexander and his Greeks, signified by the
@c    white horses, went thither because they conquered Babylon, executed
@c    upon it the judgments of God, which is signified, ver. 8, by the
@c    expression of quieting his spirit.--Ibid.  The land of the
@c    south. . .Egypt, which lay to the south of Jerusalem, and was occupied
@c    first by Ptolemeus, and then by the Romans.

@c    6:7. And they that were most strong, went out, and sought to go, and to
@c    run to and fro through all the earth.  And he said:  Go, walk throughout
@c    the earth:  and they walked throughout the earth.

@c    6:8. And he called me, and spoke to me, saying:  Behold they that go
@c    forth into the land of the north, have quieted my spirit in the land of
@c    the north.

@c    6:9. And the word of the Lord came to me, saying:

@c    6:10. Take of them of the captivity, of Holdai, and of Tobias, and of
@c    Idaias; thou shalt come in that day, a shalt go into the house of
@c    Josias, the son of Sophonias, who came out of Babylon.

@c    6:11. And thou shalt take gold and silver:  and shalt make crowns, and
@c    thou shalt set them on the head of Jesus the son of Josedec, the high
@c    priest.

@c    6:12. And thou shalt speak to him, saying:  Thus saith the Lord of
@c    hosts, saying:  BEHOLD A MAN, THE ORIENT IS HIS NAME:  and under him
@c    shall he spring up, a shall build a temple to the Lord.

@c    6:13. Yea, he shall build a temple to the Lord:  and he shall bear the
@c    glory, and shall sit, and rule upon his throne:  and he shall be a
@c    priest upon his throne, and the counsel of peace shall be between them
@c    both.

@c    Between them both. . .That is, he shall unite in himself the two offices
@c    or dignities of king and priest.

@c    6:14. And the crowns shall be to Helem, and Tobias, and Idaias, and to
@c    Hem, the son of Sophonias, a memorial in the temple of the Lord.

@c    6:15. And they that are far off, shall come and shall build in the
@c    temple of the Lord:  and you shall know that the Lord of hosts sent me
@c    to you.  But this shall come to pass, if hearing you will hear the voice
@c    of the Lord your God.



@c    Zacharias Chapter 7


@c    The people inquire concerning fasting:  they are admonished to fast from
@c    sin.

@c    7:1. And it came to pass in the fourth year of king Darius, that the
@c    word of the Lord came to Zacharias, in the fourth day of the ninth
@c    month, which is Casleu.

@c    7:2. When Sarasar, and Rogommelech, and the men that were with him,
@c    sent to the house of God, to entreat the face of the Lord:

@c    7:3. To speak to the priests of the house of the Lord of hosts, and to
@c    the prophets, saying:  Must I weep in the fifth month, or must I
@c    sanctify myself as I have now done for many years?

@c    The fifth month. . .They fasted on the tenth day of the fifth month;
@c    because on that day the temple was burnt.  Therefore they inquire
@c    whether they are to continue the fast, after the temple is rebuilt.  See
@c    this query answered in the 19th verse of the following chapter.

@c    7:4. And the word of the Lord of hosts came to me, saying:

@c    7:5. Speak to all the people of the land, and to the priests, saying:
@c    When you fasted, and mourned in the fifth and the seventh month for
@c    these seventy years:  did you keep a fast unto me?

@c    7:6. And when you did eat and drink, did you not eat for yourselves,
@c    and drink for yourselves?

@c    7:7. Are not these the words which the Lord spoke by the hand of the
@c    former prophets, when Jerusalem as yet was inhabited, and was wealthy,
@c    both itself and the cities round about it, and there were inhabitants
@c    towards the south, and in the plain?

@c    7:8. And the word of the Lord came to Zacharias, saying:

@c    7:9. Thus saith the Lord of hosts, saying:  Judge ye true judgment, and
@c    shew ye mercy and compassion every man to his brother.

@c    7:10. And oppress not the widow, and the fatherless, and the stranger,
@c    and the poor:  and let not a man devise evil in his heart against his
@c    brother.

@c    7:11. But they would not hearken, and they turned away the shoulder to
@c    depart:  and they stopped their ears, not to hear.

@c    7:12. And they made their heart as the adamant stone, lest they should
@c    hear the law, and the words which the Lord of hosts sent in his spirit
@c    by the hand of the former prophets:  so a great indignation came from
@c    Lord of hosts.

@c    7:13. And it came to pass that as he spoke, and they heard not:  so
@c    shall they cry, and I will not hear, saith the Lord of hosts.

@c    7:14. And I dispersed them throughout all kingdoms, which they know
@c    not:  and the land was left desolate behind them, so that no man passed
@c    through or returned:  and they changed the delightful land into a
@c    wilderness.



@c    Zacharias Chapter 8


@c    Joyful promises to Jerusalem:  fully verified in the church of Christ.

@c    8:1. And the word of the Lord of hosts came to me, saying:

@c    8:2. Thus saith the Lord of hosts:  I have been jealous for Sion with a
@c    great jealousy, and with a great indignation have I been jealous for
@c    her.

@c    8:3. Thus saith the Lord of hosts:  I am returned to Sion, and I will
@c    dwell in the midst of Jerusalem:  and Jerusalem shall be called The city
@c    of truth, and the mountain of the Lord of hosts, The sanctified
@c    mountain.

@c    8:4. Thus saith the Lord of hosts:  There shall yet old men and old
@c    women dwell in the streets of Jerusalem:  and every man with his staff
@c    in his hand through multitude of days.

@c    8:5. And the streets of the city shall be full of boys and girls,
@c    playing in the streets thereof.

@c    8:6. Thus saith the Lord of hosts:  If it seem hard in the eyes of the
@c    remnant of this people in those days:  shall it be hard in my eyes,
@c    saith the Lord of hosts?

@c    8:7. Thus saith the Lord of hosts:  Behold I will save my people from
@c    the land of the east, and from the land of the going down of the sun.

@c    8:8. And I will bring them, and they shall dwell in the midst of
@c    Jerusalem:  and they shall be my people, and I will be their God in
@c    truth and in justice.

@c    8:9. Thus saith the Lord of hosts:  Let your hands be strengthened, you
@c    that hear in these days these words by the mouth of the prophets, in
@c    the day that the house of the Lord of hosts was founded, that the
@c    temple might be built.

@c    8:10. For before those days there was no hire for men, neither was
@c    there hire for beasts, neither was there peace to him that came in, nor
@c    to him that went out, because of the tribulation:  and I let all men go
@c    every one against his neighbour.

@c    8:11. But now I will not deal with the remnant of this people according
@c    to the former days, saith the Lord of hosts.

@c    8:12. But there shall be the seed of peace:  the vine shall yield her
@c    fruit, and the earth shall give her increase, and the heavens shall
@c    give their dew:  and I will cause the remnant of this people to possess
@c    all these things.

@c    8:13. And it shall come to pass, that as you were a curse among the
@c    Gentiles, O house of Juda, and house of Israel:  so will I save you, and
@c    you shall be a blessing:  fear not, let your hands be strengthened.

@c    8:14. For thus saith the Lord of hosts:  As I purposed io afflict you,
@c    when your fathers had provoked me to wrath, saith the Lord,

@c    8:15. And I had no mercy:  so turning again I have thought in these days
@c    to do good to the house of Juda, and Jerusalem:  fear not.

@c    8:16. These then are the things, which you shall do:  Speak ye truth
@c    every one to his neighbour; judge ye truth and judgment of peace in
@c    your gates.

@c    8:17. And let none of you imagine evil in your hearts against his
@c    friend:  and love not a false oath:  for all these are the things that I
@c    hate, saith the Lord.

@c    8:18. And the word of the Lord of hosts came to me, saying:

@c    8:19. Thus saith the Lord of hosts:  The fast of the fourth month, and
@c    the fast of the fifth, and the fast of the seventh, and the fast of the
@c    tenth shall be to the house of Juda, joy, and gladness, and great
@c    solemnities:  only love ye truth and peace.

@c    The fast of the fourth month, etc. . .They fasted, on the ninth day of
@c    the fourth month, because on that day Nabuchodonosor took Jerusalem,
@c    Jer. 52.6.  On the tenth day of the fifth month, because on that day the
@c    temple was burnt, Jer. 52.12.  On the third day of the seventh month,
@c    for the murder of Godolias, Jer. 41.2.  And on the tenth day of the
@c    tenth month, because on that day the Chaldeans began to besiege
@c    Jerusalem, 4 Kings 25.1.  All these fasts, if they will be obedient for
@c    the future, shall be changed, as is here promised, into joyful
@c    solemnities.

@c    8:20. Thus saith the Lord of hosts, until people come and dwell in many
@c    cities,

@c    8:21. And the inhabitants go one to another, saying:  Let us go, and
@c    entreat the face of the Lord, and let us seek the Lord of hosts:  I also
@c    will go.

@c    8:22. And many peoples, and strong nations shall come to seek the Lord
@c    of hosts in Jerusalem, and to entreat the face of the Lord.

@c    8:23. Thus saith the Lord of hosts:  In those days, wherein ten men of
@c    all languages of the Gentiles shall take hold, and shall hold fast the
@c    skirt of one that is a Jew, saying:  We will go with you:  for we have
@c    heard that God is with you.

@c    Ten men, etc. . .Many of the Gentiles became proselytes to the Jewish
@c    religion before Christ:  but many more were converted to Christ by the
@c    apostles and other preachers of the Jewish nation.



@c    Zacharias Chapter 9


@c    God will defend his church, and bring over even her enemies to the
@c    faith.  The meek coming of Christ, to bring peace, to deliver the
@c    captives by his blood, and to give us all good things.

@c    9:1. The burden of the word of the Lord in the land of Hadrach, and of
@c    Damascus the rest thereof:  for the eye of man, and of all the tribes of
@c    Israel is the Lord's.

@c    Hadrach. . .Syria.

@c    9:2. Emath also in the borders thereof, and Tyre, and Sidon:  for they
@c    have taken to themselves to be exceeding wise.

@c    9:3. And Tyre hath built herself a strong hold, and heaped together
@c    silver as earth, and gold as the mire of the streets.

@c    9:4. Behold the Lord shall possess her, and shall strike her strength
@c    in the sea, and she shall be devoured with fire.

@c    9:5. Ascalon shall see, and shall fear, and Gaza, and shall be very
@c    sorrowful:  and Accaron, because her hope is confounded:  and the king
@c    shall perish from Gaza, and Ascalon shall not be inhabited.

@c    9:6. And the divider shall sit in Azotus, and I will destroy the pride
@c    of the Philistines.

@c    9:7. And I will take away his blood out of his mouth, and his
@c    abominations from between his teeth:  and even he shall be left to our
@c    God, and he shall be as a governor in Juda, and Accaron as a Jebusite.

@c    His blood. . .It is spoken of the Philistines, and particularly of
@c    Azotus, (where the temple of Dagon was,) and contains a prophecy of the
@c    conversion of that people from their bloody sacrifices and abominations
@c    to the worship of the true God.

@c    9:8. And I will encompass my house with them that serve me in war,
@c    going and returning, and the oppressor shall no more pass through them:
@c    for now I have seen with my eyes.

@c    That serve me in war. . .Viz., the Machabees.

@c    9:9. Rejoice greatly, O daughter of Sion, shout for joy, O daughter of
@c    Jerusalem:  BEHOLD THY KING will come to thee, the just and saviour:  he
@c    is poor, and riding upon an ass, and upon a colt, the foal of an ass.

@c    9:10. And I will destroy the chariot out of Ephraim, and the horse out
@c    of Jerusalem, and the bow for war shall be broken:  and he shall speak
@c    peace to the Gentiles, and his power shall be from sea to sea, and from
@c    the rivers even to the end of the earth.

@c    9:11. Thou also by the blood of thy testament hast sent forth thy
@c    prisoners out of the pit, wherein is no water.

@c    9:12. Return to the strong hold, ye prisoners of hope, I will render
@c    thee double as I declare today.

@c    9:13. Because I have bent Juda for me as a bow, I have filled Ephraim:
@c    and I will raise up thy sons, O Sion, above thy sons, O Greece, and I
@c    will make thee as the sword of the mighty.

@c    Thy sons, O Sion, etc. . .Viz., the apostles, who, in the spiritual way,
@c    conquered the Greeks, and subdued them to Christ.

@c    9:14. And the Lord God shall be seen over them, and his dart shall go
@c    forth as lightning:  and the Lord God will sound the trumpet, and go in
@c    the whirlwind of the south.

@c    9:15. The Lord of hosts will protect them:  and they shall devour, and
@c    subdue with the stones of the sling:  and drinking they shall be
@c    inebriated as it were with wine, and they shall be filled as bowls, and
@c    as the horns of the altar.

@c    9:16. And the Lord their God will save them in that day, as the flock
@c    of his people:  for holy stones shall be lifted up over his land.

@c    Holy stones. . .The apostles, who shall be as pillars and monuments in
@c    the church.

@c    9:17. For what is the good thing of him, and what is his beautiful
@c    thing, but the corn of the elect, and wine springing forth virgins?

@c    The corn, etc. . .His most excellent gift is the blessed Eucharist,
@c    called here The corn, that is, the bread of the elect, and the wine
@c    springing forth virgins; that is, maketh virgins to bud, or spring
@c    forth, as it were, like flowers among thorns; because it has a
@c    wonderful efficacy to give and preserve purity.



@c    Zacharias Chapter 10


@c    God is to be sought to, and not idols.  The victories of his church,
@c    which shall arise originally from the Jewish nation.

@c    10:1. Ask ye of the Lord rain in the latter season, and the Lord will
@c    make snows, and will give them showers of rain, to every one grass in
@c    the field.

@c    10:2. For the idols have spoken what was unprofitable, and the diviners
@c    have seen a lie, and the dreamers have spoken vanity:  they comforted in
@c    vain:  therefore they were led away as a flock:  they shall be afflicted,
@c    because they have no shepherd.

@c    10:3. My wrath is kindled against the shepherds, and I will visit upon
@c    the buck goats:  for the Lord of hosts hath visited his flock, the house
@c    of Juda, and hath made them as the horse of his glory in the battle.

@c    10:4. Out of him shall come forth the corner, out of him the pin, out
@c    of him the bow of battle, out of him ever exacter together.

@c    10:5. And they shall be as mighty men, treading under foot the mire of
@c    the ways in battle:  and they shall fight, because the Lord is with
@c    them, and the riders of horses shall be confounded.

@c    10:6. And I will strengthen the house of Juda, and save the house of
@c    Joseph:  and I will bring them back again, because I will have mercy on
@c    them:  and they shall be as they were when I had not cast them off, for
@c    I am the Lord their God, and will hear them.

@c    10:7. And they shall be as the valiant men of Ephraim, and their heart
@c    shall rejoice as through wine:  and their children shall see, and shall
@c    rejoice, and their heart shall be joyful in the Lord.

@c    10:8. I will whistle for them, and I will gather them together, because
@c    I have redeemed them:  and I will multiply them as they were multiplied
@c    before.

@c    10:9. And I will sow them among peoples:  and from afar they shall
@c    remember me:  and they shall live with their children, and shall return.

@c    10:10. And I will bring them back out of the land of Egypt, and I will
@c    gather them from among the Assyrians:  and will bring them to the land
@c    of Galaad, and Libanus, and place shall not be found for them.

@c    10:11. And he shall pass over the strait of the sea, and shall strike
@c    the waves in the sea, and all the depths of the river shall be
@c    confounded, and the pride of Assyria shall be humbled, and the sceptre
@c    of Egypt shall depart.

@c    10:12. I will strengthen them in the Lord, and they shall walk in his
@c    name, saith the Lord.



@c    Zacharias Chapter 11


@c    The destruction of Jerusalem and the temple.  God's dealings with the
@c    Jews, and their reprobation.

@c    11:1. Open thy gates, O Libanus, and let fire devour thy cedars.

@c    O Libanus. . .So Jerusalem, and more particularly the temple, is called
@c    by the prophets, from its height, and from its being built of the
@c    cedars of Libanus.--Ibid.  Thy cedars. . .Thy princes and chief men.

@c    11:2. Howl, thou fir tree, for the cedar is fallen, for the mighty are
@c    laid waste:  howl, ye oaks of Basan, because the fenced forest is cut
@c    down.

@c    11:3. The voice of the howling of the shepherds, because their glory is
@c    laid waste:  the voice of the roaring of the lions, because the pride of
@c    the Jordan is spoiled.

@c    11:4. Thus saith the Lord my God:  Feed the flock of the slaughter,

@c    11:5. Which they that possessed, slew, and repented not, and they sold
@c    them, saying:  Blessed be the Lord, we are become rich:  and their
@c    shepherds spared them not.

@c    11:6. And I will no more spare the inhabitants of the land, saith the
@c    Lord:  behold I will deliver the men, every one into his neighbour's
@c    hand, and into the hand of his king:  and they shall destroy the land,
@c    and I will not deliver it out of their hand.

@c    Every one into his neighbour's hand, etc. . .This alludes to the last
@c    siege of Jerusalem, in which the different factions of the Jews
@c    destroyed one another; and they that remained fell into the hands of
@c    their king, that is, of the Roman emperor, of whom they had said, John
@c    19.15, we have no king but Caesar.

@c    11:7. And I will feed the flock of slaughter for this, O ye poor of the
@c    flock.  And I took unto me two rods, one I called Beauty, and the other
@c    I called a Cord, and I fed the flock.

@c    Two rods. . .Or shepherd's staves, meaning the different ways of God's
@c    dealing with his people; the one, by sweet means, called the rod of
@c    Beauty:  the other, by bands and punishments, called the Cord.  And where
@c    both these rods are made of no use or effect by the obstinacy of
@c    sinners, the rods are broken, and such sinners are given up to a
@c    reprobate sense, as the Jews were.

@c    11:8. And I cut off three shepherds in one month, and my soul was
@c    straitened in their regard:  for their soul also varied in my regard.

@c    Three shepherds in one month. . .That is, in a very short time.  By these
@c    three shepherds probably are meant the latter princes and high priests
@c    of the Jews, whose reign was short.

@c    11:9. And I said:  I will not feed you:  that which dieth, let it die:
@c    and that which is cut off, let it be cut off:  and let the rest devour
@c    every one the flesh of his neighbour.

@c    11:10. And I took my rod that was called Beauty, and I cut it asunder
@c    to make void my covenant, which I had made with all people.

@c    11:11. And it was made void in that day:  and so the poor of the flock
@c    that keep for me, understood that it is the word of the Lord.

@c    11:12. And I said to them:  If it be good in your eyes, bring hither my
@c    wages:  and if not, be quiet.  And they weighed for my wages thirty
@c    pieces of silver.

@c    11:13. And the Lord said to me:  Cast it to the statuary, a handsome
@c    price, that I was prized at by them.  And I took the thirty pieces of
@c    silver, and I cast them into the house of the Lord to the statuary.

@c    The statuary. . .The Hebrew word signifies also a potter.

@c    11:14. And I cut off my second rod that was called a Cord, that I might
@c    break the brotherhood between Juda and Israel.

@c    11:15. And the Lord said to me:  Take to thee yet the instruments of a
@c    foolish shepherd.

@c    A foolish shepherd. . .This was to represent the foolish, that is, the
@c    wicked princes and priests that should rule the people, before their
@c    utter desolation.

@c    11:16. For behold I will raise up a shepherd in the land, who shall not
@c    visit what is forsaken, nor seek what is scattered, nor heal what is
@c    broken, nor nourish that which standeth, and he shall eat the flesh of
@c    the fat ones, and break their hoofs.

@c    11:17. O shepherd, and idol, that forsaketh the flock:  the sword upon
@c    his arm and upon his right eye:  his arm shall quite wither away, and
@c    his right eye shall be utterly darkened.



@c    Zacharias Chapter 12


@c    God shall protect his church against her persecutors.  The mourning of
@c    Jerusalem.

@c    12:1. The burden of the word of the Lord upon Israel.  Thus saith the
@c    Lord, who stretcheth forth the heavens, and layeth the foundations of
@c    the earth, and formeth the spirit of man in him:

@c    12:2. Behold I will make Jerusalem a lintel of surfeiting to all the
@c    people round about:  and Juda also shall be in the siege against
@c    Jerusalem.

@c    A lintel of surfeiting. . .That is, a door into which they shall seek to
@c    enter, to glut themselves with blood; but they shall stumble, and fall
@c    like men stupefied with wine.  It seems to allude to the times of
@c    Antiochus, and to the victories of the Machabees.

@c    12:3. And it shall come to pass in that day, that I will make Jerusalem
@c    a burdensome stone to all people:  all that shall lift it up shall be
@c    rent and torn, and all the kingdoms of the earth shall be gathered
@c    together against her.

@c    12:4. In that day, saith the Lord, I will strike every horse with
@c    astonishment, and his rider with madness:  and I will open my eyes upon
@c    the house of Juda, and will strike every horse of the nations with
@c    blindness.

@c    12:5. And the governors of Juda shall say in their heart:  Let the
@c    inhabitants of Jerusalem be strengthened for me in the Lord of hosts,
@c    their God.

@c    12:6. In that day I will make the governors of Juda like a furnace of
@c    fire amongst wood, and as a firebrand amongst hay:  and they shall
@c    devour all the people round about, to the right hand, and to the left:
@c    and Jerusalem shall be inhabited again in her own place in Jerusalem.

@c    12:7. And the Lord shall save the tabernacles of Jada, as in the
@c    beginning:  that the house of David, and the glory of the inhabitants of
@c    Jerusalem, may not boast and magnify themselves against Juda.

@c    12:8. In that day shall the Lord protect the inhabitants of Jerusalem,
@c    and he that hath offended among them in that day shall be as David:  and
@c    the house of David, as that of God, as an angel of the Lord in their
@c    sight.

@c    12:9. And it shall come to pass in that day, that I will seek to
@c    destroy all the nations that come against Jerusalem.

@c    12:10. And I will pour out upon the house of David, and upon the
@c    inhabitants of Jerusalem, the spirit of grace, and of prayers:  and they
@c    shall look upon me, whom they have pierced:  and they shall mourn for
@c    him as one mourneth for an only son, and they shall grieve over him, as
@c    the manner is to grieve for the death of the firstborn.

@c    12:11. In that day there shall be a great lamentation in Jerusalem like
@c    the lamentation of Adadremmon in the plain of Mageddon.

@c    Adadremmon. . .A place near Mageddon, where the good king Josias was
@c    slain, and much lamented by his people.

@c    12:12. And the land shall mourn:  families and families apart:  the
@c    families of the house of David apart, and their women apart:

@c    12:13. The families of the house of Nathan apart, and their women
@c    apart:  the families of the house of Levi apart, and their women apart:
@c    the families of Semei apart, and their women apart.

@c    12:14. All the rest of the families, families and families apart, and
@c    their women apart.



@c    Zacharias Chapter 13


@c    The fountain of Christ.  Idols and false prophets shall be extirpated:
@c    Christ shall suffer:  his people shall be tried by fire.

@c    13:1. In that day there shall be a fountain open to the house of David,
@c    and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem:  for the washing of the sinner, and
@c    of the unclean woman.

@c    13:2. And it shall come to pass in that day, saith the Lord of hosts,
@c    that I will destroy the names of idols out of the earth, and they shall
@c    be remembered no more:  and I will take away the false prophets, and the
@c    unclean spirit out of the earth.

@c    13:3. And it shall come to pass, that when any man shall prophesy any
@c    more, his father and his mother that brought him into the world, shall
@c    say to him:  Thou shalt not live:  because thou hast spoken a lie in the
@c    name of the Lord.  And his father, and his mother, his parents, shall
@c    thrust him through, when he shall prophesy.

@c    13:4. And it shall come to pass in that day, that the prophets shall be
@c    confounded, every one by his own vision, when he shall prophesy,
@c    neither shall they be clad with a garment of sackcloth, to deceive:

@c    13:5. But he shall say:  I am no prophet, I am a husbandman:  for Adam is
@c    my example from my youth.

@c    13:6. And they shall say to him:  What are these wounds in the midst of
@c    thy hands?  And he shall say:  With these I was wounded in the house of
@c    them that loved me.

@c    13:7. Awake, O sword, against my shepherd, and against the man that
@c    cleaveth to me, saith the Lord of hosts:  strike the shepherd, and the
@c    sheep shall be scattered:  and I will turn my hand to the little ones.

@c    13:8. And there shall be in all the earth, saith the Lord, two parts in
@c    it shall be scattered, and shall perish:  but the third part shall be
@c    left therein.

@c    13:9. And I will bring the third part through the fire, and will refine
@c    them as silver is refined:  and I will try them as gold is tried.  They
@c    shall call on my name, and I will hear them.  I will say:  Thou art my
@c    people:  and they shall say:  The Lord is my God.



@c    Zacharias Chapter 14


@c    After the persecutions of the church shall follow great prosperity.
@c    Persecutors shall be punished:  so shall all that will not serve God in
@c    his church.

@c    14:1. Behold the days of the Lord shall come, and thy spoils shall be
@c    divided in the midst of thee.

@c    14:2. And I will gather all nations to Jerusalem to battle, and the
@c    city shall be taken, and the houses shall be rifled, and the women
@c    shall be defiled:  and half of the city shall go forth into captivity,
@c    and the rest of the people shall not be taken away out of the city.

@c    I will gather, etc. . .This seems to be a prophecy of what was done by
@c    Antiochus.

@c    14:3. Then the Lord shall go forth, and shall fight against those
@c    nations, as when he fought in the day of battle.

@c    14:4. And his feet shall stand in that day upon the mount of Olives,
@c    which is over against Jerusalem towards the east:  and the mount of
@c    Olives shall be divided in the midst thereof to the east, and to the
@c    west with a very great opening, and half of the mountain shall be
@c    separated to the north, and half thereof to the south.

@c    14:5. And you shall flee to the valley of those mountains, for the
@c    valley of the mountains shall be joined even to the next, and you shall
@c    flee as you fled from the face of the earthquake in the days of Ozias
@c    king of Juda:  and the Lord my God shall come, and all the saints with
@c    him.

@c    14:6. And it shall come to pass in that day, that there shall be no
@c    light, but cold and frost.

@c    No light. . .Viz., in that dismal time of persecution of Antiochus, when
@c    it was neither day nor night:  (ver. 7) because they neither had the
@c    comfortable light of the day, nor the repose of the night.

@c    14:7. And there shall be one day, which is known to the Lord, not day
@c    nor night:  and in the time of the evening there shall be light:

@c    In the time of the evening there shall be light. . .An unexpected light
@c    shall arise by the means of the Machabees, when things shall seem to be
@c    at the worst.

@c    14:8. And it shall come to pass in that day, that living waters shall
@c    go out from Jerusalem:  half of them to the east sea, and half of them
@c    to the last sea:  they shall be in summer and in winter.

@c    Living waters. . .Viz., the gospel of Christ.

@c    14:9. And the Lord shall be king over all the earth:  in that day there
@c    shall be one Lord, and his name shall be one.

@c    14:10. And all the land shall return even to the desert, from the hill
@c    to Remmon to the south of Jerusalem:  and she shall be exalted, and
@c    shall dwell in her own place, from the gate of Benjamin even to the
@c    place of the former gate, and even to the gate of the corners:  and from
@c    the tower of Hananeel even to the king's winepresses.

@c    All the land shall return, etc. . .This, in some measure, was verified
@c    by the means of the Machabees:  but is rather to be taken in a spiritual
@c    sense, as relating to the propagation of the church, and kingdom of
@c    Christ, the true Jerusalem, which alone shall never fall under the
@c    anathema of destruction, or God's curse.

@c    14:11. And people shall dwell in it, and there shall be no more an
@c    anathema:  but Jerusalem shall sit secure.

@c    14:12. And this shall be the plague wherewith the Lord shall strike all
@c    nations that have fought against Jerusalem:  the flesh of every one
@c    shall consume away while they stand upon their feet, and their eyes
@c    shall consume away in their holes, and their tongue shall consume away
@c    in their mouth.

@c    The flesh of every one shall consume, etc. . .Such judgments as these
@c    have often fallen upon the persecutors of God's church, as appears by
@c    many instances in history.

@c    14:13. In that day there shall be a great tumult from the Lord among
@c    them:  and a man shall take the hand of his neighbour, and his hand
@c    shall be clasped upon his neighbour's hand.

@c    14:14. And even Juda shall fight against Jerusalem:  and the riches of
@c    all nations round about shall be gathered together, gold, and silver,
@c    and garments in great abundance.

@c    Even Juda, etc. . .The carnal Jews, and other false brothers, shall join
@c    in persecuting the church.

@c    14:15. And the destruction of the horse, and of the mule, and of the
@c    camel, and of the ass, and of all the beasts, that shall be in those
@c    tents, shall be like this destruction.

@c    Shall be like this destruction. . .That is, the beasts shall be
@c    destroyed as well as the men:  the common soldiers as well as their
@c    leaders.

@c    14:16. And all they that shall be left of all nations that came against
@c    Jerusalem, shall go up from year to year, to adore the King, the Lord
@c    of hosts, and to keep the feast of tabernacles.

@c    They that shall be left, etc. . .That is, many of them that persecuted
@c    the church shall be converted to its faith and communion.--Ibid.  To keep
@c    the feast of tabernacles. . .This feast was kept by the Jews in memory
@c    of their sojourning forty years in the desert, in their way to the land
@c    of promise.  And in the spiritual sense is duly kept by all such
@c    Christians as in their earthly pilgrimage are continually advancing
@c    toward their true home, the heavenly Jerusalem; by the help of the
@c    sacraments and sacrifice of the church.  And they that neglect this must
@c    not look for the kind showers of divine grace, to give fruitfulness to
@c    their souls.

@c    14:17. And it shall come to pass, that he that shall not go up of the
@c    families of the land to Jerusalem, to adore the King, the Lord of
@c    hosts, there shall be no rain upon them.

@c    14:18. And if the family of Egypt go not up nor come:  neither shall it
@c    be upon them, but there shall be destruction wherewith the Lord will
@c    strike all nations that will not go up to keep the feast of
@c    tabernacles.

@c    14:19. This shall be the sin of Egypt, and this the sin of all nations,
@c    that will not go up to keep the feast of tabernacles.

@c    14:20. In that day that which is upon the bridle of the horse shall be
@c    holy to the Lord:  and the caldrons in the house of the Lord shall be as
@c    the phials before the altar.

@c    That which is upon the bridle, etc. . .The golden ornaments of the
@c    bridles, etc., shall be turned into offerings in the house of God.  And
@c    there shall be an abundance of caldrons and phials for the sacrifices
@c    of the temple; by which is meant, under a figure, the great resort
@c    there shall be to the temple, that is, to the church of Christ, and her
@c    sacrifice.

@c    14:21. And every caldron in Jerusalem and Juda shall be sanctified to
@c    the Lord of hosts:  and all that sacrifice shall come, and take of them,
@c    and shall seethe in them:  and the merchant shall be no more in the
@c    house of the Lord of hosts in that day.

@c    The merchant shall be no more, etc. . .Or, as some render it, The
@c    Chanaanite shall be no more, etc., that is, the profane and unbelievers
@c    shall have no title to be in the house of the Lord.  Or there shall be
@c    no occasion for buyers or sellers of oxen, or sheep, or doves, in the
@c    house of God, such as Jesus Christ cast out of the temple.
