@node pamoi pagbu, remoi pagbu, le fukpi, Top

@menu
* papipamoi pagbu::		[The Book Of Genesis]
* papirevomoi pagbu::	[The Song of Solomon]
@end menu

@include ot-genesis.texinfo
@include ot-exodus.texinfo
@include ot-leviticus.texinfo
@include ot-numbers.texinfo
@include ot-deuteronomy.texinfo
@include ot-josue.texinfo
@include ot-judges.texinfo
@include ot-ruth.texinfo
@include ot-1_kings.texinfo
@include ot-2_kings.texinfo
@include ot-3_kings.texinfo
@include ot-4_kings.texinfo
@include ot-1_paralipomenon.texinfo
@include ot-2_paralipomenon.texinfo
@include ot-1_esdras.texinfo
@include ot-2_esdras.texinfo
@include ot-tobias.texinfo
@include ot-judith.texinfo
@include ot-esther.texinfo
@include ot-job.texinfo
@include ot-psalms.texinfo
@include ot-proverbs.texinfo
@include ot-ecclesiastes.texinfo
@include ot-canticle_of_canticles.texinfo
@include ot-wisdom.texinfo
@include ot-ecclesiasticus.texinfo
@include ot-isaias.texinfo
@include ot-jeremias.texinfo
@include ot-lamentations.texinfo
@include ot-baruch.texinfo
@include ot-ezechiel.texinfo
@include ot-daniel.texinfo
@include ot-osee.texinfo
@include ot-joel.texinfo
@include ot-amos.texinfo
@include ot-abdias.texinfo
@include ot-jonas.texinfo
@include ot-micheas.texinfo
@include ot-nahum.texinfo
@include ot-habacuc.texinfo
@include ot-sophonias.texinfo
@include ot-aggeus.texinfo
@include ot-zacharias.texinfo
@include ot-malachias.texinfo
@include ot-1_machabees.texinfo
@include ot-2_machabees.texinfo

@c    
@c    
@c    The Old Testament
@c    
@c      Book of Genesis
@c      Book of Exodus
@c      Book of Leviticus
@c      Book of Numbers
@c      Book of Deuteronomy
@c      Book of Josue
@c      Book of Judges
@c      Book of Ruth
@c      First Book of Samuel, alias 1 Kings
@c      Second Book of Samuel, alias 2 Kings
@c      Third Book of Kings
@c      Fourth Book of Kings
@c      First Book of Paralipomenon
@c      Second Book of Paralipomenon
@c      First Book of Esdras
@c      Book of Nehemias, alias 2 Esdras
@c      Book of Tobias
@c      Book of Judith
@c      Book of Esther
@c      Book of Job
@c      Book of Psalms
@c      Book of Proverbs
@c      Ecclesiastes
@c      Solomon's Canticle of Canticles
@c      Book of Wisdom
@c      Ecclesiasticus
@c      Prophecy of Isaias
@c      Prophecy of Jeremias
@c      Lamentations of Jeremias
@c      Prophecy of Baruch
@c      Prophecy of Ezechiel
@c      Prophecy of Daniel
@c      Prophecy of Osee
@c      Prophecy of Joel
@c      Prophecy of Amos
@c      Prophecy of Abdias
@c      Prophecy of Jonas
@c      Prophecy of Micheas
@c      Prophecy of Nahum
@c      Prophecy of Habacuc
@c      Prophecy of Sophonias
@c      Prophecy of Aggeus
@c      Prophecy of Zacharias
@c      Prophecy of Malachias
@c      First Book of Machabees
@c      Second Book of Machabees


@c    THE HOLY BIBLE
@c    
@c    
@c    
@c    
@c    Translated from the Latin Vulgate
@c    
@c    
@c    Diligently Compared with the Hebrew, Greek,
@c    and Other Editions in Divers Languages
@c    
@c    
@c    THE OLD TESTAMENT
@c    First Published by the English College at Douay
@c    A.D. 1609 & 1610
@c    
@c    and
@c    
@c    THE NEW TESTAMENT
@c    First Published by the English College at Rheims
@c    A.D. 1582
@c    
@c    
@c    With Annotations
@c    
@c    
@c    The Whole Revised and Diligently Compared with
@c    the Latin Vulgate by Bishop Richard Challoner
@c    A.D. 1749-1752
@c    
@c    
@c    
@c    
@c    CREDITS
@c    
@c    
@c    Without the assistance of many individuals and groups, this text of the
@c    Douay-Rheims Version of the Holy Bible would not be available for the
@c    Project Gutenberg collection.  Our most grateful and sincere thanks goes
@c    to those at 'Catholic Software' who have provided the electronic plain
@c    texts of the 73 books of the Bible.  'Catholic Software' also produces a
@c    Douay Bible program on CD-ROM that features a fully searchable Douay-
@c    Rheims Bible, footnotes, Latin text and dictionary, topical index, maps,
@c    Biblical art gallery, and other features.  For more information of this
@c    and many other products contact:
@c    
@c    Catholic Software
@c    Box 1914
@c    Murray, KY 42071
@c    (502) 753-8198
@c    http://www.catholicity.com/market/CSoftware/
@c    waubrey@aol.com
@c    
@c    Additional production assistance has been provided by volunteers from
@c    the Atlanta Council of the Knights of Columbus.  Tad Book compiled and
@c    reformatted the texts to Project Gutenberg standards.  Dennis McCarthy
@c    assisted Mr. Book and transcribed selections from the first editions
@c    included as appendices.
@c    
@c    
@c    
@c    
@c    HISTORY
@c    
@c    
@c    This e-text comes from multiple editions of Challoner's revised Douay-
@c    Rheims Version of the Holy Bible.  In 1568 English exiles, many from
@c    Oxford, established the English College of Douay (Douai/Doway), Flanders,
@c    under William (later Cardinal) Allen.  In October, 1578, Gregory Martin
@c    began the work of preparing an English translation of the Bible for
@c    Catholic readers, the first such translation into Modern English.
@c    Assisting were William Allen, Richard Bristow, Thomas Worthington, and
@c    William Reynolds who revised, criticized, and corrected Dr. Martin's
@c    work.  The college published the New Testament at Rheims (Reims/Rhemes),
@c    France, in 1582 through John Fogny with a preface and explanatory notes,
@c    authored chiefly by Bristol, Allen, and Worthington.  Later the Old
@c    Testament was published at Douay in two parts (1609 and 1610) by Laurence
@c    Kellam through the efforts of Dr. Worthington, then superior of the
@c    seminary.  The translation had been prepared before the appearance of the
@c    New Testament, but the publication was delayed due to financial
@c    difficulties.  The religious and scholarly adherence to the Latin Vulgate
@c    text led to the less elegant and idiomatic words and phrases often found
@c    in the translation.  In some instances where no English word conveyed the
@c    full meaning of the Latin, a Latin word was Anglicized and its meaning
@c    defined in a glossary.  Although ridiculed by critics, many of these
@c    words later found common usage in the English language.  Spellings of
@c    proper names and the numbering of the Psalms are adopted from the Latin
@c    Vulgate.
@c    
@c    In 1749 Dr. Richard Challoner began a major revision of the Douay and
@c    Rheims texts, the spellings and phrasing of which had become increasingly
@c    archaic in the almost two centuries since the translations were first
@c    produced.  He modernized the diction and introduced a more fluid style,
@c    while faithfully maintaining the accuracy of Dr. Martin's texts.  This
@c    revision became the 'de facto' standard text for English speaking
@c    Catholics until the twentieth century.  It is still highly regarded by
@c    many for its style, although it is now rarely used for liturgical
@c    purposes.  The notes included in this electronic edition are generally
@c    attributed to Bishop Challoner.
@c    
@c    The 1610 printing of the second tome of the Old Testament includes an
@c    appendix containing the non-canonical books 'Prayer of Manasses,' 'Third
@c    Booke of Esdras,' and 'Fourth Booke of Esdras.'  While not part of
@c    Challoner's revision, the 1610 texts are placed in the appendices of
@c    this e-text.  Also included are the original texts of two short books,
@c    'The Prophecie of Abdias' and 'The Catholike Epistle of Iude the
@c    Apostle,' to give the reader a sense of the language of the first
@c    editions in comparison to the Challoner revision.  Further background on
@c    the Douay-Rheims version may be found in a selection from the preface to
@c    the 1582 edition and the original glossary included in the appendices.
@c    
@c    
@c    
@c    
@c    CONTENTS
