@node    pamo'o, remo'o, le fukpi, Top
@chapter pamo'o [Down The Rabbit-Hole]

@c                                CHAPTER I

@c                           Down The Rabbit-Hole

@c      Alice was beginning to get very tired of sitting by her sister
@c    on the bank, and of having nothing to do:  once or twice she had
@c    peeped into the book her sister was reading, but it had no
@c    pictures or conversations in it, `and what is the use of a book,'
@c    thought Alice `without pictures or conversation?'

@c      So she was considering in her own mind (as well as she could,
@c    for the hot day made her feel very sleepy and stupid), whether
@c    the pleasure of making a daisy-chain would be worth the trouble
@c    of getting up and picking the daisies, when suddenly a White
@c    Rabbit with pink eyes ran close by her.

@c      There was nothing so VERY remarkable in that; nor did Alice
@c    think it so VERY much out of the way to hear the Rabbit say to
@c    itself, `Oh dear!  Oh dear!  I shall be late!'  (when she thought
@c    it over afterwards, it occurred to her that she ought to have
@c    wondered at this, but at the time it all seemed quite natural);
@c    but when the Rabbit actually TOOK A WATCH OUT OF ITS WAISTCOAT-
@c    POCKET, and looked at it, and then hurried on, Alice started to
@c    her feet, for it flashed across her mind that she had never
@c    before seen a rabbit with either a waistcoat-pocket, or a watch to
@c    take out of it, and burning with curiosity, she ran across the
@c    field after it, and fortunately was just in time to see it pop
@c    down a large rabbit-hole under the hedge.

@c      In another moment down went Alice after it, never once
@c    considering how in the world she was to get out again.

@c      The rabbit-hole went straight on like a tunnel for some way,
@c    and then dipped suddenly down, so suddenly that Alice had not a
@c    moment to think about stopping herself before she found herself
@c    falling down a very deep well.

@c      Either the well was very deep, or she fell very slowly, for she
@c    had plenty of time as she went down to look about her and to
@c    wonder what was going to happen next.  First, she tried to look
@c    down and make out what she was coming to, but it was too dark to
@c    see anything; then she looked at the sides of the well, and
@c    noticed that they were filled with cupboards and book-shelves;
@c    here and there she saw maps and pictures hung upon pegs.  She
@c    took down a jar from one of the shelves as she passed; it was
@c    labelled `ORANGE MARMALADE', but to her great disappointment it
@c    was empty:  she did not like to drop the jar for fear of killing
@c    somebody, so managed to put it into one of the cupboards as she
@c    fell past it.

@c      `Well!' thought Alice to herself, `after such a fall as this, I
@c    shall think nothing of tumbling down stairs!  How brave they'll
@c    all think me at home!  Why, I wouldn't say anything about it,
@c    even if I fell off the top of the house!' (Which was very likely
@c    true.)

@c      Down, down, down.  Would the fall NEVER come to an end!  `I
@c    wonder how many miles I've fallen by this time?' she said aloud.
@c    `I must be getting somewhere near the centre of the earth.  Let
@c    me see:  that would be four thousand miles down, I think--' (for,
@c    you see, Alice had learnt several things of this sort in her
@c    lessons in the schoolroom, and though this was not a VERY good
@c    opportunity for showing off her knowledge, as there was no one to
@c    listen to her, still it was good practice to say it over) `--yes,
@c    that's about the right distance--but then I wonder what Latitude
@c    or Longitude I've got to?'  (Alice had no idea what Latitude was,
@c    or Longitude either, but thought they were nice grand words to
@c    say.)

@c      Presently she began again.  `I wonder if I shall fall right
@c    THROUGH the earth!  How funny it'll seem to come out among the
@c    people that walk with their heads downward!  The Antipathies, I
@c    think--' (she was rather glad there WAS no one listening, this
@c    time, as it didn't sound at all the right word) `--but I shall
@c    have to ask them what the name of the country is, you know.
@c    Please, Ma'am, is this New Zealand or Australia?' (and she tried
@c    to curtsey as she spoke--fancy CURTSEYING as you're falling
@c    through the air!  Do you think you could manage it?)  `And what
@c    an ignorant little girl she'll think me for asking!  No, it'll
@c    never do to ask:  perhaps I shall see it written up somewhere.'

@c      Down, down, down.  There was nothing else to do, so Alice soon
@c    began talking again.  `Dinah'll miss me very much to-night, I
@c    should think!'  (Dinah was the cat.)  `I hope they'll remember
@c    her saucer of milk at tea-time.  Dinah my dear!  I wish you were
@c    down here with me!  There are no mice in the air, I'm afraid, but
@c    you might catch a bat, and that's very like a mouse, you know.
@c    But do cats eat bats, I wonder?'  And here Alice began to get
@c    rather sleepy, and went on saying to herself, in a dreamy sort of
@c    way, `Do cats eat bats?  Do cats eat bats?' and sometimes, `Do
@c    bats eat cats?' for, you see, as she couldn't answer either
@c    question, it didn't much matter which way she put it.  She felt
@c    that she was dozing off, and had just begun to dream that she
@c    was walking hand in hand with Dinah, and saying to her very
@c    earnestly, `Now, Dinah, tell me the truth:  did you ever eat a
@c    bat?' when suddenly, thump! thump! down she came upon a heap of
@c    sticks and dry leaves, and the fall was over.

@c      Alice was not a bit hurt, and she jumped up on to her feet in a
@c    moment:  she looked up, but it was all dark overhead; before her
@c    was another long passage, and the White Rabbit was still in
@c    sight, hurrying down it.  There was not a moment to be lost:
@c    away went Alice like the wind, and was just in time to hear it
@c    say, as it turned a corner, `Oh my ears and whiskers, how late
@c    it's getting!'  She was close behind it when she turned the
@c    corner, but the Rabbit was no longer to be seen:  she found
@c    herself in a long, low hall, which was lit up by a row of lamps
@c    hanging from the roof.

@c      There were doors all round the hall, but they were all locked;
@c    and when Alice had been all the way down one side and up the
@c    other, trying every door, she walked sadly down the middle,
@c    wondering how she was ever to get out again.

@c      Suddenly she came upon a little three-legged table, all made of
@c    solid glass; there was nothing on it except a tiny golden key,
@c    and Alice's first thought was that it might belong to one of the
@c    doors of the hall; but, alas! either the locks were too large, or
@c    the key was too small, but at any rate it would not open any of
@c    them.  However, on the second time round, she came upon a low
@c    curtain she had not noticed before, and behind it was a little
@c    door about fifteen inches high:  she tried the little golden key
@c    in the lock, and to her great delight it fitted!

@c      Alice opened the door and found that it led into a small
@c    passage, not much larger than a rat-hole:  she knelt down and
@c    looked along the passage into the loveliest garden you ever saw.
@c    How she longed to get out of that dark hall, and wander about
@c    among those beds of bright flowers and those cool fountains, but
@c    she could not even get her head though the doorway; `and even if
@c    my head would go through,' thought poor Alice, `it would be of
@c    very little use without my shoulders.  Oh, how I wish
@c    I could shut up like a telescope!  I think I could, if I only
@c    know how to begin.'  For, you see, so many out-of-the-way things
@c    had happened lately, that Alice had begun to think that very few
@c    things indeed were really impossible.

@c      There seemed to be no use in waiting by the little door, so she
@c    went back to the table, half hoping she might find another key on
@c    it, or at any rate a book of rules for shutting people up like
@c    telescopes:  this time she found a little bottle on it, (`which
@c    certainly was not here before,' said Alice,) and round the neck
@c    of the bottle was a paper label, with the words `DRINK ME'
@c    beautifully printed on it in large letters.

@c      It was all very well to say `Drink me,' but the wise little
@c    Alice was not going to do THAT in a hurry.  `No, I'll look
@c    first,' she said, `and see whether it's marked "poison" or not';
@c    for she had read several nice little histories about children who
@c    had got burnt, and eaten up by wild beasts and other unpleasant
@c    things, all because they WOULD not remember the simple rules
@c    their friends had taught them:  such as, that a red-hot poker
@c    will burn you if you hold it too long; and that if you cut your
@c    finger VERY deeply with a knife, it usually bleeds; and she had
@c    never forgotten that, if you drink much from a bottle marked
@c    `poison,' it is almost certain to disagree with you, sooner or
@c    later.

@c      However, this bottle was NOT marked `poison,' so Alice ventured
@c    to taste it, and finding it very nice, (it had, in fact, a sort
@c    of mixed flavour of cherry-tart, custard, pine-apple, roast
@c    turkey, toffee, and hot buttered toast,) she very soon finished
@c    it off.

@c         *       *       *       *       *       *       *

@c             *       *       *       *       *       *

@c         *       *       *       *       *       *       *

@c      `What a curious feeling!' said Alice; `I must be shutting up
@c    like a telescope.'

@c      And so it was indeed:  she was now only ten inches high, and
@c    her face brightened up at the thought that she was now the right
@c    size for going through the little door into that lovely garden.
@c    First, however, she waited for a few minutes to see if she was
@c    going to shrink any further:  she felt a little nervous about
@c    this; `for it might end, you know,' said Alice to herself, `in my
@c    going out altogether, like a candle.  I wonder what I should be
@c    like then?'  And she tried to fancy what the flame of a candle is
@c    like after the candle is blown out, for she could not remember
@c    ever having seen such a thing.

@c      After a while, finding that nothing more happened, she decided
@c    on going into the garden at once; but, alas for poor Alice!
@c    when she got to the door, she found she had forgotten the
@c    little golden key, and when she went back to the table for it,
@c    she found she could not possibly reach it:  she could see it
@c    quite plainly through the glass, and she tried her best to climb
@c    up one of the legs of the table, but it was too slippery;
@c    and when she had tired herself out with trying,
@c    the poor little thing sat down and cried.

@c      `Come, there's no use in crying like that!' said Alice to
@c    herself, rather sharply; `I advise you to leave off this minute!'
@c    She generally gave herself very good advice, (though she very
@c    seldom followed it), and sometimes she scolded herself so
@c    severely as to bring tears into her eyes; and once she remembered
@c    trying to box her own ears for having cheated herself in a game
@c    of croquet she was playing against herself, for this curious
@c    child was very fond of pretending to be two people.  `But it's no
@c    use now,' thought poor Alice, `to pretend to be two people!  Why,
@c    there's hardly enough of me left to make ONE respectable
@c    person!'

@c      Soon her eye fell on a little glass box that was lying under
@c    the table:  she opened it, and found in it a very small cake, on
@c    which the words `EAT ME' were beautifully marked in currants.
@c    `Well, I'll eat it,' said Alice, `and if it makes me grow larger,
@c    I can reach the key; and if it makes me grow smaller, I can creep
@c    under the door; so either way I'll get into the garden, and I
@c    don't care which happens!'

@c      She ate a little bit, and said anxiously to herself, `Which
@c    way?  Which way?', holding her hand on the top of her head to
@c    feel which way it was growing, and she was quite surprised to
@c    find that she remained the same size:  to be sure, this generally
@c    happens when one eats cake, but Alice had got so much into the
@c    way of expecting nothing but out-of-the-way things to happen,
@c    that it seemed quite dull and stupid for life to go on in the
@c    common way.

@c      So she set to work, and very soon finished off the cake.

@c         *       *       *       *       *       *       *

@c             *       *       *       *       *       *

@c         *       *       *       *       *       *       *


